Mr. Maiga (Mali) (spoke in French): On behalf of
His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, President
of the Republic of Mali, my delegation and I extend to
you, Mr. President, our warm congratulations on the
assumption of your country, France, to the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of March. Rest
assured of the full cooperation of my country in
that regard.

I would also like to wish every success to South
Africa, Indonesia, the Dominican Republic, Belgium
and Germany in fulfilling their mandate as new
members of the Council. I take this opportunity to
congratulate and thank the delegations of Bolivia,
Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, Sweden and the Netherlands for
their contribution to the pursuit of international peace
and security.

This meeting gives me the welcome opportunity
to convey to all Security Council members, Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and all United Nations staff
who deal with Mali the deep appreciation of President
Keita and the Government and people of Mali for their
continued commitment to peace and security in Mali,
the Sahel and the rest of the world.

My delegation and the Malian people would
like to express our deepest sympathies to the troop-
contributing countries in Mali and the United Nations
family and offer our deepest condolences to them for
the loss of the peacekeepers who died honourably by
the bullets of the enemies of peace.

In accordance with paragraph 6 of resolution
2423 (2018) and in reference to its paragraph 4 and
the assessment of the results achieved under the Pact
for Peace, I would like to report on the progress made
by the Government of Mali six months after President
Keita's oath of office, during which he committed to
keeping Mali firmly on its way out of the crisis.

My delegation takes note of the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/262) and welcomes the clarity of his
briefing and his updates on the developments in my
country. We also take note of the observations and the
high expectations set out in the report.

At the outset, I would like to assure Council
members that the President of the Republic of Mali,
the Government, the Coordination des mouvements
de l'Azawad, the Platform coalition of armed groups
of 14 June 2014 and all the groups associated with
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
emanating from the Algiers process remain fully
committed to the diligent and inclusive implementation
of its provisions.

The establishment of a Ministry to oversee the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation has made it possible to consolidate
cooperation between the Government and signatory
parties. It has also promoted the inclusion of all other
groups that have accepted the Agreement. Today, all of
those groups recognize each other as Malian parties.
The mention of that cohesion in the report under
consideration is cause for my delegation's satisfaction.

As the Council is certainly aware, presidential
elections were held on 29 July and 12 August last
year in peaceful conditions. President Keita, who
was re-elected with more than 67 per cent of the
vote, was sworn in on 4 September last year. I wish
to note the remarkable contribution of the signatory
parties and those associated with the Agreement to the
smooth running of the electoral process. They played
an important role in fostering a peaceful climate by
providing security support to the process in every area
in which they were present. Their positive involvement
sufficiently demonstrates their strong commitment to
work alongside the Government in implementing the
provisions of the Agreement.

I would also like to acknowledge the important role
that the United Nations Multidimensional Mission for
Stabilization in Mali (MINUSMA) played throughout
the electoral process. The Mission provided us with
essential financial, logistical and technical support to
ensure the success of the voting process and a peaceful
electoral climate. Its cooperation with the management
bodies of the electoral process, its participation in
securing voting operations and the training that it
provided to various political and social stakeholders on
the prevention of election-related violence significantly
contributed to the success of the presidential elections.
My delegation would therefore like to take this
opportunity as we consider the report of the Secretary-
General to express our sincere thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, for his exemplary work and contribution
to the holding of peaceful presidential elections.

Since its establishment, the Government has
accelerated the implementation of the provisions of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
particularly with regard to institutional reforms and
security arrangements. In that connection, the Head
of State has instructed us to initiate a consensual
and inclusive process for constitutional review and
institutional reform. The process leading to the
adoption of a new constitution through a referendum
has begun with the establishment of a committee
of experts, which started work on 16 February. The
committee is responsible for reviewing previously
drafted constitutional reforms and the provisions of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. It
will also take developments in Malian political life into
account and conduct wide-ranging consultations at the
national level.
In order to carry out its mandate, the committee has
met with all parties - the signatory movements and
movements associated with the agreement, trade unions,
youth, women, traditional and religious authorities and
civil society organizations. The few stakeholders with
whom meetings could not be arranged have had their
contributions acknowledged. In support of the experts'
work, the Government of Mali has set up a national
framework for dialogue that brings together political
parties, the signatory and associated movements and
civil society organizations.

Finally, to strengthen the consensual nature of the
constitutional review, the President recently initiated
meetings with all leaders of the majority and the
opposition to gather their views on the national situation
and their proposals for the revitalization of Malian
social and political life, based a common understanding
of the major problems facing our nation.

While the Government is conducting constitutional
and institutional reforms, it is also accelerating
the implementation of the decentralization and
regionalization processes. The new territorial
collectivities code and the law on the conditions of
the free administration of territorial collectivities,
promulgated on 2 October 2017, laid a solid foundation
for administrative reform and decentralization. Those
laws determine the election of municipal, departmental
and regional councillors through direct universal
suffrage, as well as the transfer of 30 per cent of State
budget revenues to local authorities. Nineteen decrees
setting out the details of the powers transferred from
the State to the collectivities have been adopted.

The implementation of those measures increased
the transfer rate of budgetary revenue to more than
21 per cent in 2019. Therefore, the amount of transferred
resources doubled between 2015 and 2019, an increase
of more than $190 million. In addition to the resources
and loans earmarked for the decentralized Government
departments - whose transfer to local authorities was
provided for in the framework of the agreement - the
transfer rate will be even higher than the prescribed
rate of 30 per cent.

On 20 February, the Government also adopted a
decree on the transfer of decentralized services from
the State to territorial collectivities, in line with article
14 of the agreement. That transfer makes it possible
to provide basic social services to the population,
particularly in the areas of education, health and water
and sanitation. It also creates conditions conducive
to regional development, particularly in the areas
of agriculture, local taxation, youth employment
and energy.

I am pleased that the report of the Secretary-
General has found that the percentage of civil servants
and other State officials in the north and central regions
increased slightly in the past six months. With regard
to the interim authorities, their presence throughout
all of the northern regions of Mali has enabled the
establishment of a framework for the provision of basic
social services to the population. In order to inaugurate
and operationalize those authorities, the State budget
has mobilized just over $45 million.

Those achievements, while encouraging, cannot
mean we lose sight of the extreme volatility of the
security environment in which the Malian authorities
are working. The terrorist threat continues to spread
from the north to the centre of the country and is
complicating the implementation of the agreement.
Terrorist groups are inciting, sustaining and
exacerbating intercommunal violence by reviving
long-standing disputes and secular rivalries. To
counter those emerging threats, the Government of
Mali has developed and implemented an integrated
security plan to strengthen security measures for the
country's central regions, including the deployment
of 13,000 personnel and the creation of 16 new
security posts in 2018, as well as social mobilization
efforts, labour-intensive employment opportunities,
income-generating activities for women and youth and
outreach programmes promoting social cohesion.

The Government also launched an accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process on 6 November 2018 in Gao, Timbuktu and
Kidal. That operation concerns the elements of the
joint operational mechanism and has enabled the
registration and disarmament of more than 1,400 out
of the expected 1,600 combatants, all hailing from
the two signatory movements to the agreement and
other armed groups that have accepted it. That process
will continue to accommodate an additional 417 ex-
combatants. Those soldiers will receive training under
the auspices of the Ministry of Defence, MINUSMA
and the European Union, after which they will be
assigned roles in providing security for the remainder
of the DDR process in an environment that - as the
Council recognizes - is a challenging one.

Between February 2018 and March 2019, more than
74,405 combatants were pre-registered by the DDR
Commission, 23,427 of whom were carrying weapons.
Furthermore, 17,000 of them met the eligibility criteria
to participate in the DDR process. I am grateful to
MINUSMA for its collaboration, which contributed
greatly to the success of that process, as well as to
the World Bank, which provided $15 million for the
reintegration of the first 4,000 ex-combatants to be
demobilized. Meanwhile, we have also carried out a
disarmament programme in central Mali to reduce
intercommunal violence, during which 1,500 elements
were identified. In the coming weeks, they will be
joining the Soufouroulaye camp, near Mopti, to undergo
various tests.

Regarding the process of security sector reform,
the Government organized a high-level workshop
in Bamako from 12 to 14 December 2018 at which
consensus was reached with the signatory movements,
particularly with regard to the reconstitution of the
army, special units and territorial police. In accordance
with the provisions of the agreement, the Government
recalled former elements of the Malian armed forces,
505 of whom have to date returned to the defence and
security forces. The issue of quotas continues to be
under discussion with the signatory movements.

Thanks to the support of the European Union,
the European Union Capacity Building Mission in
Mali and the European Union Training Mission in
Mali, the Malian defence and security forces continue
their capacity-building efforts while focusing their
deployment in the north. The Government has also
decided to establish a border protection force in order
to better monitor Mali's seven borders.

We have also undertaken efforts to create
an environment conducive to development and
humanitarian action. Despite difficult conditions, the
Government maintained an economic growth level of
5.3 per cent and reduced the budget deficit from 2.9 per
cent in 2017 to 2.5 per cent in 2018.

With regard to the implementation of the
specific strategy for the development of the northern
regions, the instrumental nature of the sustainable
development fund should be noted. As part of the fund's
operationalization, various legislative texts relating to
its creation, organization and management methods
were adopted between February and November 2018.
Pending the fund's effective operationalization, the
Government has mobilized $20 million to finance
urgent priority expenditures in the regions of Kidal,
Menaka, Timbuktu and Gao.

The Malian people cherish the values of freedom,
dignity and solidarity, which constitute our moral
compass. It is our commitment to those values that has
motivated our country, for more than five decades, to
participate in peacekeeping missions both in Africa and
beyond the continent. From 1960 until very recently,
Mali provided more than 2,000 personnel - soldiers,
military and police officers - who have been deployed
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Haiti,
Angola, Burundi, the Central African Republic, Darfur,
Liberia, Rwanda and Sierra Leone.

For more than half a century, our country has
responded without hesitation or premeditation every
time it has been called upon, whether to bring peace
to territories in conflict or to help implement a return
to normalcy and stability, reinstate democracy, rebuild
national cohesion and restore dialogue between
communities that have been torn apart. In all our
interventions, we have accomplished what we consider
to be our sacred duty as a nation of peace and harmony.
When it was our turn to face a terrible tragedy, we,
too, were met with steadfast commitment on the part of
other friendly nations. In the liberation of the northern
regions, the restoration of our territorial integrity
and the enhanced security of our populations, our
country has benefited from international solidarity on
a tremendous scale. We will never be able to thank our
friends and partners enough for their solidarity, which
was demonstrated most recently when our country
suffered two terrible tragedies in the space ofa week.

We witnessed unprecedented barbarity on 17 March,
when 23 of our soldiers died during a terrorist attack
on their camp in the village of Dioura. Then again,
on 23 March, the horror reached new heights with the
massacre of more than 150 inhabitants of the village of
Ogossagou. Those events serve to underline once more
the need for mobilization and extreme vigilance in our
fight to safeguard the future of our nation. The events
at Ogossagou and Dioura generated an impressive wave
of compassion and solidarity around the world, which
showed our citizens that they have not been abandoned.
All those committed to restoring peace and security in
our country under those circumstances have declared
themselves to be Malians, as per the touching words of
the Secretary-General.

On behalf of President Keita and the Government
and the people of Mali, I would like to convey our
gratitude for all the expressions of sympathy bestowed
upon us. To our friends and to our partners, I would like
to reiterate our determination to pursue our unrelenting
fight against the terrorist and extremist groups - be
they faceless or a thousand faces - that will not cease in
their attempts to destroy our democratic and republican
institutions and the cohesion and secular coexistence
of our societies. By all means, we will ensure that the
persons responsible for those massacres will be brought
to justice.

The United Nations is among the partners that has
been involved in safeguarding our country since the
very earliest stages of the 2012 crisis. The Council has
repeatedly reaffirmed its conviction that restoring and
preserving peace in the world and managing the global
security of our planet require solidarity and mutual
assistance from which no nation is exempt. That is why
I would like to stress the importance attached by all
Malian stakeholders to maintaining MINUSMA and
building its capacities so that it can continue to assist
the ongoing peace process.

Initiatives to reduce the budget of MINUSMA
or to downscale or reconfigure its mandate run the
risk of jeopardizing the fragile progress already
achieved. Indeed, for the first time since its signing,
the agreement has made significant headway and a
genuine impetus has been launched. To sustain that
momentum, we require the full support of MINUSMA,
which is constantly working with the signatory groups
and those involved in the agreement's implementation
to facilitate the establishment of the DDR process and
the interim authorities, inter alia.

Today MINUSMA provides Vital services to the
most vulnerable populations pending the effective
reconstruction of the Malian State, and therefore plays
a key role in stabilizing the country. Reducing the
resources available to MINUSMA will therefore have
extremely negative consequences for our economic
situation, leading to the strengthening of terrorist
groups and the further deterioration of the situation.
Similarly, although MINUSMA does not play a direct
role in counter-terrorism activity, its support for the
forces carrying out that mission are essential. I refer to
the Barkhane force and the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) Joint Force, alongside which MINUSMA
plays an indispensable complementary role.

Terrorist groups have experienced major setbacks
in recent months. That has opened a window of
opportunity to push them back further and is grounds
for the maintenance of MINUSMA in order to fully
exploit that opportunity. More broadly, all forces must
be mobilized to prevent the transfer of foreign terrorist
fighters to our country, which would only increase the
threat in the Sahel and allow it to spread to new areas,
starting with countries in the Gulf of Guinea, such as
Ghana, Togo, Benin and Cote d'Ivoire.
Mali welcomes the high level of attention the
Security Council has afforded to the developments in
our country. It is precisely that constant attention from
the Council that impels us to express our concerns
about the security situation in the Sahelo-Saharan zone.
President Keita has solemnly emphasized on several
occasions that Mali is on the front line in the global
mission to counter terrorism in the Sahel. Our country
serves as a buffer zone for the terrorist threat, whose
size and capacity should not be underestimated. That
is why our Head of State has called upon our partners
to not let their guard down with regard to Mali. During
his tenure as President of the G-5 Sahel, he took the
initiative to accelerate the operationalization of the G-5
Sahel Joint Force.

The results we have already obtained require the
staunch support of all our partners through the effective
provision of the pledges made at the Nouakchott
conference on 6 December 2018. While reiterating
Mali's gratitude for the surge in solidarity expressed
at that event, I reiterate the call of the G-5 Sahel Heads
of State for predictable and sustainable funding for the
activities of the Joint Force.

Recent events have shown that the risks and threats
posed by terrorist and criminal groups are now not only
cross-border but also multidimensional and dynamic.
Those risks and threats are also apparent well beyond
the borders of Mali. The measures taken to neutralize
them, however, are rendered less effective by the
intrinsic limitations of the current international peace
and security architecture.

We cannot ignore the fact that the expansion of
terrorist and criminal groups does not threaten the
Sahelo-Saharan region alone but could very soon spread
throughout the entire West African region. We now
need to see solidarity with the States of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) that
are not members of the G-5 Sahel. Mali therefore calls
upon the Security Council to consider ways to involve
those States in MINUSMA capacity-building and in
support for the actions of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. It is
important to stress that new initiatives for consideration
with the increased involvement of ECOWAS should not
replace or duplicate the work already being carried
out by MINUSMA and the G-5 Sahel. The aim is to
put flexible and effective arrangements and structures
in place to bolster the fight against terrorism and
transnational organized crime.

In the difficult circumstances we are experiencing,
on behalf of the President of the Republic of Mali and
the Malian people, I wish to recognize the outstanding
work done by MINUSMA, under the leadership of
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of
the Secretary General for Mali and Head of the Mission.

We are also extremely grateful to the French
forces of Operation Barkhane, all MINUSMA troop-
contributing countries and all other multilateral and
bilateral partners for their ongoing commitment to
finding a lasting and definitive solution to the crisis
in our country. Our thoughts at this time go to those
courageous friendly troops who lost their lives in the
conflict. Their sacrifices have sealed an everlasting
blood pact between our peoples.

In conclusion, I would say that we need to put
things into perspective. Seven years ago, the very
existence of our country was under threat. Much of
Mali's territory was controlled by terrorist groups,
the State was on the brink of collapse and our people
were suffering grievously. Today, largely thanks to
the enormous investment made by the international
community, primarily through MINUSMA, the
leadership of President Keita and the determination
of the Malian people, Mali has recovered its dignity
and re-established itself as a nation. The jihadists have
retreated, the security situation is generally improved,
a historic peace agreement has been signed and the
State-building process continues.

However, we must remain realistic. While progress
has been made in terms of the situation in 2013, it
nonetheless continues to be of particular concern.
The jihadist threat persists despite military successes,
especially in central Mali, where ancestral rivalries
are being exploited to inflict extreme suffering on the
population, as the tragic events of 23 March cruelly
reminded us. The implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, despite our tireless
efforts and the progress made, remains slow and
fragile - too fragile for us to let down our guard, too
fragile for the international community to withdraw
and too fragile for us to consider that our work is done.

I speak solemnly when I say that Mali is at a
crossroads today. Two paths await us - either peace
will take root so that socioeconomic development can
finally be established throughout the country, or we will
fall back into insecurity and political instability. The
risk is genuine and the whole international community
must be fully aware of it.

All our efforts on every level are now aimed at
ensuring that Mali takes the first path - the path of
stability, peace and development. As the Council is
aware, MINUSMA and, broadly speaking, the entire
international community, play a central role in the
fragile equilibrium and the current progress being made.
Therefore, any withdrawal will be interpreted as a sign
of weakness by our common enemies and will carry a
high risk of dealing a fatal blow to the already laborious
and complex implementation of the agreement.

Mali's success will be a victory for the international
community, just as Mali's failure will be a defeat for it.
What is at stake in Mali, as we all know, is of global
significance. Today, therefore, I make a solemn appeal
to maintain and strengthen international mobilization,
which, for us, constitutes a permanent source of
motivation and commitment. Thanks to international
solidarity, we have a reason to believe in peace and
stability - something that all of us owe to the peoples
of Mali and of the Sahel.

The meeting rose at 5.15 pm.
