Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
for his detailed and informative briefing and his
dispassionate approach to a particularly troubling
situation, the developments about which he has
consistently alerted us.
Yesterday and today mark the culmination of
a month and a half of violence and repression by the
Israeli forces against Palestinian protesters in Gaza. The
repeated warnings to the Council, including by France,
since late March have gone unheeded. The situation
on the ground continued its relentless escalation,
yesterday reaching the shocking total of more than
60 demonstrators killed in a single day, which brings
the number of Palestinian demonstrators killed by the
Israeli forces over the past month and a half to nearly
100. These tragic numbers speak for themselves.

First, the ongoing situation in Gaza is a tragic new
illustration of the human consequences of the stalemate
in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and a result of a
total absence of political hope. We have been saying
this for years: the prevailing situation in Gaza is not
sustainable. The ongoing Violence is itself rooted in a
decade of Israeli blockades, aggravated by the stalemate
in the process of reconciliation and its humanitarian
consequences. The Hamas-backed protests of recent
weeks are fuelled by this situation, together with the
absence of any prospects for hope in the peace process
with Israel or on inter-Palestinian reconciliation; the
absence of any prospects for economic improvement,
due to the land, air and sea blockade maintaining one of
the highest unemployment rates in the world, at around
40 per cent, and per capita income lower than 25 years
ago; and a very youthful population, more than half of
them aged under 18, for whom, in this context, hope for
peace has given way to the feeling of having nothing
to lose.

The unfolding tragedy cannot be separated from the
desperation of the people of Gaza. That is why, beyond
de-escalation - which is an immediate imperative - and
beyond meeting emergency humanitarian needs, it
is essential to work towards sustainable solutions for
Gaza in the broader context of the two-State solution.
This is why we urge Mr. Mladenov to engage in-depth
in that regard in the Gaza Strip.

Secondly, the record of repression of the weekly
demonstrations, which have been taking place since
30 March, is shocking. A new line was crossed
yesterday, which risks heralding a point of no return
and triggering a cycle of uncontrollable violence. Since
30 March, 99 Palestinians, including 12 minors, have
been killed while demonstrating along the separation
line in Gaza. This very heavy toll is directly related
to the inadequate and disproportionate response of the
Israeli security forces. Yesterday President Macron
clearly condemned the Violence of the Israeli armed
forces. These serious incidents must be fully explained,
and we recall in that regard the request of the Secretary-
General for an independent and transparent inquiry.

In the immediate term, two fundamental
requirements must be met to put an end to this
cycle that threatens to continue this very day with
demonstrations related to the commemoration of the
seventieth anniversary of Palestinian exile in 1948: on
the one hand, respect for international humanitarian
law, which is fully applicable in the Gaza Strip, in
particular the imperative to protect civilians; and, on
the other hand, respect for human rights, in particular
the right to peaceful demonstration. Any steps Israel
takes to safeguard its security, which is a legitimate
concern that we share, must be taken within this
context. We therefore call on the Israeli authorities to
demonstrate careful judgement, the utmost restraint
and to avoid the disproportionate use of force. Israel is
a State governed by the rule of law and must, as such,
apply rules of engagement that respect international
standards of law and order, in accordance with its
international commitments.

We condemn indiscriminate fire against protesters,
which has been systematic in recent weeks, in particular
yesterday. Nothing can justify that. Lethal weapons
must not be used against unarmed demonstrators
who pose no serious or imminent threat. This is the
message of numerous non-governmental organizations,
including Israeli and Palestinian ones. They underscore
the extreme seriousness of the gunshot wounds
inflicted on demonstrators without any justification in
terms of security and that the Gaza health system is
overwhelmed and approaching breaking point.

At the same time, we call on the protesters to refrain
from any acts of provocation or violence, and we warn
those, principally Hamas, who would seek to hijack the
demonstrations or use them to threaten Israel's security
along the barrier. As members know, France will never
undermine the security of Israel.

Not only in the Gaza Strip but also in the West Bank
and Jerusalem, the risk of the situation deteriorating
and escalating out of control is extremely high in an
increasingly tense regional context, especially on the
northern border of Israel. Everyone must therefore
show restraint and a spirit of responsibility, in
particular the Palestinian and Israeli officials in their
respective statements.

It is also up to the Security Council to speak with
a strong voice in order to help to prevent the ongoing
escalation. That is a key point. The silence observed
by the Council since the beginning of the crisis is less
and less understandable. Since yesterday, it has left
a dangerous void. That silence must be replaced by
a clear public statement without delay. To that end,
France is ready to work in a constructive spirit with
its partners. The Security Council cannot be prevented
from speaking on such a serious matter. Otherwise, its
very calling, if not its raison d'etre, are at stake.

I come to my last point. In the tense context that
I have just described, our collective responsibility
is to preserve the parameters that alone will in due
course resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The
question of Jerusalem is at the heart of such parameters
because it is a precondition for peace between Israelis
and Palestinians and, beyond that, regional stability.
The question of Jerusalem concerns the entire
international community.

Jerusalem has been the subject of several Security
Council resolutions. In that context, the status of
Jerusalem should be considered by the parties in their
discussions with a View to a peace agreement. In line
with the consensus that has prevailed for 70 years in the
international community, France does not recognize
any sovereignty over Jerusalem without agreement.
Following the June 1967 conflict, we therefore did not
recognize the annexation of East Jerusalem, which is
part of the occupied territories under international law.

Similarly, in 1980, we did not recognize Israel's
unilateral acts with regard to Jerusalem. The Security
Council adopted resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980),
which provide for two principles in particular. First,
any decision or action to alter the status or character
of Jerusalem is considered null and void and must be
rescinded. Secondly, all States Members of the United
Nations that have established diplomatic missions in
Jerusalem must withdraw them from the city. That
is what happened as a result of resolution 478 (1980)
without exception.

Jerusalem should become the capital of two
States - Israel and Palestine - in line with modalities
that must be defined through negotiation. No unilateral
decision can replace that. France condemned the
decision that was taken by the United States in
December and implemented yesterday.

As we all know, there is no solution other than the
two-State solution. However, there will be no two-
State solution without agreement between the parties
on Jerusalem, and no possible agreement on Jerusalem
outside the internationally recognized parameters.
Abandoning that framework will fuel tensions and
violence because ofthe symbolic, historical and religious
importance of Jerusalem to both the Palestinians and
the Israelis. It would also create a space that will be
rapidly filled by all kinds of extremists in the region
who have an interest in the political conflict becoming
a religious conflict.

France cannot allow itself to again see Jerusalem
and the Palestinian territories, starting with the
Gaza Strip, descend into chaos. Yesterday President
Macron met the King of Jordan, the Custodian of the
Holy Sites in Jerusalem, as well as President Abbas.
Today he will speak to the Israeli Prime Minister,
Benjamin Netanyahu.

In the symbolic and historical context of these
commemorative days, which are essential to both
the Palestinians and the Israelis, we call on everyone
to exercise restraint, ensure calm and prevent any
escalation. We call for a resumption of dialogue and
negotiations, in which the international community
should shoulder its full responsibility in order to
support the parties and to ensure results.

Because it is a friend of both the Israelis and the
Palestinians, France intends to continue its efforts with
unwavering resolve. We call on the Council to fully
play its role in that regard.

