Mrs. Marsudi (Indonesia): Indonesia shares
the View of the briefers that partnership with all
stakeholders and at all levels is highly pertinent when
addressing peace and security challenges in Africa.
Indonesia's partnership with Africa began in the days
of our forefathers as they fought for independence.
Since then, our relations have become more solid, more
developed and more action-oriented, with the aim of
addressing common global challenges. But one thing
remains unchanged - our relations will always be
based on good faith, honesty and sincerity. This is the
spirit of togetherness that we need to replicate at the
global level: a partnership that will not cause any harm
to Africa; a partnership that will bring mutual benefits
to Africa; and a partnership that will bring equality and
common progress to Africa. I would like to address
some key points in that regard.

First, I wish to stress the importance of a
home-grown solution. The report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/678) notes that the peace and security
challenges being faced in some parts of Africa
are increasingly complex and volatile. There is no
one-size-fits-all solution, and that is why we believe in
the principle of African solutions to African problems.
It is in that spirit that Indonesia supports the Silencing
the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative through enhanced
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union (AU).

Secondly, there is a need to strengthen partnership
with subregional and other regional organizations.
Subregional organizations such as the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development have
played important roles in preventing and solving
conflicts in their respective regions. Stronger
cooperation and collaboration on the ground is even
more crucial. Cooperation between United Nations
peacekeeping missions and AU-led peace operations
to counter terrorism is proof of such cooperation
on the ground. Interregional cooperation is equally
as important. Efforts are under way between the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the AU to
establish closer cooperation between the two regions on
issues of common interest.

Thirdly, international support for African
development and capacity-building must be improved.
Economic growth is one of the prerequisites to
achieve peace. Indonesia has done its part to support
Africa through technical cooperation and capacity-
building programmes. Indonesia held the Indonesia-
Africa Forum in April 2018, and the Indonesia-Africa
Infrastructure Dialogue in August this year. Those
events resulted in concrete economic cooperation in
various strategic sectors, including infrastructure,
trade, connectivity and strategic industries. Last year,
Indonesia also hosted the Indonesia-Africa Maritime
Dialogue to strengthen cooperation on maritime security
and sustainable fisheries. Such activities have proven
effective in improving the economy, development,
food security and livelihoods of our African brothers
and sisters.

Lastly, Indonesia will continue its commitment to
maintaining peace in Africa through our participation in
United Nations peace operations. Indonesia is currently
contributing to seven missions in Africa, namely, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara, the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei. Moving forward,
we will continue to work in peacekeeping missions
in Africa through community engagement to win the
hearts and minds of local communities and achieve the
objective of peace and stability in Africa.

Indonesia will remain committed, as a true partner
of Africa, to maintaining peace and security. We will
continue to work together with Africa.

