Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): Like my colleagues
who have already spoken, I would like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Holbrooke for his leadership and
determination as the head of the Security Council
mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This
mission coincided with very dangerous developments
on the African continent.

As we all know, the Security Council started its
work in the year 2000 with an affirmation of its
commitment to conflict resolution in Africa. Today the
Council is going through another "month of Africa",
which has put this commitment to a difficult and
demanding test.

It is from this perspective that we would like to
express our appreciation to the members of the mission
for their important contribution to redeeming the
Council's pledge to meet this test. Ukraine has
endorsed all the observations and recommendations
contained in the report prepared by the mission. I
would like to make a few comments with regard to
some of the major issues raised in the report.

My first point relates to the issue of the
deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). The results of the talks of the Security
Council mission's members with the leaders of the
parties to the Lusaka Agreement have reconfirmed the
urgency of the deployment of phase II of MONUC. In
this connection, we agree entirely that one of the most
compelling tasks today is to prevent the developments
in Sierra Leone from having any negative impact on
the United Nations presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Certainly, it is not enough
simply to say that the peacekeeping operation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must be judged on
its own merits. We have to admit that potential
MONUC troop contributors will take into account the
current crisis in Sierra Leone. We have to acknowledge
that their judgement will also be based on the United
Nations response to the developments in Sierra Leone
and on the successful outcome of the United Nations
actions to overcome the crisis.

We agree with the mission's recommendation that
the Secretary-General's final decision on MONUC
deployment should be preceded by a reaffirmation by
all parties of their commitment to the Lusaka
Agreement. At the same time, we would also urge the
Secretary-General to pay particular attention to
increasing MONUC's capabilities to protect its
personnel. The military strength of the expanded
MONUC has to be strong enough to produce a real
restraining effect on any attempts to threaten the safety
and security of peacekeepers.

The mission's report also underscores another
point, which has to be addressed directly to the parties
to the Lusaka Agreement. To be successful, the peace
process has to move forward. The new attitude of the
parties towards maintaining the ceasefire, noted in the
mission report, is indeed encouraging. At the same
time, the ceasefire is only one component of the
Lusaka Agreement. In this context, the parties have to
demonstrate more responsibility in advancing all other
integral parts of the peace process.

For example, we recognize that the differences
over the venue of the inter-Congolese dialogue are
considerable. However, they do not amount to the
major obstacle to the launching of the inter-Congolese
political talks, which are so fundamental to achieving
lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In this connection, we fully support the initiative
of France to convene a meeting of the Political
Committee next month in New York; this might resolve
some of the outstanding questions impeding progress in
the peace process. We agree that more difficult issues,
such as the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and resettlement of the armed groups, should also be
taken up during that meeting of the Political
Committee in New York.

It is also important to acknowledge the
instrumental role played by the Security Council
mission in defusing the Kisangani crisis, which
recalled the times of the struggle for territories in
Africa and was even labeled the Fashoda of the twenty-
first century. The fighting in this Congolese city should
encourage the Security Council to take a stronger
position on the need to put an end to the presence of
foreign troops in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which is inconsistent with the principles of the
United Nations Charter. We take note of the agreement
between Rwanda and Uganda to withdraw their forces
from Kisangani.

Before concluding, I would like to place special
emphasis on the mission's recommendation for the
early establishment of an expert panel to investigate the
reports of the illegal exploitation of the resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It should be
recalled that the Security Council has already formally
undertaken to take a decision on this matter
expeditiously, taking into account the conclusions of its
mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Finally, we, like the French delegation, are very
much concerned about the human rights situation in the
eastern Congo, which is proving to be really disastrous,
according to a number of reliable reports. The Security
Council should pay special attention to this issue. In
our View, a panel should be set up for the purpose of
investigating the reports on flagrant human rights
violations and atrocities perpetrated against the civilian
population in the eastern Congo.
