Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the opportunity for the Council
to once again address the issue of the protection of
journalists, which is such an important aspect of the
problem ofthe protection of civilians in armed conflict.

In the context of the various ongoing armed
conflicts, journalism remains one ofthe most dangerous
professions. Only last week we received the news of
another tragic death of a representative of the press,
the Iraqi television journalist Firas Al-Bahri, executed
by the Islamic State. Journalists who fall into the
category of civilians under international humanitarian
law are protected accordingly under the code for armed
conflict, and that is entirely proper.

Against the backdrop of the growing role that the
media plays in the world's political and social life,
issues related to journalists" activities are increasingly
included on the agenda of various international
institutions and organizations, especially UNESCO,
the Human Rights Council, the General Assembly and
the Security Council. We view today's resolution 2222
(2015) as a continuation of resolution 1738 (2006), the
Council's foundational document on the subject. The
topic of protecting journalists' safety should continue
to be seen as a priority in the work of those bodies,
while of course taking into account their mandate and
purview. At the same time, attempts to expand the
interpretation of the category to include practically
anyone and everyone who uses the Internet, even if
they are not involved in professional journalism, will
not improve its effectiveness. Blurring the concept of
what a journalist is will not help the situation.

Despite the measures that the international
community has taken, the situation regarding the
protection of journalists leaves much to be desired.
Their rights are sometimes grossly ignored and their
lives and health threatened. The number of journalists
killed increased in 2014. News of the deaths of or
injuries to journalists in Syria, Iraq and Libya and
other countries continues to reach us with alarming
regularity. Employees of the media working in hot spots
have become victims of intimidation, attacks, searches,
arbitrary detentions and expulsions. The kidnapping
ofjournalists by the Islamic State and related terrorist
organizations is extremely worrying. We all know
about cases in which the equipment that journalists
need in order to carry out their professional tasks has
been intentionally destroyed or confiscated.

We are particularly concerned about the situation
in Ukraine, where journalists, especially those
representing Russian media, are not only endangered
for doing their job, but are also forced to work in
conditions of open discrimination. Russian journalists
are periodically captured by members of the Ukrainian
special services. Some representatives of Russian and
foreign media have paid with their lives for their efforts
to work in a war zone and report the truth about what
is happening there. Unfortunately, such cases have not
only gone unpunished, they have not always come to
the attention of the relevant international entities and
human-rights organizations.

One of the aspects of modern armed conflict is
what is known as the information war. Winning it
involves employing a wide-ranging arsenal of weapons,
which include, in particular, some States' decisions to
ban broadcasts or impose sanctions on media they do
not like. We should also include in this type of warfare
the spread of incitements to intolerance and the rhetoric
of hatred. In that regard, it is important to recall the
responsibility thatjournalists have to society.

We agree with the provisions of the concept note
prepared for today's meeting (S/2015/307, annex) on
the need to ensure the proper training of journalists
working in armed conflict situations and to minimize
the risks involved in such work. The growing number
of victims among journalists clearly points to the need
to step up efforts to ensure their protection in areas of
armed conflict. The main responsibility for ensuring
the protection of civilians, including journalists, lies
with the parties to the conflict.

We strongly condemn any acts of violence against
journalists and call on the authorities of all States on
whose territory armed conflict is unfolding to make
every possible effort to investigate and prosecute such
crimes, in particular those against media professionals,
and to bring to justice those responsible.

