Ms. Kazragiene (Lithuania): I wish to thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Robert Serry, for his briefing.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

Let me start with the Middle East peace process.
The last time we spoke, my delegation, like all those
around this table, urged the two parties to seize the rare
opportunity created by the perseverance and dedication
of United States Secretary of State Kerry to firmly
pursue the path of negotiation and to abstain from
any moves and actions that could damage the historic
chance for an agreement that would lead to a viable
two-State solution, with both peoples living in peace
and security, paving the way for economic and other
ties and exchanges that would benefit all - Israelis,
Palestinians, their neighbours and the rest of the world.

That chance is now slipping away. Israelis and
Palestinians deserve a life of peace, security and safety
in their homes. We cannot allow a further escalation
of violence, more bloodshed and more human tragedy
in an already highly volatile region. It is in the interest
of Israelis and Palestinians alike to return to the path
of negotiation. We reiterate our call to the two parties
to exercise maximum restraint and to abstain from any
actions and violence that could further aggravate this
very difficult and delicate moment. Political will and
leadership of the highest order are required from both
sides.

My delegation expresses grave concern regarding
the recent authorization of a new settlement in
Hebron. All settlement expansion and demolitions, as
well as all acts of incitement and violence from both
sides, must stop immediately. We are also seriously
concerned about the recent disturbances at the Haram
al-Sharif/Temple Mount complex, which is sacred to
Muslims and Jews alike. Both sides must demonstrate
responsibility and do everything possible to prevent a
further escalation of the situation. The settlement of all
outstanding issues must be pursued by way of dialogue
between the parties.

Lithuania condemns the attacks on Israeli territory
from the Gaza Strip, including those during the Easter
and Passover holidays. In light of intra-Palestinian
reconciliation, Hamas must fully subscribe to the
Quartet principles and renounce violence, adhere to
previous agreements and recognize Israel's legitimate
right to exist.

As I turn to the situation in Syria, I cannot but
refer to the recent report (S/2014/295) of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of - or rather the failure
by the parties to the conflict to implement - resolution
2139 (2014) . The Secretary-General clearly states that
civilians are not being protected and that humanitarian
access to those most in need is not improving.

The warring parties in Syria, the Syrian regime in
particular, continue to violate the Geneva Conventions,
international humanitarian law and the human rights
of the Syrian people, including the most basic right of
all - the right to life. Humanitarian access remains
intermittent and malnutrition remains severe. War
crimes and crimes against humanity, predominantly
committed by the Government of Syria, are mounting.

Sieges, aerial bombings, shellings and the barbaric use
of barrel bombs continue unabated, causing even more
destruction, suffering and death among the civilian
population. Impunity reigns.

The Council's recent Arria Formula meeting on
the so-called Caesar report revealed horrifying facts
about the industrial-scale torture and forced starvation
campaign carried out by Syria's regime. The Council
cannot afford to remain silent on the humanitarian
situation, and it cannot ignore Syria's continuing
non-compliance with resolution 2139 (2014). Tolerating
violence and impunity breeds more violence and
impunity. The Syrian people have already lost and
suffered too much. It is time to act. We must use the tools
at our disposal to drive home the message that there is
no escaping accountability and justice. One such tool is
the referral of Syrian case to the International Criminal
Court. Let me touch upon two other issues related to
Syria.

First, with respect to presidential elections, holding
elections in June in a country that has never had a real
election, in the midst of war and under the most extreme
humanitarian circumstances is a travesty of legitimacy
and a mockery ofelections. Can anyone imagine polling
stations being set up in Aleppo, Homs or any other city,
town or village in Syria under constant and real threat
to human lives, or in the various locations inaccessible
due to siege? Or polling stations being set up where
food and basic humanitarian necessities have not been
able to enter for months? What about the votes of the
refugees and displaced persons, whose numbers have
reached some 9 million?

Furthermore, such elections clearly contradict the
letter and the spirit of the Geneva communique of 2012
(S/2012/523, annex). The Joint Special Representative
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, has voiced deep concern about
the impact of such an election on the chances of a
resumption of the Geneva talks.

Secondly, each State party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention undertakes not to use chemical weapons,
including toxic chemicals and their precursors, under
any circumstances. The alleged use of chlorine gas
against the Syrian population violates that commitment
and raises the issue of accountability. The case must be
promptly and thoroughly investigated. Lithuania is also
concerned about recent reports of certain discrepancies
in the chemical weapons removal process that may
indicate that the Syrian authorities have retained the
ability to deploy chemical weapons. This too must be
investigated and clarified.

I would also like to say a few words on the dangerous
and highly damaging impact that the spillover of the
Syrian crisis has had on its neighbours. In Lebanon, for
example, shelling, shooting and aerial incursions into its
border zone from Syria, as well as movements of armed
fighters and war material between the countries, have
become part ofthe daily reality oflife. And yet Lebanon
stoically keeps its doors open to refugees from Syria,
who now total 1 million. Lebanon needs the political
support and assistance of the international community.
The Government of Prime Minister Tammam Salam,
formed in February, has a lot to grapple with, including
holding this year's elections within an established time
frame. We reiterate our call to all parties in Lebanon
to adhere to a policy of dissociation from the Syrian
conflict, uphold the Baabda Declaration and maintain
a national dialogue. The Security Council's strong
and unanimous support to Lebanon remains critical
to preserving its sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence.

