Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We, too, would like to thank Ambassador
Negroponte and Ambassador Jones Parry for their
briefings. We note that the coalition, together with the
Iraqis, are making an active effort to establish normal
conditions in the country and to restore the economy
and infrastructure. We note that the United States and
the United Kingdom have played an important role,
together with all other members of the Security
Council, in providing for the normal completion of the
oil-for-food programme, and have reaffirmed the
obligation of the coalition to resolve all outstanding
issues.

We also note with satisfaction that the
International Advisory and Monitoring Board has
finally been established, and we hope that reports from
that body will soon be received. It is a key mechanism,
set up pursuant to resolution 1483 (2003), to provide
for transparency with regard to the Iraqi economy. We
also note the efforts to create an Iraqi army, security
force, police force and border service. Ambassador
Negroponte spoke about that issue in detail. We hope
that that work will be quick and effective.

The briefing also noted, however - and we are
all aware of this - that the security situation in Iraq
remains serious. According to our assessment, it is
continuing to worsen. Of course, we condemn all
terrorist acts. Whatever the target of such acts,
innocent people suffer. Such acts must be condemned
and counteracted. We do not have any information
about how specific operations are being carried out
against those who plan and perpetrate terrorist acts, but
we believe that any use of force should, of course, be
proportional; every attempt must be made to prevent
the suffering of innocent civilians.

We are grateful to Ambassador Negroponte for
having mentioned disarmament in his briefing.
However, quite frankly, we do not understand why the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) have not endeavoured
to obtain more information about the efforts
undertaken by the coalition. As we heard, a report was
prepared in October by a survey group set up by the
coalition. We do not see why that report could not be
transmitted to UNMOVIC and IAEA experts,
particularly since we will be receiving a regular report
from UNMOVIC very soon.

We did not hear anything in the briefing about
persons missing since the first Gulf war, and the theme
of Kuwaiti property was not touched on either. But we
hope that those questions will be discussed in
December, when the regular report of the Secretary-
General is submitted to the Security Council -
although we are, of course, interested to find out more
about what the coalition is doing with respect to these
matters and what the results have been.

Like previous speakers, we take note of the
agreement that was reached between the coalition and
the Iraqi Governing Council. We welcome the desire to
give the political process a new dynamism, and Russia
has consistently advocated the speeding up of the
process of the restoration of Iraq's sovereignty. We do
not know why the agreement has still not been
transmitted officially to the Security Council. As we
understand it, there are two parties to the agreement -
the Iraqi Governing Council and the coalition - and
either or both of them could transmit the agreement to
the Security Council for its information, particularly
since reporting to the Council is an obligation on the
part of the coalition and of the Governing Council.

Nevertheless, we are, of course, familiar with the
text of the agreement. We are somewhat disappointed
that there is no mention in it of the United Nations. We
believe that that is wrong, for, in order successfully to
resolve the Iraqi problem, we need first and foremost
the trust of the Iraqi people, and secondly the active
participation of the international community. That is
our conviction, and all of the events of recent months
only corroborate our view.

Like the representatives of France and of
Germany, we believe that very serious consideration
should be given to the idea of convening an
international conference under the auspices of the
United Nations in which all the main political forces of
Iraq would participate, as well as external players,
including Iraq's neighbours and other countries. We
believe that this idea should be discussed, and we also
consider that, in order to hold a conference as part of
this process, a consensus must be reached about how it
should be organized.

Given the fact that the security situation in Iraq is
getting worse and that attacks are taking place against
representatives of international organizations and of
new Iraqi structures, we are not ruling out the
possibility of that conference's being held outside of

Sll'V.4869

 

Iraq - again in the context of the analogy of
Afghanistan, as mentioned by Ambassador Pleuger.

The conference could form the transitional
Government of Iraq, which, together with the
Secretary-General and his representatives, could
elaborate specific steps in order effectively to
implement the political process.

We would like also to ask some questions about
the text of the agreement, since we think that it is
important. We believe that that members of the
coalition and of the Iraqi Governing Council, as well as
the United Nations Secretariat, should take these
questions into account.

We believe that the timelines for the adoption of
the fundamental law by 28 February, for the creation of
the Transitional National Assembly by 31 May, and,
subsequently, for the formation, by 30 June, of the
transitional administration are realistic and are
justified. However, with regard to subsequent steps, the
timelines do represent a bit of a stretch - for example,
the election for the constitutional convention is
scheduled to be held only on 15 March 2005, and
general elections by the end of 2005.

We believe that it would be better if the date of
the election for the constitutional convention, and the
date of the general elections - that is, elections for the
permanent Government - were decided on by the
Transitional Government and by the Transitional
National Assembly. They will be functioning by 30
June, and it is possible that they will have a clearer
idea about when, realistically, they should hold the
appropriate elections.

We also believe that there are certain
contradictions between parts of the agreement with
respect to the proposal to form organizational
committees that could affect future elections - that is,
the election of members of the National Assembly.

In the beginning of the agreement, it is stated that
the Iraqi Interim Governing Council will not play any
formal role in selecting members of the National
Assembly. But two lines down, it is stated that the Iraqi
Governing Council will nominate five of the
representatives of each provincial organizational
committee.

Therefore it will be playing a role in that
respect - not a formal role, but a very real one. Would
this not, therefore, lead to a situation in which certain

segments of the population and certain political forces
are left out of the process of the formation of these new
authorities?

My next question has to do with the provision
stating that there is a proposal to conclude, by the end
of March 2004, an agreement on security between the
coalition and the Governing Council, including an
agreement on the status of the coalition forces. We had
thought that the status of the coalition forces had been
determined in resolution 1483 (2003) and that their
mandate had been clarified further in resolution 1511
(2003). So, quite frankly, we are not clear about the
new status that is being referred to here.

If this proposed agreement on status is going to
be elaborated for the period after 30 June, then perhaps
it would be logical to conclude this kind of agreement
with the Transitional Government when it is formed,
not with the Governing Council, whose authority
expires on 30 June.

I should like to ask how you plan to provide for
the political presence of countries of the coalition in
Iraq after 30 June, after the Coalition Provisional
Authority ceases to function. Do you think that the
countries in the Coalition will be present in Iraq
through their usual embassies, or do you plan to create
different sorts of structures for their presence in Iraq?
We do not expect immediate answers to these
questions. We understand that the situation is still
evolving, but we thought it useful to ask those
questions, since it is clear that we still have a lot of
work to do.

We hope that the role of the United Nations in
this process will not be underestimated. It is clear to us
that the Iraq problem can be resolved, not so much by
adopting new resolutions, but through a radical change
of strategy by the international community in that
country. We mean that there is a need to involve as
many Iraqis with authority as possible in the settlement
process, to use the potential of neighbouring countries
and to give the United Nations a real chance, not only
in words but in actual fact, to have a part in resolving
the problem of Iraq. We welcome the fact that the
Secretary-General has prepared serious new proposals
to increase the work of the United Nations in order to
find the best possible solution to the Iraqi crisis. We
eagerly await his initiatives.

We hope that today's discussion will be useful
and that the views in the Security Council will be taken

SANA-869

 

into account in the work of the Coalition and that they
will also be transmitted to the Iraqis for their
information, including to the members of the
Governing Council of Iraq. We know there has been a
public appeal for the United Nations to participate
directly in implementing these very stages of the
political process.

