Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation)(sp0ke in Russian): We associate ourselves with the words of
gratitude addressed to Mr. Annabi and Ambassador
Greenstock. We note certain progress that has been made
in the implementation of the Lome Agreement and in the
deployment of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) contingents in various regions of the
country, including those areas where the peacekeepers of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) were not
deployed earlier. We hope that further expansion of
United Nations presence will assist in speeding up the
return to normal life for all the citizens of Sierra Leone.
We express our gratitude to the Government of Nigeria
for the flexibility it has demonstrated regarding the issue
of the extension of the dates for the Nigerian contingent's

 

stay in Sierra Leone, which makes it possible to prevent a
vacuum in the area of ensuring security and to establish
favourable conditions for a build-up of the UNAMSIL
presence.

At the same time, we are concerned by the parts of the
report that refer to a dangerous trend of escalating tensions
between the combatants of the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) and the UNAMSIL military personnel in the field,
which has manifested itself in particular in incidents during
which obstacles were created to the freedom of movement
of UNAMSIL personnel and in which weapons were seized
from the military personnel of the Mission.

We note that these unlawful actions follow the same
type of logic as the hostile public statements of the leader
of the Revolutionary United Front Party (RUFP) towards
UNAMSIL, and we believe it is appropriate for the Council
to warn Mr. Sankoh regarding his personal responsibility
for the unpredictable consequences that such incidents may
entail. The weapons must be returned to the peacekeepers.
Creating obstacles to the implementation of the Mission's
mandate is inadmissible.
Russia supports the Secretary-General's view
concerning four key areas in which efforts should now be
focused to move the peace process in Sierra Leone forward:
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of all
former combatants; the extension of State authority to the
entire territory of the country, including law enforcement
activity; national reconciliation and democratization; and the
rebuilding of national security forces. We are convinced
that progress on each of these tracks is possible solely in
conditions of cooperation between the Government, the
RUFP and other Sierra Leonean groups and leaders, which
in the final analysis bear fundamental responsibility for the
restoration of peace to the country.

We call upon them to actively cooperate with each
other and with UNAMSIL in implementing the Lorne
Agreement. We emphasize that it is precisely this factor, in
our view, that is decisive regarding further international
support for the peace process in Sierra Leone. In the light
of this approach, Russia is ready to continue to render
assistance to United Nations peacekeeping efforts in Sierra
Leone. At present, we are at an advanced stage in our
negotiations with the Secretariat regarding the allocation to
UNAMSIL of a Russian air-support unit.

In expressing our satisfaction with the high level of
participation by the international community in the
settlement of the conflict in Sierra Leone, we take particular
note of the irreplaceable role being played in this context
by the leaders of States of the region and of the active
and constructive policy of the current Chairman of the
Economic Community of West African States, President
Konare of Mali, which have given significant impetus to
efforts to strengthen peace.

In conclusion, I support the elements of the
presidential statement proposed by Ambassador
Greenstock.

