Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have often expressed our opposition to the
introduction of human rights issues into the Security
Council's agenda. We believe that they are not within
the Council's remit and should be considered by the
specialized bodies, first and foremost the Human Rights
Council. The Security Council has never been part of
the United Nations toolkit for protecting and promoting
human rights. It was never intended to monitor or
analyse situations in the area of human rights. It has
unique authority to take decisions on situations that
may involve the potential use of force, among them
situations that represent a threat to or a breach of peace
or an act of aggression.

Given that mandate, the Council cannot be a
platform for discussions of human rights situations,
wherever they are. No international document on
human rights assigns the Security Council authority for
oversight or any other function in that area. The remit
ofthe Security Council should be focused on issues that
pose genuine threats to international peace and security,
but if we regularly pad the agenda with non-core issues
it will inevitably dissipate the Council's attention and
strength, reduce its effectiveness and encourage future
accusations that it has exceeded its mandate, become
politicized and is using double standards, leading to a
weakening of trust in the Security Council in general.

With regard to the potential outcome of today's
meeting, the long-standing practice of the organs of the
United Nations system concerning human rights is clear
testament to the fact that politicized, country-specific
resolutions and discussions have never yielded positive
results, which can be achieved only by strengthening
dialogue and interaction among countries, as has been
demonstrated by attempts to discuss this issue here in
the Council.

At this stage, the main goal of the Security
Council is to create the conditions for resuming the
negotiating process as soon as possible in the interests
of arriving at political solutions to the problems of the
Korean peninsula. Our priority should be on finding
a peaceful resolution to this problem. The present
difficult situation should not be used as a pretext to
increase foreign military potential in the region. We
call upon all parties to decrease tensions, avoid military
rhetoric and quickly start a political process to find a
way out of the impasse.

