Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We are
in a typical pattern whereby we are usually just about
the only ones to take the floor during open meetings. I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, for holding today's
open briefing. We had spent far too long in a closed
format in the little room next to the Chamber, where not
very much happened.

I think it proper that, as the Security Council, we
always deal with facts and reality. In recent months,
the reality on the ground has changed. Although
there are still continued acts of violence and military
operations taking place in Syria, it is notable that the
situation on the ground has changed. There are zones of
de-escalation. We note that terrorist groups are losing
power. For example, Da'esh was expelled from Raqqa,
and soon may also be expelled soon from Deir ez-Zor.

It is also clear that that has meant that the Syrian
Government clearly has the upper hand on the ground
over the tens of armed groups and coalitions with
which it has had military confrontations since 2011.
Therefore, the current reality means that we have to act
on the basis of those facts. Otherwise, whatever we do
will not be useful. In that regard, let me say that we
remain convinced that there is no military solution to
the crisis in Syria. Therefore, more than ever before,
the negotiation processes are fundamental.

Once more, we would like to pay tribute to the
tireless work of Mr. Staffan de Mistura and his entire
team. Over and over again, they do not cease in working
to take into account developments on the ground, as
well as developments in the views and feelings of
all actors. They always seek new areas and build on
existing areas in which they can move forward the
process of negotiation.

Mr. De Mistura has just told us, and we commend
him, that he is taking a calculated risk in convening
the eighth round of talks on 28 November. It shows
great ambition. Mr. De Mistura wants to discuss
substance and concentrate on two specific points: the
constitutional process and the electoral process. Those
are central elements laid out in resolution 2254 (2015),
but perhaps the new political reality on the ground
might in some way facilitate the groups coming to
really incorporate the need to sit around a table and
negotiate on issues of substance. In that regard, the
efforts mentioned by Mr. De Mistura, including the
requests made to Governments and to the opposition
to take such a step, must be fully supported by the
Council. I would also hope that the second round of
meetings in Riyadh will be a success so that we really
can see a united opposition speaking with one voice,
rather than a cacophony of various groups that often
express contradictory points of view.

I am very much improvising regarding notes that
were well prepared, but having listened to what Mr. De
Mistura has said I must take into account the new
elements of the situation that he has explained to us. Let
me say once again that we have full confidence in his
efforts. The Security Council must meet its obligations,
firmly support Mr. De Mistura and his team, and ensure
that all actors in this crisis hear the Council's opinion
that the only way to resolve the situation is through
political negotiations.

