Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Ms. Honore for her briefing. Over the past six
months, the political process in Haiti has registered
steady progress. The security situation remains stable.
The settlement of displaced people proceeds smoothly.
The response to the cholera has produced encouraging
results. However, at the same time, tensions remain
between the executive and legislative branches of the
Haitian Government. Differences between the two
branches over the elections remain unsettled. Given
the country's weak economy and fragile humanitarian
situation, the peaceful reconstruction process remains
a challenge.

At present, Haiti is at a critical stage in consolidating
peace and stability. To help Haiti to achieve lasting
stability and development, China believes that the
international community should step up efforts in the
following three areas.

First, it should facilitate the election process to
achieve a peaceful political transition in Haiti. China
hopes that all stakeholders in Haiti will make the
country's future and well-being a priority, resolve their
differences over the elections and other issues as soon
as possible through dialogue and negotiation and ensure
the smooth holding of elections by the end of the year.
The international community and the relevant regional
organizations can play a positive role in providing good
offices and facilitation.

Secondly, it should accelerate economic
reconstruction and enhance Haiti's development
capacity. Underdevelopment has been one of the
underlying causes of the political and social problems
in Haiti. The international community should honour
its donor pledges and actively participate in Haiti's
State-building process with a view to helping the
country to achieve independent development as soon
as possible. Haiti has the highest rate of cholera in
the world. China applauds Secretary-General Ban Ki-
Moon's efforts to eliminate the cholera epidemic and
hopes that the international community will continue
to provide support to the cholera control programme
in Haiti.

Thirdly, it should continue to fully support the
role of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). Under the leadership of Special
Representative Honore, MINUSTAH has made positive
efforts in supporting the political process in Haiti and
in maintaining social order. China appreciates such
efforts and hopes that MINUSTAH will continue to
discharge its duties effectively in accordance with its
mandate.

