Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Allow me first to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this important and
timely debate. Allow me also to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador Peter Wittig and
the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose
Luis Guterres, for their briefings and presentations.

It is well known that conflict weakens institutions
and affects State capabilities. In the post-conflict
phase, the scale of required institution-building varies
from one country to another. It depends largely on the
degree of institutionalization existing prior to the
eruption of conflict, as it is easier to resuscitate
institutional memory than to establish it from scratch.
However, peacebuilding is not only about rebuilding
what existed before the outbreak of violence. Actually,
it may be the case that existing structures are part of
the root causes of the conflict. Therefore, the goal of
any peacebuilding operation must be to establish stable
and accountable institutions that are able to provide
good governance.

In that context, institution-building should be
understood and pursued in its wider sense, not only to
encompass organizational reforms, but also to instill a

value system that would promote the peaceful
settlement of disputes over the long term. The early
engagement of civil society is also important, as it can
help to promote a culture of greater transparency,
accountability and the active participation of the
population in defining its actual needs.

Institution-building is both a goal and a means to
an end in complex peacebuilding processes. It should
be integrated, along with other peacebuilding goals,
into a national peacebuilding strategy serving as a
framework that brings together peace, security and
development. A successful peacebuilding strategy must
strike a delicate balance between the need to quickly
produce an impact and dividends on the ground, on the
one hand, and to support long-term capacity-building,
on the other, with the overarching goals of
transforming the causes of the conflict and laying the
foundations for justice and durable peace.

As others have already stressed, the greatest
lesson to be learned from previous efforts at building
institutions in conflict-ridden States is undoubtedly that
there is no one-size-fits-all approach. Building
functional institutions requires tailored approaches
based on thorough analysis of the root causes and
drivers of the conflict.

Institution-building should be nationally owned
from the outset and involve leveraging existing
capacities. Therefore, the United Nations and donors
should seek out local initiatives, however nascent, and
encourage them to grow. In addition to national
ownership, equally important is the availability of
sustained attention and financial resources for long-
term tasks. There is often a gap between peacebuilding
aims and the resources required in the long run, as
funding tends to diminish precisely at the point when it
is most needed. In this area, the Peacebuilding
Commission could play a critical role in mobilizing
additional resources to continue over a sustained period
of time.
Post-conflict institution-building undoubtedly
determines the shape and direction peace and stability
will take. It is thus our responsibility to provide the
necessary means for such an undertaking to succeed.

