Mr. Rangaswamy (India): India would like to
thank the Austrian Presidency for organizing this
thematic debate on the protection of civilians. I am
making a short statement in the interest of the
economic use of time and a more detailed statement is
being circulated.

The operational reasons behind the inability of
the United Nations to fully translate the Security
Council's intent to protect civilians on the ground have
been spelled out with clarity and precision by the
independent study commissioned by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO). My delegation
believes that the primary gap concerns resources. For
example, 17,000 peacekeepers are simply inadequate
for the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). There is
no way that this number of troops can provide
meaningful support to national authorities in an area of
responsibility the size of Western Europe.

We have learned that the presence and activities
of high-quality troops acts as a significant and effective
deterrent to those who wish to harm civilians. It stands
to reason that an increase in the number of troops is the
first requirement. It also stands to reason that troops
require proper equipment and enablers. India is one of
the leading providers of air assets to MONUC and can
attest to the efficacy of air assets as enablers. It is
somewhat surprising that the United Nations and the
Security Council are unable to generate the required air
assets.

I refer to the need for accountability mentioned in
the concept paper circulated by the Austrian presidency
(S/2009/567). My delegation believes that there should
be accountability of those who mandate. Their
responsibility does not end with the generation of
mandates. They should be held accountable if
unachievable mandates are generated for political
expediency or if adequate resources are not made
available.

The development of normative frameworks must
also take into account the question of accountability.
These frameworks must be accompanied by
mechanisms to enforce those norms. The deficit in the
willingness and ability to enforce will inevitably lead
to an erosion of credibility. There must also be
accountability for this.

The Security Council must make up its mind
about what it means by protection of civilians. It must
have clarity about who is to be protected and what
constitutes a threat. It must also clarify what kind of
response it expects and who is to respond. It must, for
example, be able to differentiate between threats that
require a military response and those that require a rule
of law response. It should not ask force commanders or
their soldiers to assume policing responsibilities. The
Security Council must also be clear that its
responsibility for protecting civilians does not end with
a military or police response. Civilians require
humanitarian wherewithal for survival. Protection of
civilians requires a more integrated view. Multiple
stakeholders are involved, not just the military.

The concept to be developed should be one that
can be translated into targets on the ground. It must be
able to quantify the problem and articulate actions that
need to be taken. Only then will we be able to measure
progress or the lack of it.

My delegation suspects that the Council will find
it difficult to address this issue. Development of
indicators and norms requires uniform application of
the law. The Security Council cannot do justice to its
role if it discusses protection of civilians in some
operations and not in others.
The Council needs to develop a clearer idea of
operational realities. This information gap cannot be
addressed without meaningful and substantive
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries. Even though there is a relative lack of
appreciation - on the part of the Council and many
so-called humanitarian actors - of the troops'
initiative and dedication to humanitarian principles, it
is a fact that there is progress on the ground. Many
contingents have ideas and concepts that can be
effective. An effort by MONUC's Indian Brigade to
distribute cell phone hotline numbers within their area
of operation has led to a significant increase in
reported incidents of violence and the consequent
deployment of troops to pre-empt or deter attacks. This
has also lead to creation of databases of malefactors
and their movement patterns. That is an example of the
kind of intelligence capabilities that are key
requirements for increased effectiveness.

National capacities need to be strengthened.
Peacekeepers cannot and should not protect everyone
from everything. The protection of civilians is a
national responsibility, and peacekeepers are there to
aid in the development of these national capacities.
Capacities and institutions must be relevant to the
realities of the area in which United Nations operations
are deployed. The experiences and capabilities of
developing countries, particularly those that have gone
through successful nation-building exercises, are of
great significance in this regard. The Security Council
must find ways and means to harness those capacities.

