Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I should like
to once again express my great appreciation for the
conduct of this mission of the Security Council, which,
again, as you, Mr. President, just mentioned, visited the
Central African Republic and then the African Union
in Addis Ababa. I should like to report on the African
Union segment.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your leadership during the Security Council mission
to Africa. I take this opportunity to thank Mr. Haile
Menkerios, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to the African Union, and the Secretariat for
their assistance and support in the preparations for and
the holding of this meeting.

As the Council is aware, during the second leg of
the mission to Africa, the members of the Council met
with the African Union Peace and Security Council
for the ninth joint annual meeting of the two Councils
that took place on 12 March. The agenda for the ninth
joint session was aimed at enhancing the partnership
between the African Union and the United Nations
in matters related to peace and security in Africa,
aimed at strengthening the tools for the prevention
and management of conflicts and strengthening
peacebuilding mechanisms.

The session was an occasion for the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the members of the
Security Council to exchange views on the following
issues: the situation in the Great Lakes, the Central
African Republic, Mali and the Sahel, Libya, Somalia,
South Sudan, Darfur, the strategy to fight the terrorist
group Boko Haram, and the strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.

Experts from both Councils have discussed and
finalized a draft joint communique which captures the
discussions held in the room on the aforementioned
agenda items.

On the situation in the Great Lakes region, the
session expressed its concern over the differences
between the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), including the Force Intervention
Brigade, that might affect operations against the rebel
groups, and spoilers, which are supposed to be the
focus of this cooperation.

The session also stressed the importance of all
signatories respecting and implementing all aspects
agreed upon in the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of Congo and
the region, signed on 24 February 2013 and recognizing
the important role played by the Southern African
Development Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes.

On the Central African Republic, the meeting
expressed great concerns about the humanitarian
situation in the country; underscored the importance of
bringing to justice the perpetrators of war crimes and
crimes against humanity, including rape, systematic
looting and the forced recruitment of children; and the
urgent need to put an end to the culture of impunity that
has long prevailed in the Central African Republic.

On Boko Haram, the meeting took note of the
decisions of the Peace and Security Council of
29 January and 3 March on Boko Haram. It also took
note of a letter from the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission to the United Nations Secretary-
General transmitting the concept of operations of the
multinational joint task force to fight the terrorist group
Boko Haram. The members of the Council took note
of the request of the Peace and Security Council that
the United Nations Security Council take appropriate
action following the discussion of the multinational
joint task force strategic concept of operations.

On Mali and the Sahel region, the meeting
welcomed the ongoing negotiations and expressed
support for the Algerian mediation and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, highlighting its contribution to peace
and security in Mali.

The meeting addressed the situation in Libya to
express concern about the grave violations of human
rights committed by armed groups, and expressed
support for the efforts of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and for Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bernardino Leon for his facilitation
of the inclusive political dialogue among the Libyan
stakeholders.

On Darfur, the meeting expressed concern about
the humanitarian and security situations, and support
for the efforts of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel for the Sudan and South Sudan.

On the situation in South Sudan, the meeting
expressed grave concern about the failure of the
negotiations and the continuous violations of the
agreements by both parties to the conflict. The meeting
also reiterated its determination to impose sanctions
on those who undermined the ongoing political
process, and commended the mediation conducted by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to
achieve a long-lasting peace agreement in the country.

On Somalia, the two Councils welcomed the
positive developments and strong partnership
between the African Union Mission in Somalia and
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia in
the fight against the Al-Shabaab terrorist group and
in strengthening Somalian institutions as the country
enters a crucial and decisive period leading to elections
in 2016.

On the review of United Nations peace operations,
the meeting noted the importance of strengthening
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations in matters related to peacekeeping operations,
and looked forward to the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations coordinated by
former President Jose Ramos-Horta.

On the enhancement of cooperation between the
African Union and the United Nations for the prevention
of conflicts in Africa, the meeting stressed the
importance of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa and highlighted
the need for a continuous dialogue between the two
Councils to address common challenges. The experts of
the two Councils negotiated and agreed on a draft joint
communique, which has been finalized in challenging
conditions. This brings me to stress the need to improve
the preparations for the joint session in order to bring
effectiveness to the meeting and better coordination
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and our own Security Council.

