Mr. Fall (spoke in French): I would like to start
by commenting on the new recommendations having to
do with the Plan of Action that has been drawn up and
then list them in terms of the entities that would have
to act to implement them. I think I would start by
saying that the international community recognizes not
only the importance of security in West Africa but also,
unfortunately, the threats that have been highlighted
here, in particular the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and mercenaries.

Still, with respect to the international community,

I think there is a need for it to support the Moratorium
on the Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of
Light Weapons - first of all, by supporting the
national commissions responsible for this issue;
secondly, by helping the Secretariat of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to
strengthen its capacity in this domain; and, finally, of
course, by coordinating development assistance within
the United Nations system.

As regards the Council itself, we have noted the
idea of having an embargo on light weapons in conflict
areas. I think this was an early initiative launched here
at a Security Council ministerial-level meeting by Mrs.
Madeline Albright, former Secretary of State of the
United States of America. I think this idea has come up
again, and we should note it, while at the same time
penalizing the mercenary operations in West Africa.

I also note the willingness to contain mercenary
activities and proliferation through the adoption of
appropriate legal instruments. Of course, the Security
Council would need the assistance of the Conference
on light weapons as regards the definition of standards
and so forth.
Finally, there was mention of developing
independent mechanisms, evaluation and sanctions. Of
course, this mission would naturally fall under the
auspices of the Security Council.

At the subregional level, specifically for
PCASED and ECOWAS, two things are very
important: improving the procedure for monitoring of
import controls and the end-user certificates, and
starting in the next semester, we will look at reviewing
and improving these procedures as part of our agenda.

Finally, as regards ECOWAS, PCASED and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
together, I see the need to evaluate risks in the
subregion and to report annually on arms trade flows
and mercenary activities in the region.

