Chile is a member of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security and associates itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the Group (annex 27). We would like to contribute some additional remarks to this debate in our national capacity. The impacts of the coronavirus disease pandemic, together with other global challenges, have further complicated already-difficult situations of conflict, humanitarian crisis and peacebuilding. Twenty years on from the historic adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), and amid an increasingly complex global context, the women and peace and security agenda is more important than ever. This agenda has taught us major lessons on the differing impact of crisis situations on women, and on the importance of placing women at the centre of response, recovery and peacebuilding efforts. Resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and peace and security constitute a foundational normative and political framework for protecting the rights of women against gender-based violence and abuse and discrimination in crisis and conflict situations. They also provide a road map for enhancing the participation of women at all levels and in all phases of crisis and emergency response - this includes in relevant institutions, operations and missions, as well as of local women in negotiating and peacebuilding processes and in peace and security decision-making at all levels. We reiterate Chile's commitment to this agenda, while recognizing the importance of the tools developed under its auspices. We were among the first countries in our region to develop, in 2009, a national action plan for its implementation. In 2015, we launched the second national action plan, which incorporated indicators for monitoring and evaluation against goals and commitments, in line with recommendations of the Secretary-General. Chile is highly vulnerable to natural disasters, which, like other emergencies, have a disproportionate impact on women. We are currently in the process of developing our third national action plan, considering the relevance of the lessons learned from, and tools developed under, the women and peace and security agenda to emergency and disaster situations. Another component of this agenda we deem particularly important is the development of regional networks of women mediators and the established in 2019 of the Global Alliance of Women Mediators. These reflect the aspirations, commitment and participation and leadership capacities of women in peace processes. Our region of Latin America and the Caribbean does not yet have such a network linking women peace and security mediators and peacebuilders. That is why we welcomed, and are actively participating in, the initiative of Argentina and UN-Women in Latin America to establish a network of women mediators for the southern cone. We reiterate the need to address and eradicate the scourge of sexual and gender-based violence, including in conflict situations, as well as in the context of the pandemic, and must ensure that those responsible are held to account for their actions. In conclusion, we renew our commitment to the women and peace and security agenda, and reiterate its centrality and relevance to international peace and security, conflict prevention, peace processes and peacebuilding.
