Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): On behalf of my delegation,
I wish to thank the delegation of Egypt for having
organized this open debate. We also wish to thank
the briefers for their perspectives on the subject
under discussion.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security is
a growing trend. It has been demonstrated time and
again that regional and subregional organizations
can contribute their usually proximate understanding
of local and regional conflicts and their root causes
to a mutually beneficial partnership with the United
Nations. Over the years, many regional and subregional
organizations have taken advantage of the provisions
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
which provides the platform through which the United
Nations and regional organizations could work together
to prevent, manage and resolve crises and develop
strategies to effectively engage in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.

While the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security resides
with the Security Council, regional actions lighten the
burden of the Council and provide an added layer of
legitimacy to multilateralism. Indeed, regional efforts
enhance the prospects for inclusivity and consensus in
addressing the increasing challenges to global peace
and security. Threats, such as extremist ideologies,
terrorism, the illicit transfer and proliferation of small
arms and light weapons, humanitarian disasters,
human trafficking, environmental hazards, drug
trafficking, the criminal use of cybertechnology and
global pandemics, among others, are critical factors
that have profoundly shaped international security in
modern times. Those security challenges tend to be
transnational in character and are often beyond the
capacity of any one country to resolve. That makes the
collaboration between the United Nations and regional
organizations all the more pertinent.

It is significant to underline the importance of the
cooperation that exists between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU). In 2006, both organizations
reached an agreement on the Ten-Year Capacity-
Building Programme for the AU that provides the main
framework for United Nations assistance to the AU.
Under the Programme, the United Nations has supported
the African Union in areas such as capacity-building for
mediation, electoral assistance and technical assistance
to the African Union Peace and Security Council.
The United Nations and the African Union have also
worked for the maintenance of peace and security
through collaboration in peacekeeping operations
on the African continent. The Security Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council have,
through their annual consultations, held discussions on
issues of common interest, especially conflict situations
in Africa. Those consultations are mutually beneficial
because they allow for close coordination of the actions
of the African Union and the United Nations in matters
of peace and security. We believe that the process
could benefit from a strengthening of the policy-level
coordination between the two organizations.

While those developments are encouraging, the
opportunities and challenges remain critical points for
ensuring a more functional and effective cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and regional
arrangements. Such cooperation and collaboration must
be premised on a clear division oflabour that recognizes
the relative advantage of each organization. We believe
that more work needs to be done on how the United
Nations can better support arrangements for further
cooperation and coordination with the African Union
on Chapter VIII arrangements in addressing common
security challenges. Such arrangements would also
serve to deepen and broaden dialogue and cooperation
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union.

In concluding, I wish to call attention to the fact
that in the face of the increasing gap between the
demand for the involvement of the United Nations in
conflict situations, on the one hand, and the United
Nations ability to respond effectively, on the other,
regional organizations become even more compelling
as enablers of peace. That is why we believe that
greater consideration should be accorded to expanding
and enhancing regional approaches to the pursuit of
international peace and security. Regional approaches,
in essence, represent a critical bridge between the
national and global dimensions of conflict. It is a
bridge that we must continue to build, no matter how
challenging that may appear to be.

