Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Let me congratulate you
and wish you, Mr. President, every success on Angola's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
in March. I also wish to congratulate Ambassador
Rafael Dario Ramirez Carrefio on a successful and
productive Venezuelan presidency in February. I join
other colleagues in expressing appreciation to the
delegations of China and the United States, as well as
all Council members, for the tremendous work leading
to the adoption of resolution 2270 (2016).

Malaysia welcomes the adoption of this very
important text. Given the far-reaching implications of
the resolution, we would have preferred ample time to
consider the text. However, considering the exigencies
involved and the need for proper consultations with our
respective authorities, we had to expeditiously work
to ensure that the spirit and intent of the resolution
were appreciated, so that it could be adopted in a
timely manner.

Malaysia unequivocally reaffirms its belief that
illicit development and procurement of weapons of mass
destruction and related technologies and capabilities by
any State is unacceptable and cannot be tolerated by the
international community. Such activities undermine the
work and commitment of all Member States to peaceful
relations with each other and to the peaceful resolution
of conflict. Those are our core values. It is for that
reason that Malaysia voted in favour and co-sponsored
the resolution.

The Korean peninsula has gone through a periodic
cycle of ups and downs. It would benefit from more
predictability of inter-State behaviour through greater
engagement and dialogue. It requires a change of
attitude and embracing more trust to pursue all
peaceful means of resolving the outstanding issues
between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and its neighbours and other interlocutors, not just for
the sake on securing peace and stability on the Korean
peninsula and the wider region, but equally, if not
more important, so that the benefits of enduring peace,
security and stability could prosper the nation and the
people of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

Malaysia remains convinced that the interests
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and
its grievances could be best served by its return to
the negotiating table. We call upon the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to recommit itself to the
resumption of peaceful dialogue and negotiations under
the six-party talks framework. As others in the region
have reaped the seeds of mutual trust, cooperation
and prosperity sown before, so too should the people
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea enjoy
such benefits of sustained peace and socioeconomic
development. It could learn from the economic success
stories of its immediate neighbours.

The inclusion of language safeguarding humanitarian
exemptions in the text is a crucial element. It will
prevent the effects ofpossible unintended consequences
against legitimate interests, particularly related to
the livelihoods and the humanitarian situation of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea population.
We are fully supportive of that. Malaysia wishes to
underscore that interpretation of relevant provisions
in the resolution must not be a pretext to disrupt
diplomatic access and further impede the conduct of
legitimate diplomatic and humanitarian activities in
the country, as stipulated under the Vienna and Geneva
conventions respectively.

Our primary goal is to see the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula. We must not be diverted from that
goal. We wish to see the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea return to the negotiation table and embrace
change that builds trust to pursue shared security and
prosperity through international cooperation. As a
member of the Council, we remain committed to doing
our part, including through the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006)
concerning the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

