Mr. De Loecker (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Allow me, Mr. President, on behalf of the European
Union, to extend to you a very warm welcome to New
York and in particular to welcome your presence here
as you preside over the Security Council during this
crucial debate.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia - and the associated countries of Cyprus,
Malta and Turkey, as well as the European Free Trade
Association countries members of the European
Economic Area - Iceland and Liechtenstein - align
themselves with this statement.

First of all, I should first like very warmly to
welcome the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and once again to
offer him our warm congratulations for the work he has
done to date as head of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). We are
particularly pleased to note the presence here of several
members of the Transitional Government who were
democratically elected to the Constituent Assembly,
and we extend a warm welcome to the Chief Minister,
Mr. Mari Alkatiri; his Minister for Finance, Ms.
Fernanda Borges, and his Vice-Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation, Mr. Fernando de Araujo. The
European Union takes this unique opportunity to assure
them, with confidence and conviction, of its support in
the exercise of their duties.

The people of East Timor are living in remarkable
and very stimulating times. Their elected
representatives in the Assembly have begun the process
of drafting the Constitution of the future State. As the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General has
just confirmed, that work is going well and they are
making good headway. The European Union welcomes
this. It is important that the Views of the Timorese
people, as set out in the reports of the district
Constitutional Commissions of June and July this year,
before the electoral campaign, be reflected in the
finalized draft Constitution.

We welcome the decision taken by the
Constituent Assembly, further recommended by the
Secretary-General, to schedule for next May the
transfer of UNTAET's powers of sovereignty to the
Government of the State of East Timor. That will give
the Timorese time to ensure a smooth transition and to
allow for the gradual, but necessary, stabilization of
administrative structures.

The likely holding of the first presidential
elections of the new State will be another important
step towards democracy and the construction of a
Viable nation. We agree with the Secretary-General that
the elections should take place before the declaration of
independence, so that, before it leaves, UNTAET can
ensure that the elections go smoothly.

The continuing activities of the militias in West
Timor remain one of our principal concerns. We are
pleased to note, however, the increase in the number of
refugees who are returning to East Timor. We underline
the importance of a swift conclusion of a memorandum
of understanding between the United Nations and the
Indonesian Government to allow for the return of
humanitarian agencies, so that they can assist in the
repatriation efforts.

We thank the Secretary-General for drawing up
plans for the future international presence in East
Timor. The European Union has taken due note of the
suggested reduction in the size of its military, civilian
police and civil administration components. That
reconfiguration, proposed following numerous
consultations with the representatives of the Timorese
people, should make it possible for the principal needs
of the people to be met once independence has been
declared. The Union therefore endorses the Secretary-
General's recommendations for an integrated mission
and looks forward to his further recommendations.

The European Union hopes that the dialogue
between UNTAET, the Secretariat, the Timorese people
and all the other actors involved in East Timor will
continue, in order to ensure the progressive adaptation
of UNTAET and a painless transition to its successor
mission, in line with the needs of the people.

As the Secretary-General emphasized in his
report, the departure of United Nations staff will have a
negative impact on Timor's economy. The international
community must ensure that this impact is minimized,
and the working group's recommendations on the
subject are expected shortly.

In future the international presence must continue
the considerable efforts under way in the area of
reconstruction. The European Union will participate in
these efforts, in cooperation with the international
financial institutions and all of the actors involved. The
European Union will continue to attach particular
importance to the process of national reconciliation.
It is indispensable that the perpetrators of the
serious crimes committed in 1999 be brought to justice.
Training of staff and future civil servants of the State
of Timor in criminal and administrative justice and of
the Serious Crimes Unit is crucial in this respect. We
reiterate our call for the Jakarta authorities to conclude
the appeals proceedings in the case of the murder last
year of three Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees workers in Atambua.

Reconstruction efforts will also have to address
the improvement of health-care and education services
as well as the rehabilitation of transport networks, so
that the living conditions of the Timorese can gradually
return to normal. The European Commission, which
hosted the donors' conference last December, is
currently finalizing its strategy aimed at supporting
development efforts in East Timor in the medium and
long term.

UNTAET's success is undeniable, and the ground
that has been covered since autumn 1999 is
remarkable. The international community must also
ensure the success of the process of UNTAET's
departure and the transition to an international presence
that will be both effective and efficient in its
reconstruction efforts. The United Nations Secretariat
and its various departments have the European Union's
full support in this task and in planning the next stages.

