Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to
brief the Council on the continued support of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, specifically as per the Council's request
to inform it on the progress made by the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan towards implementing
the benchmarks outlined in resolution 2412 (2018). I
would also like to briefly elaborate on the Secretary-
General's recommendations to reconfigure UNISFA, as
submitted in his letter of 20 August (S/2018/778).

With regard to the first benchmark, which is
facilitating the full freedom of movement, the Sudan
and South Sudan maintained standing clearance
for all UNISFA air and ground patrols within the
Safe Demilitarized Border Zone. Since March,
both countries have authorized their senior national
monitors based at the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism headquarters in Kadugli to
provide approval. Consequently, all patrols undertaken
by UNISFA since April have received approval
without delay.

On the second benchmark, which is finalizing the
agreement on the four Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism team sites, UNISFA continues
to operate a team site at Tishwin/Panakuac Within the
Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, and efforts continued
within the reporting period to establish the other three
team sites. The ad hoc committee for the 14 Mile Area
met on 28 August, when the South Sudanese delegation
stated that it was unable to convince local leaders to
allow the establishment of the tweam sites in Safahah/
Kiir Adem and As Sumayah/Wierayen. As a result, the
committee recommended that the matter be referred
to the Joint Political and Security Mechanism. With
regard to the establishment of the fourth team site in the
Abu Qussa/Wunkur area, the decision remains with the
Joint Political and Security Mechanism to consider an
alternative location due to the presence of rebel entities.

Despite the efforts of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel to convene meetings of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism within the reporting
period - which is the third benchmark - the three
scheduled meetings were postponed by the parties.
The meeting to be held on ll and 12 August and the
subsequent meeting scheduled for 6 and 7 September
were postponed to accommodate talks between the
South Sudanese parties in Khartoum and subsequent
consultations on the agreement reached on 30 August.
The meeting scheduled for 17 and 18 September was
postponed by the Sudan due to prior commitments
of the Government. The African Union High-level
Implementation Panel has scheduled the next meeting
of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism for
23 September.

With regard to advancing the establishment of the
border-crossing corridors - which are the fourth and
fifth benchmarks - progress remains contingent on
parties undertaking sensitization exercises with their
border communities. Sensitization efforts are necessary
to allay the concerns of the border communities,
while emphasizing that in no way do the marking of
border-crossing corridors and Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism operations prejudice
the current or future legal status of the border. The
upcoming meeting of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism is expected to address sensitization issues
with the border communities.
Lastly, the African Union Border Programme
convened the Joint Demarcation Committee - which
is the sixth benchmark - from 10 to 13 September,
in order to resume border demarcation discussions.
However the parties were unable to advance their
discussions on the boundary delimitation document,
which would guide the demarcation exercise. Progress
on that document stalled in 2017. The Joint Border
Commission is scheduled to meet in October.

Despite only partial completion of the conditions
contained in resolution 2412 (2018), the past few months
witnessed a number of other positive developments in
the relationship between the Sudan and South Sudan, not
least among them the efforts undertaken by the Sudan
in facilitating talks between the South Sudanese parties
in Khartoum. Building on this promising collaboration
between the parties, I call on the Council to consider
the reconfiguration recommendations outlined by the
Secretary-General in his letter of 20 August to adjust
UNISFA to the current realities so as to best support
both Governments in their efforts to implement
their agreements.

Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism operations have markedly increased and
picked up momentum within the past year due to the
proactive push by the Security Council and UNISFA to
further activities, including the establishment of team
sites. The Border Monitoring Mechanism remains a vital
part of the framework that regulates the relationship
between the two countries and its normalization. It is
in this regard that I request the Council to consider the
recommendation in the Secretary-General's letter and
allow for a modest adjustment in UNISFA'S mandate on
the Mechanism, within current resources. This would
provide the Mission with the ability to better support
border-demarcation efforts by the African Union border
programme, including the much-needed sensitization
of the border communities that I highlighted earlier.
The recommendations envisage the establishment of
two further sector headquarters and team sites within
the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, as required, to
provide more comprehensive coverage of the border
region. Troops would be transferred from the Abyei
area to achieve full operating capability for the Border
Monitoring Mechanism. This would harmonize the
diminishing military threat with the corresponding
reduction in military need for the Abyei area.

With regard to the Abyei area, the military
component of the Mission would concentrate
its deployments along the borders of the area to
safeguard against armed incursions. With criminality
increasing in the Abyei area, the recommendations
call for the deployment of three formed police units
and additional specialized individual police officers
to enhance the Mission's focus on maintaining law
and order and continue furthering peace between
the local communities. These proposed changes are
accommodated within the current uniformed personnel
ceiling of 4,550. Extensive consultations were
undertaken by the Secretariat with the parties and the
African Union to formulate these recommendations,
which endeavour to match the situation on the ground by
reducing troops from the Abyei area, introducing police
to manage law and order, and enhancing the Mission's
mandate to seize and advance progress on the Border
Monitoring Mechanism, as well as to operationally
support the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel in its political efforts. The further engagement
of the Council with the parties is necessary to agree on
a mandate for UNISFA that would serve the parties as
well as their border communities.

In closing, let me reiterate that it is imperative that
all peacekeeping missions address the changing needs
on the ground and work towards achieving a political
resolution. In the case of UNISFA, the support to the
implementation of the 2012 cooperation agreements and
the resolution of the status of Abyei and of the border
needs to be reframed in such a way as to enable the
parties to make meaningful progress. The Secretary-
General's letter outlines recommendations that aim to
achieve that goal.

