We regret to see that the draft resolution on women and peace and security has not been adopted. A certain member claims that it attaches importance to the women and peace and security agenda, but its actions do not match its words. China has from the very beginning been supportive of Russia's initiative to promote a draft resolution in commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and give new impetus to the women and peace and security agenda. We believe this will help reaffirm our commitment to the agenda and galvanize the positive momentum for better implementation. In this spirit, China participated in the negotiations constructively, contributing to the improvement of the text and to building consensus. Had certain members shown the same spirit of unity, constructiveness and flexibility, we could have reached consensus and sent out a positive signal. Advancing the women and peace and security agenda is an evolving and enriching process. We should remain open-minded and be inclusive to new perspective and elements, putting emphasis on solving fundamental problems facing women's development instead of clinging only to existing language and refusing improvement. On many occasions, developing countries have repeatedly stressed that the women and peace and security agenda and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development are interlinked and indivisible. The achievement of sustainable development and the economic empowerment of women are key for preventing conflict, sustaining peace and strengthening women's protection and participation. China put forward text proposals in this regard, which were echoed by some colleagues. It is our belief that, in consultations and negotiations of the Council, members should respect each other, accommodate each other's concerns and interests, and find common ground. This is crucial to the unity and effectiveness of the Council. We hope all Council members will join hands to strengthen unity in advancing the important work of the Council, including the women and peace and security agenda. Only in this way can we maintain the Council's effectiveness and ability to take actions, and live up to the expectations of Member States and of the international community
