Mr. Chtcherbak (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation attaches great
importance to the speedy normalization of the situation in
the subregion of the Great Lakes in central Africa, a
situation which is closely bound up with circumstances in
Rwanda and the surrounding area. We believe that the tasks
of restoring peace, security and stability to that country and
to the region as a whole can be achieved only through a
well-thought-out and comprehensive approach. An integral
part of that approach must be the establishment of an
impregnable barrier against the illegal dissemination of
weapons, the continuing inflow of which is undermining
mutual trust and preventing national reconciliation. It is also
capable of provoking a new spiral of bloody violence with
all its devastating implications for the peoples of the region.

On occasions in the past we have expressed our
concern with regard to information reaching us about
weapons shipments to the former Rwandan government
forces in violation of the embargo imposed by Security
Council resolutions 918 (1994) and 1011 ( 1995). In view of
the seriousness of the problem, we support the work of the
International Commission of Inquiry, which we believe
provides a considerable deterrent against political and ethnic
extremism in the region. The Russian delegation will vote
in favour of the draft resolution, which contains a broad
range of balanced steps aimed at stabilizing the situation
not only around Rwanda but in the region as a whole. In
this context it is particularly important to take specific
steps to ensure the effective implementation of the
embargo on arms supplies to illegal militia forces, as well
as to appeal to all countries of the region not to allow
their territories to be used as bases for launching attacks
on any other State.

We believe that it is extremely important that the
measures proposed should, as the draft resolution clearly
states, be implemented in coordination with countries
neighbouring Rwanda. We regard this as a means of
guaranteeing the efforts of the international community to
resolve this complicated problem, which could also
become an important precondition for stabilizing the
situation in the region, in particular by implementing the
provisions of the Tunis Declaration of Heads of State of
the Great Lakes Region of 18 March 1996.

