Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing on the international efforts to avert
famine and to respond to its appearance in conflict-
affected areas in Yemen, Somalia, South Sudan and
north-eastern Nigeria. I also commend the efforts of
the United Nations and the international community in
response to the Secretary-General's early-warning call
for action against famine earlier this year.

In Somalia, this crisis is not one of famine alone but
also has many political and security aspects, given the
increasing number of displaced persons and the ensuing
competition for scarce natural resources, which will
ultimately threaten the recent but fragile political and
security gains in Somalia. We are also concerned about
the obstacles to humanitarian access for those affected
by the crisis in various parts of Somalia, especially
those created by the Al-Shabaab terrorist movement. It
will be important to redouble efforts to support Somali
institutions, not only with regard to the mechanisms
needed to address such humanitarian crises, but also in
order to prevent those crises and provide early warnings
and responses to them.

In South Sudan, despite the fact that economic
and climatic factors have colluded to exacerbate the
humanitarian situation there, the direct and main reason
for the worsening situation lies in the ongoing vicious
circle of violence and armed conflict. It is therefore the
legal and ethical obligation of the parties to the conflict
to cease all forms of violence, observe international
law and the relevant international principles relating to
civilians and facilitate the rapid, safe and unimpeded
access of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
to the affected areas. South Sudan needs the support of
international donors and the international community as
a whole, since the available resources for addressing the
deteriorating humanitarian crisis are still inadequate.
We believe that the humanitarian relief efforts cannot
be a lasting solution to the crisis and that the only way
to resolve the continued humanitarian plight of South
Sudan's civilians will be through an inclusive political
process that opens prospects for a solution based on the
peace agreement.

Egypt is following the emergency food insecurity
situation in Yemen with concern, especially given
the added danger brought on by the cholera outbreak.
These tragedies can be partly blamed on the Houthis'
continued refusal to participate seriously in the efforts
of the United Nations Special Envoy to reach a political
settlement of the crisis. We reaffirm the importance
of reaching a political settlement that can lead to
sustainable solutions to the myriad humanitarian
challenges in Yemen. The international contributions
to the humanitarian response plan should be increased,
and pressure should meanwhile be brought to bear on
the Houthis to allow the safe passage of humanitarian
goods throughout Yemen.

In Nigeria, we commend the efforts of the
Government to enhance its national response and scale
up its efforts to address the humanitarian crisis in the
north-eastern part of the country. The Government
has facilitated humanitarian access to the affected
areas, provided financial contributions in response to
their need, managed large numbers of refugees and
displaced persons and developed a comprehensive
plan for its humanitarian response, the Buhari Plan
for north-eastern Nigeria's reconstruction on the
humanitarian, security and development fronts. We
urge the international donor community to act rapidly to
honour its pledges announced at the Oslo humanitarian
conference on Nigeria and the Lake Chad region,
held earlier this year, so as to avoid exacerbating the
humanitarian situation in north-eastern Nigeria.

Despite the success of our collective efforts to avert
famine, the crisis is not yet over. Millions of people in
those areas, especially women and children, still cannot
meet their most basic needs. The famine crisis has shed
light on the importance of improving the coordination
of humanitarian assistance and scaling up United
Nations early-warning mechanisms. Famines do not
come out of the blue or happen by chance. They are
actually avoidable.

