Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
for his briefing.

Our successes in eliminating terrorist nerve centres
and taking de-escalation measures in the framework
of the Astana process have enabled us to significantly
improve the situation in Syria. What we also need is
progress on the political front, increased international
humanitarian aid, and assistance in restoring the
infrastructure of the liberated areas and in mine
clearance. However, the inadmissibility of attempts to
establish preconditions, a principle that we traditionally
apply to the Syrian parties involved in the political
process, is also true for humanitarian assistance from
our international partners.

We would like to draw attention to the fact that the
11 November statement of the Presidents of Russia and
the United States included a call to the States Members
of the United Nations to increase their contributions
to meeting the Syrian people's humanitarian needs in
the next few months. The same subject was included
in a joint statement on 22 November by the Presidents
of Russia, Iran and Turkey that emphasized assistance
with humanitarian mine clearance, preserving
historical heritage and restoring basic residential
infrastructure, including socioeconomic facilities.
Russia has consistently advocated for expanding
humanitarian assistance to Syria and does not divide its
inhabitants into "us" and "them". We have been helping
Syrians on a daily basis and have kept the Security
Council regularly informed about that. On the other
hand, we have been seeing unilateral sanctions that do
not allow Damascus to buy medicines or acquire and
repair medical equipment. That is eloquent testimony
to various international stakeholders" real attitude
to Syrians.

We are extremely concerned about the
humanitarian catastrophe in Raqqa, primarily caused
by the indiscriminate violence of the coalition. Now
the United States and its major allies are taking steps,
including in the information space, to hide the serious
consequences of their military operation. The United
Nations is still unable to get into Raqqa in order to
conduct an assessment. The official version e that it is
too dangerous - is frivolous fudging aimed at people
with short memories. A year ago, when the terrorists
were withdrawing from their last refuge in eastern
Aleppo, a few members of the Security Council
literally tried to drag representatives of the United
Nations and its partners there by force, including by
adopting a resolution. Then everything was organized,
both the evacuation and the monitoring, and received
high praise from the humanitarian workers.

We have been assured that Raqqa has long ago
been liberated from the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) without any controlled evacuation or
signs of monitoring, but what is going on there is the
mystery of the seventh seal. The banal reason is that the
coalition has something to hide from the international
community - significant numbers of civilian victims
and huge destruction. An unattractive picture is
emerging from communications concerning a deal that,
as we understand it, was cut when Raqqa was liberated
between ISIL and the paramilitary groups allied with
the coalition. We are concerned about the situation of
the people fleeing Raqqa, who are held in inhumane
conditions in camps for displaced persons, in a zone
that is de facto controlled by armed groups protected
by the coalition.

There have been reports that various local authorities
have been established in districts liberated from ISIL,
with the direct participation of the coalition, and that
economic recovery measures are being negotiated
with them. They are not discussing such issues with
the Syrian authorities. We have listened to people
voicing unfounded fears that establishing de-escalation
areas could affect Syria's territorial integrity. We
have consistently refuted such insinuations. What the
coalition is doing, however, is taking real steps to pull
the country apart. Basically, the foreign presence is in
Syria illegally, however hard individual officials in the
United States try to find legal grounds for it, because
there are none. Moreover, we are seeing the occupying
forces attempt to gain a foothold in Syria an indefinite

period that has nothing to do with the counter-terrorism
efforts that we are assured are the coalition's only goal.

We recognize the importance of providing
assistance to the people of Raqqa and its environs,
as well as to the hundreds of thousands of displaced
people who have been forced to leave the city. However,
that assistance cannot be supplied at the expense of
other parts of the country, including those liberated
by the Syrian army. In order for the coalition to gloss
over its actions in Raqqa as a distraction, it needs an
alternative tragedy of the month. That job has recently
fallen to eastern Ghouta, where terrorists remain and
clashes between various armed groups continue. We
have been cultivating intensive contacts in eastern
Ghouta, including with armed groups, in order to help
to resolve emerging humanitarian access issues, and we
are discussing the parameters of medical evacuation.
Those are all very delicate issues requiring work on the
ground. A tripartite mechanism with the participation
of Russia, Syria and the United Nations has great
potential, and cooperation of that kind is essential to
finding solutions to complex issues. I should point
out, by the way, that the Syrian authorities have just
announced a truce in eastern Ghouta.

We have already said that the Security Council
will have to have a serious discussion about cross-
border operations in the absence of proper monitoring.
It is non-governmental organizations that are the
concertmasters in this area, with the United Nations
playing second fiddle. The requirement of resolution
2165 (2014) - that the assistance being dispatched
through the border crossings it designates must go
to every area of Syria - is not being met. We have
no way of knowing where it actually ends up. There
is an understanding that in this way only the areas
held by armed groups are supplied. We have heard
Mr. Lowcock's information about the cross-border
deliveries, but it is not enough, and we want to know
more. We want a briefing on cross-border deliveries at
the beginning of next week under the heading of "Any
other business".

This mechanism cannot be maintained in its
current form. It usurps Syria's sovereignty and is
contrary to the principles of emergency humanitarian
assistance endorsed by the General Assembly. It is an
unprecedented and extreme measure that must now
be reassessed.

Positive changes in the situation on the ground,
thanks to the Astana process, help to increase the
volume of convoys through the line of contact. We
are encouraging the Syrian authorities to engage
constructively. At the same time, there needs to be
order in the distribution of humanitarian aid so as to
ensure that it does not to fall into the hands of terrorists
to then be resold to the Syrian people at higher prices.

We are troubled by the humanitarian situation in
the Al-Rukban camp, at the border with Jordan. As the
Syrian Government has no access there, we cannot ask
it to do the impossible. This is an area under the control
of the American military, which arbitrarily established
the camp around the Al-Tanf military base. In that
time, the area has become a black hole through which
terrorists freely flow. We trust that our United States
partners will assist the United Nations in normalizing
the situation in that area.

In conclusion, we note that the assessments
pointing to a reduction in the volume of humanitarian
assistance to besieged and hard-to-reach regions need
to be continuously verified so as to ensure that they
align with reality. Assistance is reaching those areas
except when, for objective reasons, it cannot do so due
to ongoing hostilities.

