Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): Let me first congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and thank the members of the Council
for convening this timely debate.

The international community comes once more to
this Chamber to express its sadness in the face of the
horrendous events that continue to take place in the
Middle East. Brazil has consistently advocated a
peaceful solution to the conflict. In the face of recent
events, the Brazilian Government has reiterated that
position in press communiques over the past days. We
also join the Rio Group in its call released yesterday
for an immediate cessation of all acts of terrorism,
provocation, incitement and destruction.

There are definitely no positive developments on
the ground in the Middle East. But if there is a single
trend that we welcome and encourage in the most vivid
terms, it is the growing responsiveness of the Council
to the challenge before the international community at
this moment. In times of despair and disappointment
for so many in the Middle East, it is towards the United
Nations that world public opinion looks in the hope
that reason and peace will eventually prevail. It is only
natural that high hopes are placed on possible action by
the Security Council. We welcome the recent adoption
of resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) and fully
back their terms. But we strongly believe that the
Council can certainly do more to fully assert its
responsibilities in this matter.

The Brazilian Government remains deeply
alarmed by the growing and fast deterioration of the
situation. We call upon the parties to comply
immediately and thoroughly with Council resolutions
1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002), especially with regard to
a meaningful ceasefire. We join the international
community in the call on Israel to suspend all military
actions in the occupied territories, to roll back illegal
occupation and settlement activities, to respect the
Palestinian Authority and its leadership and to
withdraw, without delay, from Palestinian cities. The
threat that military escalation has brought to holy
shrines of all three major monotheistic religions must
stop immediately.

Recent military actions against the Palestinian
Authority compound in Ramallah are, at the least,
deplorable. The Israeli authorities must understand that
excessive use of force does not generate any sense of
security for their own people. On the contrary, it only
fuels the dreadful spiral of violence and reprisals that
makes the vision even more remote for everyone. We
condemn the decision to isolate President Arafat and
the attempts to threaten his physical integrity and
demoralize his leadership over the Palestinian
Authority and the Palestinian people. Any attempt to
exile him from his homeland would be yet a further and
a grave mistake. It cannot, and will not, be accepted by
the international community.

We fully understand the grievances of both
Israelis and Palestinians. We all want their suffering to
stop. But the disproportionate and lethal use of force by
Israel as well as unacceptable acts of terrorism and
suicide bombings by Palestinian militants only
jeopardize even further any prospect of a lasting
political settlement to the conflict in the Middle East.
We are dismayed by the fact that the two parties are
failing to keep the course towards a negotiated solution
to the conflict and that their daily attitude towards each
other seems to be designed to make that goal even
more distant.

The Brazilian Government reaffirms its
preparedness to cooperate fully with the Security
Council in the implementation of actions designed to
resume the peace process and promote peaceful
coexistence between Israel and a Palestinian State. We
remain faithful to the aspiration of the State of Israel to
exist within secure and recognized borders as well as to
that of Palestine to an independent, democratic and
economically viable State.

No military solution can ever bring about that
vision. Nor will it be achieved through the isolated
efforts of any party no matter how powerful and
influential it may be. The only possible route is respect
for human rights and for the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination. The only possible
instruments are those based on the legitimacy of
international law. Resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principle of land for peace are the points
of reference for the resumption of the peace process in
a negotiated settlement between the parties. A ceasefire
is urgently needed, but it cannot be obtained through
the expansion of illegal occupation and the use of
increased armed force. No ceasefire will stand in the
absence of a political framework.

The practical question before us today is what
should the Security Council do to further the cause of
reason and peace. We think we need more active
involvement of the Council on the ground. We believe
that the Council has a special responsibility to use its
tools in order to demand compliance with its decisions.
We think that it is the Council's duty to call upon the
representatives of Israel and Palestine to explain, at the
highest possible level, what they are effectively doing
to respond to the Council's demands. We believe that
the Council should be directly briefed by all emissaries
whose efforts the international community continues to
support. We remain committed to the idea of
establishing an international monitoring mechanism to
help the parties implement the recommendations of the
Mitchell report and the Tenet plan and support the
efforts carried out on the ground by the special envoy
Anthony Zinni. An international presence, with the full
backing of the United Nations, seems indispensable
now.

Last but not least, the Security Council must lay
out a clear strategy to move ahead with new and
constructive approaches, such as the initiative by
Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, recently
endorsed by the League of Arab States. Let me reaffirm
that Brazil will strongly support any initiative decided
upon by the Security Council with a view to achieving
political freedom, peace, stability and prosperity for all
in the Middle East.

