Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to warmly congratulate the sister
delegation of Nigeria for having organized this open
debate of the Security Council on the theme
"Maintenance of international peace and security:
Optimizing the use of preventive diplomacy tools:
Prospects and challenges in Africa".

This debate is all the more relevant as, quite
clearly, numerous atrocities could have been avoided
and thousands of human lives spared had preventive
diplomacy tools been deployed in a number of conflict
situations around the world. This conviction is
supported by the positive experiences achieved around
the world under the auspices of the United Nations
through the good offices, mediators and special envoys
of the Secretary-General, which have defused several
crises and which prove, if there was any further need
for such proof, that the effectiveness and benefits of
preventive diplomacy are well established.

The resounding successes achieved in different
areas through the interventions of regional and
subregional organizations and civil society, or simply
through good will, are also grounds for satisfaction,
from which we should take encouragement and seek to
optimize such strategies in all of our efforts towards
peace.

Thus, the United Nations, which was created,
among other reasons, to save current and succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, should place
preventive diplomacy at the very heart of its action to
ensure that, even if it is not the main tool for the
maintenance of international peace and security, it will
serve as an essential one in neutralizing certain
conflict-prone situations from the earliest signs.

To achieve effective preventive diplomacy, we
must meet the challenge of devoting the necessary
financial resources and proven and highly qualified
human resources to it. Another challenge that will have
to be met is that of strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations to consolidate their conflict-prevention
and settlement mechanisms. Indeed, synergy and close
interaction between the United Nations, which bears
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and its partners -
especially regional organizations, which serve as
complementary instruments in United Nations
actions - are necessary to strengthening the momentum
of preventive action.

In this vein, we should welcome the fact that the
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations, which is based on Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations and stretches back to the very
creation of the Organization of African Unity, is one of
the most dynamic partnerships in the area of
peacekeeping and early detection of warning signs of
potential crisis situations. The presence of United
Nations offices in various regions throughout Africa is
therefore of great importance.

Indeed, my delegation is of the view that the
African Union, with the support of the United Nations,
must acquire the means to be more aware of the
precursor signs of tension and to take the necessary
steps in close cooperation with the United Nations, and
the Security Council in particular.

Having taken this fully into account, the African
Union established a system for the management of
peace, which spans the spectrum of activities from
preventive diplomacy to peacebuilding via
peacekeeping. The Panel of the Wise was established in
the context of this initiative, as Africa has understood
and recognized that conflicts, be they latent or open,
can be resolved only through political means - that is
to say, through negotiation.

My delegation therefore launches an appeal for
the African Union Panel of the Wise to enjoy the
greatest possible support, which would enable it to
offer informed advice to the Presidents of the African
Union and the African Union Commission, which
could, on the basis of that advice, carry out intensive
preventive diplomacy. Is it not said that it is better to
prevent than to cure?

However, to prevent effectively, there is a need to
bear in mind, as recalled by the Secretary-General in
his report contained in document S/2008/18 of
14 January 2008, that prevention is a multidimensional
task involving political decisions, humanitarian
activities and development activities that require
organizations to work in close cooperation with the
United Nations, and especially with the Security
Council, the Human Rights Council, the Economic and
Social Council and the specialized agencies.

In so doing, we could focus on strategies aimed at
peacebuilding and reconciliation. In that regard, the
African Union has already taken the first steps by
adopting, at its seventh session of the Conference of
Heads of State and Government, in July 2006, the
strategic Framework for Post-Conflict Reconstruction
and Development.

Relying on the aforementioned principles and
beliefs, and supported by the structures established by
the African Union, the President of the Republic of
Senegal, His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Wade, has
personally involved himself in a number of regions of
Africa and the world to advise and reconcile the parties
in conflict. The ongoing commitment of President
Wade has promoted the resumption of political
dialogue, better governance and the holding of free and
democratic elections in many countries, thus avoiding
confrontations which would have undoubtedly claimed
hundreds if not thousands of lives.

Senegal remains convinced that the combined
actions of all to find ways and means to prevent
conflict will finally mitigate the financial and human
costs of peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.

