Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
France is most concerned at the deterioration of the
situation in Burundi. The conclusion of the Convention of
Government had laid the grounds for understanding, which
should have made it possible to ease tension and restore the
rules of democracy. My Government, which had hailed that
progress, still believes that the Convention of Government
is the keystone of political and institutional balance in
Burundi.

The resolution, in favour of which France voted,
attests to the interest and concern of the Security Council
for the situation in Burundi. We cannot remain indifferent
to the evidence of violence that comes to us daily, the
violation of the rules of democracy and the abuses carried
out by extremists: we must react.

For its part, France encourages dialogue and calls
upon all Burundians to renounce violence and cooperate
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and anyone else who could serve as a facilitator of
dialogue. We would be happy if African statesmen, whose
wisdom is uncontestable, agreed to play that role. We pay
tribute to the efforts of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and to the outstanding actions in the field by OAU
civilian and military observers. Finally, the European Union
is also engaged in intensive diplomatic efforts, and is
planning to name a special envoy for the Great Lakes
region.

While encouraging dialogue, which is the logical path
towards a solution to this crisis, our Council is also ready
to consider any measures that might prevent a deterioration
of the situation. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to
refugees and displaced persons is a priority, and we
therefore believe it necessary to ensure that such
assistance be given the best possible protection. We
therefore await with interest the conclusions of the
technical mission that the Secretary-General has
dispatched to the scene.

We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for
giving priority to all possible preventive-diplomacy
measures. The Council's request for consideration of new
steps in no way prejudges the decision it will take, nor, a
fortiori, the participation of our country in a possible
operation. Finally, if the Council expresses its readiness
to consider the adoption of restrictive measures against
those who would continue to resort to violence, it must be
clear that our role is not to punish Burundi. On the
contrary, our concern is to help Burundi overcome the
serious crisis it is experiencing.

The coming weeks are important for Burundi. All
the opportunities for peace and dialogue that the
international community is supporting must be taken
advantage of so that this country can return to the rules of
democracy and the rule of law.

Finally we can not fail to emphasize once again that
the crisis affecting Burundi is part of the greater
framework of difficulties confronting the Great Lakes
region. This is why we continue to believe that there will
soon be a need to convene a conference on peace,
security and stability in the Great Lakes region in order
to resolve the region's problems as a whole.

