Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of African
States.

At the outset, Iwould like to thank you, Mr. President,
for including the issue of Security Council reform on
the Council's programme of work. I would also like to
congratulate Spain for its assumption of the presidency
for the month of October 2015.

We welcome the concept note circulated by the
Permanent Representative of Spain (S/2015/793, annex) and take note of the issues contained therein
regarding efforts by the Security Council to improve
its working methods. We take note of the improvement
in the working methods of the Council, including the
use of the informal interactive dialogue, to interact
and engage informally with individual Member
States, the Peacebuilding Commission and regional
and subregional organizations. We also take note of
efforts to address issues such as penholdership, chairs
of subsidiary bodies, preparation of annual reports and
monthly assessments. We consider these to be modest
but meaningful steps towards improving the work of
the Council.

We note that the main focus of the Security
Council's Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Matters has been on the Council's
annual report to the General Assembly. We further note
that elected members of the Security Council have not
made much progress in pushing for the implementation
of certain issues and we hope that things will improve
in the future.

We encourage the Council to continue to build on the
important advances made through further improvement
of its working methods by implementing actions
outlined in note 5/2010/507 and subsequent relevant
notes. We remain convinced that cosmetic changes to
the working methods will not advance the fundamental
need for comprehensive reform of the Security Council
and expansion of its membership in both the permanent
and non-permanent categories, as contained in General
Assembly decision 62/557. The status quo continues to
be inconsistent with the principles, purposes and spirit
of the Charter of this great and noble Organization, in
that we have a Security Council in which Africa and

other regions remain underrepresented or unrepresented
in both categories.

Our continued participation in this debate is
firmly rooted in our commitment to working with
the entire United Nations membership in achieving
comprehensive reform of the Security Council along the
lines elucidated in the African Common Position. We
therefore reiterate our call for a comprehensive reform
as contained in decision 62/557 and, in that regard, we
stress the interlinkage of the five clusters of Security
Council's reform.

On two ofthose clusters - the relationship between
the Security Council and the General Assembly, on the
one hand, and the working methods, on the other - we
have at all times maintained a principled position.
Our position is the one we submitted to the Chair of
the intergovernmental negotiations on 22 April and is
reflected in the framework document; it underscores the
need to uphold the primacy of and full respect for the
provisions of the United Nations Charter that pertain
to the powers and functions of the General Assembly.
The two clusters remain inextricably linked and, while
there has been some convergence of Views on how to
improve them, key elements of the reform have not
come to fruition.

Notwithstanding the efforts made by various
delegations, certain proposals that are worthy of
consideration remain on the table. These include how
to improve transparency and access to the Council
and the creation of established rules of procedure for
the Council. We maintain that the Security Council
and the General Assembly must work closely together
within their respective spheres of responsibility to seek
solutions to the plethora of challenges confronting the
international community, with the Security Council
focusing on issues as mandated under the Charter, in
order to foster harmonious interaction and a cooperative
relationship between the two organs. The relationship
between the Council and the General Assembly
remains, for all delegations, a matter of paramount
importance on the reform agenda.

In January, the Security Council underscored
the interlinkages between security and development,
including their mutually reinforcing nature. It is
therefore key that we remain focused on this aspect as a
means for attaining sustainable peace. Maintaining the
balance between the two principal organs of the United
Nations: the Security Council and the General Assembly,
is extremely necessary in order to enable the United
Nations to meet existing and emerging threats. It is also
necessary for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). The role of the General Assembly,
including questions relating to international peace
and security, as provided for in the relevant Articles
of the Charter, need to be enhanced and strengthened
in order to enable it to play its proper role as the most
representative and democratic policymaking body of
the United Nations.

We commend the enhanced cooperation between
the African Union Peace and Security Council and the
Security Council, which has led to a more structured and
effective annual consultation between the two bodies.
We continue to urge for the enhanced coordination
between them in order to ensure predictable and
sustained funding for African Union peacekeeping
operations and to support post-conflict reconstruction
and development on the African continent. Sustained
cooperation between the Council and regional
organizations will yield immense benefits in addressing
the present and future challenges to international peace
and security. Despite these positive developments, we
are concerned about the inconsistency of the Security
Council's decisions by its demonstrated selectivity in
addressing issues that are of grave concern to regional
organizations.

In conclusion, improving the working methods of
the Security Council is an integral part of the question
of equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council. All five issues
of Security Council reform are interrelated and must
be addressed in a holistic manner. It has been several
decades since the Security Council has been seized
of the matter of the review of its working methods.
The fact that after 70 years the Council's rules of
procedure remain provisional underscores the urgency
of addressing this issue.

We note that the main thrust of all the positions
of the various groups and delegations has been to
ensure that the Security Council becomes transparent,
inclusive, accountable and accessible in its working
methods. The Group of African States supports those
initiatives. We would therefore like to reiterate Africa's
readiness to work with all interest groups and Member
States to achieve decisive and irreversible progress, but
as a comprehensive package of reform, not in isolated
silos. General Assembly decision 62/557 continues to
be our guiding light. We remain convinced of the need
for comprehensive reform that takes into account the
principles, objectives and ideals of the United Nations
Charter, for a fairer world based on universalism, equity
and regional balance.

