Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I should like to extend our
gratitude to all of those delegations that have voiced
their condolences in connection with the tragedy that
occurred yesterday in the skies over Syria.

We thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Mr. Mark
Lowcock for their briefings.

Yesterday, in Sochi, yet another historic milestone
was achieved with respect to developments in the
situation in Syria, namely, the Russian-Turkish summit,
which resulted in the signing of a memorandum on
stabilizing the situation in the Idlib de-escalation zone.
Together with our Turkish partners, we will submit that
document for distribution as an official document of
the Security Council.

Key components of the memorandum include
maintenance of the de-escalation zone and the
establishment within it a demilitarized zone that will
help carry out focused work to ensure a sustained
cessation ofhostilities. At the same time, it confirms the
determination to continue fighting terrorism in Syria in
all its forms and manifestations. Uncompromising and
consistent struggle against terrorism remains among
the chief obligations of all States Members of the
United Nations.

The document is a confirmation that Russia,
together with other Astana guarantors, continues to
undertake tremendous efforts to ensure that the situation
around Idlib will be resolved through negotiations
and that the civilian population will not suffer, as we
described to our partners and have been describing
all of this time. Efforts aimed at seeking an optimal
solution will continue. Regardless of what some may
state due to envy or from mere impotence, the Astana
format remains a functional and effective mechanism.
We thank our Kazakh colleagues for their contribution
to its establishment.

On the whole, our view is that the situation on
the ground has set the stage for a meaningful political
process. That, too, is largely to the credit of the
Astana trio. We will persevere in our efforts aimed
at facilitating the establishment of a constitutional
committee made up of representatives of the Syrian
leadership, opposition forces and civil society. The
challenge and objective is to ensure the beginning of
the committee's work as soon as possible.

We call for attempts at destructive intervention in
this sensitive process to be abandoned and for attempts
to impose contrived, ill-conceived configurations to
be set aside. They only slow down the formulation of
balanced solutions and undermine the achievement of a
sustained, lasting settlement.

I wish to tell Mr. De Mistura that it is perhaps not
worth using the Security Council to exert pressure on
the guarantors. They are doing more for the political
process than anybody present in the Chamber. It is
important for him to facilitate - and not to lead - the
process. Syrian decisions need to be owned by the Syrian
people themselves, as is stipulated under resolution
2254 (2015), to which we all, including Mr. De Mistura,
frequently refer.

We call upon all those who do not intend to make
progress on scenarios in a way that runs counter to the
genuine desires of the Syrian people, who do not intend
to embroil themselves in political engineering, to help,
or at least not obstruct, the activities of the guarantor
countries of the Astana process designed to launch
what is necessary for Syria, the Middle East region
and the entire international community, namely, a
comprehensive political process based on the decisions
of the Congress of the Syrian National Dialogue in
Sochi and Security Council resolutions on Syria.

Our approaches to tackling humanitarian issues in
Syria remain unchanged. We believe that it is unseemly,
to put it mildly, to selectively approach the delivery of
assistance to the Syrian population. It is unacceptable
to blatantly politicize issues pertaining to the delivery
of humanitarian assistance and the rebuilding of what
was destroyed by terrorists, upholding the inalienable
right of refugees and internally displaced persons to
return to their homes.

Unfortunately, unbalanced policies in Syrian
affairs emerge more often than not. In particular,
having read the report of the Secretary-General on the
humanitarian situation in Syria, we have been unable
to find anything about issues pertaining to access by
humanitarian workers to a number of areas beyond the
control of Damascus, including those occupied by the
coalition in breach of Syria's sovereignty. There has
been no mention of what took place, and what continues
to take place, in Raqqa. Yet it is known that the bodies
of the dead are still being retrieved from under the
rubble after the so-called coalition razed the city to
the ground, having liberated it from terrorists and,
while they were at it, from civilians. I do not recall a
call for the protection of refugees being issued at that
time. Apparently, some have a selective approach to
humanitarian affairs.

There has been no progress in delivering vital
supplies to the residents of the Rukban camp, which is
located in an enclosed zone around the United States
At Tanf military base. Indeed, Mr. Lowcock mentioned
both Raqqa and Rukban in his briefing. Once again,
we would draw attention to the fact that the value of
the conduct of cross-border operations in the light of
developments on the ground has been exaggerated.
This is a mechanism that has been introduced as an
extraordinary measure. It is not transparent and blatantly
undermines Syria's sovereignty. It is important to move
towards its eventual drawdown. It is also important to
promptly rebuild the Syrian economy, and especially
areas most severely affected by the hostilities there. It
is necessary to eschew double standards and politically
tinged conditions. Many reject such approaches. That
was confirmed during last week's sixtieth annual
Damascus International Fair with the participation of
official representatives and companies from 48 States.

It is high time to acknowledge the fact that
unilateral sanctions imposed by a number of States
undermine, not the regime, as they have called it, but
are detrimental above all to ordinary Syrian citizens.
This is a vicious and counterproductive practice, not
only in the Syrian context but in other contexts as well.

The Russian Federation will continue to provide
assistance to Syria on the political and humanitarian
fronts. With the assistance of the Russian Centre for
Refugee Reception, Distribution and Settlement,
Syrians continue to return from Lebanon and Jordan.
Overall, since 18 July, approximately 13,500 refugees
have returned to Syria, and 243,000 people have
returned since 30 September 2015. Furthermore, since
1 January, about 149,000 internally displaced persons
have returned to their homes, and since 30 September
2015, 1.2 million people have returned.

Furthermore, the Syrian authorities are
implementing socioeconomic measures geared towards
generating momentum for rebuilding key infrastructure
in the country. Those measures also aim to continue
the delivery of comprehensive humanitarian assistance
to civilians. Since September 2015, about 30,000
residential structures have been rebuilt or renovated,
as well as more than 5,000 educational and 150
medical institutions. For our part, during that period,
Russia organized and conducted 1,935 humanitarian
operations, during which over 3,000 tons of food and
basic necessities were provided and distributed. Russian
military medical personnel delivered assistance to
approximately 93,000 Syrians.

Despite the general trend towards greater
stabilization, the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic
on the whole remains tense. Fighters continue to
intensively shell Syrian army positions and residential
areas in Government-controlled territory from the Idlib
de-escalation zone. In August, there were 554 violations
of the cessation-of-hostilities regime by illegal armed
groups with the use of mortars, anti-aircraft and heavy
machine guns, as a result of which 29 people were
killed and 71 were wounded.

As a consequence of terrorist bombardments,
civilians continue to perish. On 7 September, terrorists
using multiple-launch rocket systems in Maharda
killed nine civilians, including five women and
three children. Approximately 30 people were wounded.
On 13 September, when terrorists used improvised
launchers in Aleppo, a child was killed and 13 people
were injured.

At the same time, fighters continue to launch
unmanned attack aerial vehicles in the direction of
the Russian Khmeimim air base. Since July, Russian
air defence has destroyed 58 such drones. In addition,
the Idlib de-escalation zone fighters and White Helmet
activists continue preparations with a view to staging
the use of chemical weapons. There is information
that such fabrications were already filmed in Jisr
ash-Shugur and Khan Shaykhoun. Syrians, including
children who had been abducted from Idlib and Aleppo,
were forced to participate. There is also evidence that
the Al-Nusra Front recently provided barrels of chlorine
to Jaysh Al-Izza in Al-Lataminah, and Kafr Zita. We
once again draw attention to that fact, about which we
have repeatedly warned.

The fighters' activities are fuelled from abroad,
and that is also being reinforced in the light of blatant
disregard for Syria's sovereignty, which Damascus has
a legitimate right to protect through the means available
to it, by those who advocate a credible peace process.

Facilitating extremists, even indirectly, is
unacceptable. We note that those who became involved
in the Syrian crisis are finally realizing the mistake
of relying on extremists. Some States have initiated
relevant proceedings to clarify the role of certain
Governments in supporting groups tha thad tarnished
themselves by cooperating with terrorists and through
their numerous violations of international humanitarian
law. We hope that those proceedings will be carried
through to their logical conclusion.
We heard concerns today that the Syrian conflict
is liable to lead to more serious regional consequences.
That is also a concern to us, and we see that some of our
partners are using Syria as a springboard to unleash more
dangerous conflict with far-reaching, unpredictable
consequences. In that connection, we would like to call
once again for genuinely collective efforts to be carried
out with regard to all conflicts in the region, especially
along counter-terrorism lines, and to abandon attempts
to resolve issues in Syria behind Syria's back.

