Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): To begin with, I would like to say that we
greatly appreciate the work of the United Nations
humanitarian personnel in Syria, and we actively
support them. There is no need to convince us of
the importance of assisting the United Nations, and
Ambassador Rycroft's suggestion to that effect is
dishonest. What is he talking about?

First of all, we should look at what is really going on
in a professional manner. Thanks to the continued efforts
of Russian experts, the number of residential areas in
Syria covered by the truce has risen to 961. Seventy
armed opposition groups have officially joined the
ceasefire regime. Talks with armed-group commanders
are going on in a number ofprovinces. Russia continues
to provide the people of the Syrian Arab Republic with
substantive humanitarian assistance.

We continue our persistent quest to find ways to
improve the situation in Aleppo. As we all know, the
eastern districts of that strategically important city are
held by armed groups led by the terrorist organization
Jabhat Al-Nusra. The long-promised separation of the
moderate opposition from adherents of Al-Nusra has
yet to happen. We continue to be showered with data
showing shrinking numbers for Al-Nusra, based on
information from the press and even from opposition
social networks. What kind of sources are those? That
helps to maintain an intolerable situation in which
thousands of peaceful residents are held hostage. What
does that represent? The desire to preserve a major
centre of terrorist-led anti-Government resistance at
any cost? There are extremely disturbing reports of
the brutal suppression of demonstrations by peaceful
residents demanding that the radicals leave the city.
Our professional bilateral contacts with the American
side are currently continuing, and we hope they will
enable us to come up with an appropriate solution.

At a Security Council meeting in October (see S/PV.7785) we had a detailed discussion of the reasons
for the disruption of the humanitarian operation, owing
to sabotage by illegal armed groups and the so-called
local council against a backdrop of - and this is
putting it mildly - inadequate action on the part of
certain United Nations staff, of which they are well
aware and, as I understand it, which they now regret.
We cannot permit any repeat of that kind of scenario.
From now on, let us see the insurgents, including those
of Ahrar al-Sham and Nour al-Din al-Zenki, publicly
affirm - and their sponsors guarantee - their
willingness to cooperate with the United Nations
agencies and enable humanitarian operations to be
conducted without obstacles or artificial constraints.
There can be no bartering of the sick and injured for
food and medicines for the insurgents.

We also expect to see similar efforts on the part of
the local council in eastern Aleppo. We have a right to
hope in particular that our English colleagues, or the
French - who have received these people in Paris at
the highest level - will help in that department. That
is what they should be talking about - about their own
efforts, not about what they want from Russia, what
Russia should do, what Russia can do. They should be
talking about their own efforts. We are States, after all.
What can be asked of Russia? What should Russia do?
After all, we have found out that there are two such
councils, existing through infusions from abroad.
One of them is functioning in Gazientep. The other
is in Syria, outside of Aleppo. Neither one of them is
responsible for law and order. It is hardly possible to
consider the councils representative bodies of local
Governments in eastern Aleppo. They are not even in
Aleppo. Formally speaking, their mandates have ended.
Let us not forget that.

We have also noticed that every month we find out
through United Nations reports about an increasing
number of people in besieged areas. Invariably that is
due to the population centres that are under the control
of armed groups. If the purpose of such mathematical
distortions is to present the Syrian Government as
the main party responsible for suffering, then it is
an unacceptable approach. It is not clear how such
calculations are carried out, because United Nations
evaluation missions are not allowed access to besieged
territories. Nonetheless, those missions regularly
provide statistics based on nothing.

At the same time, the number of people who are
in need of humanitarian assistance in territories
under the control of the Government is constantly
underestimated. For example, an interesting instance
of such underrepresentation is from the bulletin for
20 April, which stated the number of people in Deir ez-
Zor - which is besieged by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant - to be 200,000. On 3 May, the number was
110,000. We follow what is happening there very closely
because, unlike what has been hypocritically described
by some as an operation of support, we are conducting a
counter-terrorism operation in the country. Yes, we are
supporting the legitimate Government.

The most recent information about attacks against
civilian infrastructure is pure propaganda. It is not
objectively verified. According to that information, the
only thing that Syrians do is bomb health facilities and
increase the intensiveness of such attacks right before
Security Council meetings. If we amassed all the Internet
data on attacks against health facilities, we might be
surprised by the number of those facilities - which
pre-war Syria never had. At the same time, it is
continuously stated that there are no functioning health
facilities remaining. That always happens immediately
prior to a Security Council meeting.

As a result of the shelling by the fighters in eastern
Aleppo, the United Nations has left western Aleppo.
Why is that something that we are not talking about
today? Why is it that the attacks against the Embassies
in Damascus are not being condemned? In the absence
of the United Nations in Aleppo, information is gathered
from God knows where - from various countries and
from non-governmental organizations that are outside
of Syria. Data is being intentionally falsified. Let me
point out that information is never provided about the
location of so-called mobile hospitals in areas under the
control of rebel fighters who are supported by Western
partners. When we asked for an honest exchange of
information, that was what we specifically had in mind.

My colleague from the United States, Ms. Power, is
absolutely right. Let me say again that as of 18 October
the Russian Air Force has not conducted airstrikes on
Aleppo or within the 10 kilometres surrounding it. We
are waiting for the moderate opposition to dissociate
themselves from the terrorist groups. That is an
urgent task.

I must say that because of the efforts of our
partners - today's statements are testimony to
that - the work of the Council on the Syrian settlement
is increasingly moving into the virtual sphere, which
has nothing in common with the realities of the ongoing
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. Let me recall, for
example, the many appeals to the Governments of Syria
and Russia. But who is going to work with those who
were brought into Syria and provided with weapons
and money? Can we imagine what it must be like for a
secular Syria, which has a long tradition of coexistence
of various faiths and cultures, to witness the presence of
foreign fighters? Let us assess that professionally. What
kind of significance does that have for them? Who is
going to be working with those people? It seems that no
one will. First, the conflict was brought into existence.

Now there is fear of the conflict and actions are being
dictated by that fear. That is what is happening.

Some want to put the whole world into a tribunal,
Those parties have reached the point where they have
listed the names of Syrian officers and generals.
However, if they claim to be impartial, where are the
names of the terrorists? Who is going to deal with
them? Maybe those parties have become frightened of
them. Let us try to not be hypocritical. Those parties
have forgotten about their own golden standard on the
presumption of innocence by pre-emptively identifying
those responsible, which is something that ought to
only be decided by a legal process. That is elementary,
and yet I find myself saying it in the Security Council.

Let me also say that I have listened very carefully
to my colleagues with whom I work on a daily basis on
various issues. Their harshness tells me that their plans
are not working, that something went wrong and that
they are incapable of removing yet another regime and
destroying another country in the Middle East. They
cannot do that. However, it is never too late to stop
trying. The doors of cooperation remain open.

