Some 11 million Syrians continue to be in need of humanitarian assistance and protection. The needs are critical: food, water, shelter, medical assistance and care. Since 2014, cross-border operations have offered them a true lifeline, allowing the United Nations and its implementing partners to ensure life-saving assistance from across the border upon simple notification to the Syrian authorities. Throughout the last months, the co-penholders of the draft resolution contained in document S/2020/684 - now resolution 2533 (2000) - did their utmost to find agreement on a resolution to renew the mechanism. We worked in good faith and in an inclusive, transparent and thorough manner with all members of the Security Council. Our sole guideline was the humanitarian imperative of improving the fate of the people on the ground. Three crossings are at the very heart of this mandate and were an absolute necessity from a humanitarian perspective, particularly in the context of a pandemic. As the Secretary-General has repeatedly pointed out, the gap left by closing the border crossing at Al-Yarubiyah, in the north-east, earlier this year is still a long way from being filled, and the population remains in dire need of medical aid. After many rounds of discussion - and votes - and given the divergent positions among the members of the Council, the Security Council had no choice but to make yet another decision that does not reflect the humanitarian needs on the ground, in order to find compromise. Some 1.3 million people, including 800,000 internally displaced persons, live in the Aleppo area, among whom 500,000 are children, received the necessary humanitarian aid through the Bab Al-Salam border crossing. Today is yet another sad day. It is a sad day not only for the Security Council, but also - and mostly - for the Syrian people living in those areas. Both Al-Yarubiyah and Bab Al-Salam were vital crossings for delivering, in the most efficient way possible, the humanitarian assistance those people deserve. Yet, in the interest of the almost 3 million civilians who depend on the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing, the Council had to make the decision to compromise. The decision we have taken today allows for Bab Al-Hawa to stay open for 12 months, which will allow for better planning and greater predictability for the many non-governmental organizations that, under difficult circumstances, guarantee the survival of the people suffering in and around Idlib. This is today's only good news. It is the reason that Germany and Belgium put forward draft resolution S/2020/684. We would like to thank the overwhelming majority of Council members for their active support throughout the process. Finally, in this context, we once again urge the Syrian authorities to cooperate without reserve with the United Nations and its implementing partners in the cross- line delivery of aid, fully in line with the needs on the ground, in the interests of the Syrian people.
