Mr. Mbeou (Togo) (spoke in French): I should like
to thank Ambassador Nestor Osorio for his briefing
on the activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and its
Panel of Experts. I take this opportunity to commend
the Panel - whose mandate was extended by resolution
2049 (2012), of 7 June 2012 - for the considerable
efforts it is deploying.

We note that, since the adoption of resolution
1737 (2006), relations between the Islamic Republic of
Iran and the various bodies established to combat the
proliferation of nuclear weapons have not improved.
Rather, in recent years, indeed in recent months,
the crisis of confidence has actually worsened. The
February 2012 report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) stresses that enrichment activities have
continued and that the Iranian nuclear programme may
have been extended to military activities, particularly at
the Parchin site. The findings of the report (S/2012/395)
of the Panel of Experts created pursuant to resolution
1929 (2010) seems largely to confirm the IAEA's
suspicions.

We regret that the IAEA's continuously expressed
will to inspect that site has not yet received a favourable
response from the Iranian authorities. That approach
is typical of the cooperation between Iran and the
Agency - a cooperation that the Board of Governors of
the IAEA would very much like to intensify.

Against that background, Togo calls on the Islamic
Republic of Iran to fulfil its commitments under not
only the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons but also its agreements with the IAEA and the
negotiations with the five plus one group. My country
welcomes the continuation of those negotiations on
23 and 24 May in Baghdad. Another similar meeting is
scheduled to be held on 18 and 19 June.

Togo also takes note of the statement made by
the Iranian President to the effect that his country
is willing to pursue negotiations and voices the hope
that the Moscow meeting will lead to an outcome that
could constitute a guarantee in the context of renewed
relations between Iran and other partners.

With respect to sanctions, I share the View that,
regrettably, sanctions imposed under the auspices of the
United Nations coexist with a myriad of other sanctions
imposed by States or groups of States. The report of the
Panel of Experts notes that overlap with concern. While
some countries say that they are bound only by United
Nations sanctions, others state that they are applying
both categories simultaneously.

Concerning reports, given that few States have
provided the Council with reports on the implementation
of the resolutions relating to the Iranian nuclear issue,
it would seem to be to the benefit of all countries if
outreach activities were regularly conducted through
visits, inspections and participation in seminars and
workshops. We think that is the best way for the
Committee to get its point across and to highlight the
role of States in implementing resolutions.

