Mr. Grandi: Abdallah is a father of eight from
Buthidaung, in the northern part of Myanmar's Rakhine
state. When he fled to Bangladesh in September last
year he became a refugee for the third time. The first
time was in 1978, when he came to Bangladesh as a
young boy, and the second was in 1991. That second
time he remained for three years and then, anxious
to recover his home and his four acres of land, he
returned to Myanmar as part of an organized voluntary
repatriation operation.

Back home, he and his family started to rebuild
their lives. They had seven cows and were able to
make a living. But, he says, around two years after
his return, "hope started to fade away". Forced
labour, confiscation of crops and cattle and relentless
incremental restrictions on their freedom of movement,
their right to worship and their access to livelihoods
constrained their existence.

Last year his village was attacked. Houses were
burned and others in his community, including his
own nephew, were shot dead. Hiding nearby, he saw
his own his own home torched. He had no choice but
to flee again. And he is once again living in a flimsy
shelter in Kutupalong refugee settlement, together with
his family, despairing at the prospect of never being
able to build a safe and stable life. "My decision to
return was wrong", he said recently. "That is why we
are suffering now."

It has been almost six months, as we heard, since
the current rapid and chaotic outflow of more than
688,000 refugees from Myanmar to Bangladesh began,
driven by violence and destruction, following decades
of repression and exclusion. That movement has now
been significantly reduced, but it still continues.
Already this month, some 1,500 Rohingya refugees
have arrived in Bangladesh. The Government and the
people of Bangladesh continue to receive refugees and
provide them with protection and support. For this, they
are to be deeply commended.

With reports of insecurity continuing, as we heard
from the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, it is critical that the border remains open and
that those still fleeing are able to reach safety. The
Government of Bangladesh, together with highly-
skilled national and local organizations, the United
Nations and other humanitarian agencies with solid
donor support, has mounted an impressive response.
Yet conditions remain overcrowded and precarious
for many, including for host communities. Disease
outbreaks, including diphtheria, have been met with
decisive action but remain a significant risk.

We are now in a race against time as a major new
emergency looms. The monsoon season will start in
March. We estimate that more than 100,000 refugees
are living in areas prone to flooding or landslides.
Tens of thousands of particularly vulnerable refugees
must be urgently relocated. Their lives are at grave
risk. The foundation of existing shelters must be
strengthened; bridges built and reinforced and new land
found and made ready. The Government is steering a
massive emergency preparedness effort. Nonetheless,
international support must be stepped up to avert a
catastrophe. The Kutupalong area in Cox's Bazar is now
the largest refugee settlement in the world, with its own
character, economy and emerging social structures.

As we have repeatedly stated, resolving the crisis
means finding solutions inside Myanmar. However,
while they are pursued - as they must be - significant
support will be required in Bangladesh. Humanitarian
action and funding must be sustained but longer-term
support will also be required to help the Government
reinforce local infrastructure and economy and ensure
access to opportunities for refugees and the communities
hosting them. Education and opportunities to develop
skills and earn an income will be critical in order to
avoid the deep despair that can set in when refugees are
abandoned on the margins of societies. We must ensure
that young people retain a vision of a future and that
the ground is laid for eventual voluntary return. Failure
to do that will inevitably lead to disillusionment and
radicalization. It will also expose refugees to protection
risks, including sexual and gender-based violence,
trafficking and other forms of abuse and exploitation.

The causes of the crisis originate in Myanmar, and
a genuine search for solutions must finally start. At the
heart of it all is the restoration of rights, including the
right of refugees to return home voluntarily, and in safe
and dignified conditions. Let me be clear. Conditions
are not yet conducive to the voluntary repatriation of
Rohingya refugees. The causes of their flight have not
been addressed, and we have yet to see substantive
progress on addressing the exclusion and denial of
rights that has deepened in recent decades, rooted in
their lack of citizenship. But preserving the right of
return and pursuing the conditions that will enable it
to be exercised must remain a central priority. For that
reason, I welcome the dialogue between the Government
of Bangladesh and the Government of the Union of
Myanmar on the voluntary repatriation of refugees,
and the commitment to international standards on the
voluntary, safe and dignified return, setf out in the
arrangement agreed between them in November 2017.

In line with my mandate to support Governments to
pursue solutions for refugees, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
has extended an offer of support to both Governments,
including by participating in the joint working group
established for its implementation. The framework
for return should eventually be defined in a tripartite
agreement among the two Governments and UNHCR.
Our offer of support remains open.

The construction of infrastructure to support
the logistics of return is important but should not be
confused with the establishment of conditions conducive
to voluntary repatriation. An end to violence and the
destruction of property, and granting humanitarian
access throughout Rakhine state - as called for by the
Secretary-General - are critical, basic steps.

Humanitarian access, as the Council has heard,
remains extremely restricted. UNHCR has not had
access to affected areas of the northern part of Rakhine
state, beyond Maungdaw town, since August 2017, and
our access in central Rakhine has also been curtailed.
UNHCR presence and access throughout the state are
essential to monitor protection conditions, provide
independent information to refugees, and accompany
returns as and when they take place. Refugees must
be able to return to a place of their choice, including
the location where they previously resided. Temporary
arrangements should be avoided. As we have seen in
Myanmar and elsewhere, they have a tendency to
persist for considerably longer than envisaged, and to
take on a permanent character.

The recommendations of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State are an important blueprint for a
peaceful and inclusive future, and, therefore, for the
sustainable return of refugees. I fully endorse the two-
track approach envisaged in the report: the first focused
on access to citizenship and the restoration of rights for
the Rohingya, including freedom of movement, access
to education and basic services, and to livelihoods;
and the second on inclusive development aimed at
improving the condition of all communities in Rakhine
state, and on fostering peaceful co-existence.

Refugees must determine the timing and
pace of returns; building their confidence is
crucial. Implementing the Advisory Commission's
recommendations related to central Rakhine would be
a concrete first step. There, around 120,000 internally
displaced people, mainly Rohingya driven from
their homes by intercommunal violence, are now in
their sixth year of confined encampment. Granting
freedom of movement, allowing them to return home
and fast-tracking the confirmation of their citizenship
would send a strong signal to refugees in Bangladesh
that Myanmar is genuinely committed to taking
responsibility for their protection and well-being, and
to pursuing lasting solutions. As in the past, UNHCR
stands ready to work the Government of Myanmar in
those efforts, by providing technical advice and support
on securing solutions for the internally displaced,
voluntary repatriation, and resolving statelessness.

Addressing the root causes ofthe appalling violence
and systemic discrimination that has driven hundreds
of thousands from their homes repeatedly over decades,
and securing solutions to the current crisis will require
substantial support to both Myanmar and Bangladesh.
International political engagement, technical expertise
and financial resources will be needed on both sides
of the border, including for humanitarian and targeted
development activities. Preferential trade arrangements,
labour and migration pathways, innovative financing,
enhanced national partnerships and expanded regional
cooperation should also play a critical role. If solutions
are successfully pursued, they have the potential to
yield significant dividends across the wider region,
while helping to prevent extremism, foster stability and
spur economic development.

Despite all that they have endured, Abdullah and
his family are still holding on to a vision of a future
back in Myanmar. They say:

"We want to go back but we want the United
Nations to accompany us and provide security.
We want to go to the village we come from - the
same place. We want our belongings and our land.
We want our right to move around freely like
other citizens."

That call must be heeded. It is time to put an end to the
repeated, devastating cycle of violence, displacement
and statelessness to invest in tangible, substantial
measures that will start to overcome the profound
exclusion that Abdullah and the rest of the Rohingya
community have endured for far too long. It is the
responsibility of the Government of the Union of
Myanmar, but international engagement and support
are key to making it happen.

