Mr. Amado (Portugal): Let me congratulate
Brazil on its presidency of the Council. Let me also
thank you, Sir, for the organization of this debate and
the concept paper (see S/2011/50) that was distributed
beforehand. Allow me to also thank the Secretary-
General for his statement, as well as Ms. Sarah Cliffe
and Ambassador Gasana for their contributions to this
debate.

As this is the first time that I have the privilege to
address the Security Council, permit me to forgo
reading out the text that has been circulated and instead
share with the Council some reflections related to the
problem being debated today.

I would like first of all to make a general remark
on the situation we face globally. We live in times of
change and deep transformations. I think that we are
living in one of those periods when history suddenly
accelerates and human reason has difficulty keeping up
with, adapting and responding to the situations created
by that speeding up of history.
In such a time, we have to assume our particular
responsibilities. We act as politicians and, in this
particular place, we have that responsibility. As the

great recession of 2009 showed, we are in the midst of
a huge process of transformation, of restructuring of
the global economy and of change in the distribution of
resources and wealth all over the world, as well as a
rebalancing of power among nations and among
regions. Peace processes have a huge geopolitical
impact, which we cannot ignore. I think we are also in
the midst of a long, complex, difficult and very
dangerous process of reconfiguration of the
geopolitical order. I think that the Security Council will
be at the centre of that process, and we have to assume
that responsibility.

To control that process and avoid a global
confrontation, we need to address every tension,
conflict and situation of unrest with particular
sensitivity and, more than ever, collective commitment.
That is why I completely concur with Guido
Westerwelle's remarks about the determining role that
the Peacebuilding Commission has to play in the
context of the United Nations system.

I think that we also need to address the different
situations that we face all over the world in a more
comprehensive way. In that regard, we certainly also
need to address the interdependence of the political,
security and development dimensions with a
comprehensive approach. We need to address the
complexities of these situations, which are really vital
in managing the difficulties that we need to manage.

The timing in choosing this issue for our debate
is also appropriate from the perspective of the global
challenges that we face, with which we need to deal in
a more comprehensive way. And to do that the
political, security and development dimensions have to
be addressed in an appropriate way.

At the end of the 1990s, I served as Development
Minister, and during that time I saw how difficult it
was to conciliate the security and political dimensions
with development policy. On the ground, it was always
difficult not only to coordinate, but also to promote
interaction among the security, military and
development sectors. There were many preconceived
ideas among the various agencies on the ground.

Fortunately, it seems that those times have
passed. There has been a long-standing debate within
the United Nations, mainly on how to manage conflicts
in Africa, and a comprehensive process is evolving. I
think it is also important in today's debate to have had
the opportunity to listen to Sarah Cliffe from the World
Bank. I had the privilege of participating in some
sessions in the preparation of that very important
report, which I believe for the first time will address all
these issues in the comprehensive way needed to face
today's reality.

Finally, I would like to make the following point
on what is happening in the Middle East. Minister
Westerwelle addressed the Council on this particular
issue, but I would also like to stress this point. Given
the dynamic of the events flourishing there, it is our
fundamental responsibility to manage the geopolitical
tension between war and peace. I would like to add to
what Mr. Westerwelle said.

More than ever, we need a very comprehensive
approach to the realities of the Middle East. It is a
mistake to look at the conflict, unrest and tension in a
fragmented way. If we do not address them in the next
couple of months or years in a comprehensive way,
interlinking the political, security and development
challenges of the region, I would say that we will be
facing a tragic situation. I am sure that the Security
Council will have to play a much more difficult role if
we are not able to handle these situations, as I said, in a
more comprehensive way, engaging the whole of the
international community, including the Security
Council.

