President Jonathan: On behalf of the
Government and the people of Nigeria, I wish to
express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this crucial meeting to review the United
Nations efforts in the area of conflict prevention.
Nigeria considers it a subject of critical importance to
all humanity. I want also to commend the Secretary-
General for his tireless efforts in this regard and for the
incisive and comprehensive report (S/2011/552), which
has been invaluable in presenting a persuasive case in
all ramifications for preventive diplomacy.

When Nigeria convened the open debate on
preventive diplomacy in July 2010 (6360th meeting),
we were motivated by a profound concern that the
nature of conflict was outpacing our collective ability
to respond effectively to it. For so long, the
international community has accorded little attention to
mediation and preventive diplomacy. We have placed
far too much emphasis on and devoted too many
resources to the military dimensions of peace and
security without addressing the root causes of conflicts.

The report before us today indicates that this
trend was not strictly a result of failure to utilize
preventive strategies, but was principally due to
inadequate resourcing and coordination. The immediate
challenge before us must be how to address these key
questions.

Africa has, over the years, placed a great deal of
political weight on the application of preventive
diplomacy strategies by putting in place early warning
and mediation mechanisms. The African Union took
bold steps to develop a framework for preventive
diplomacy through the efforts of the African Union
Peace and Security Council.

At the subregional level, the Economic
Community of West African States has also made great
strides in this area, primarily through the steady
implementation of its conflict prevention framework
encompassing diplomacy, fact-finding and early
warning systems. It is imperative, therefore, that these
efforts at regional and subregional levels be supported
both financially and technically by the international
community and the United Nations system.

Today, a number of effective contact points have
been developed within the United Nations system for
these collaborative arrangements, especially through
the Secretary-General's special envoys, the Department
of Political Affairs, United Nations regional offices and
the Peacebuilding Commission. As the Secretary-
General aptly observed, working with relevant partners
has created enabling environments in easing tensions,
building capacities for skilled interventions and
fostering dialogue.

Indeed, Nigeria has invested resources to support
the campaign for preventive diplomacy, especially
within our subregion. We have adopted the use of
preventive diplomacy in addressing complex questions
arising from armed conflicts.

It is therefore encouraging to note that the
Secretary-General has established a steering committee
to consider measures for enhancing cooperation across
the network of preventive diplomacy actors. In real
terms, preventive diplomacy is often most effective
when conducted behind the scenes, certainly well
before tensions rise to boiling point level. We believe
we can foster the growth of conflict prevention at both
normative and practical levels. We can standardize our
approach to political and peacekeeping missions to
reflect the strategic importance of preventive
diplomacy.

If indeed our primary responsibility in this
Council is to maintain international peace and security,
the work of the Council in managing international
peace and security should be viewed through the lens
of preventive diplomacy. If we are able to assist
nations and communities in restoring their social and
institutional fabric, if we can also apply ourselves to
the ongoing task of providing opportunities for people
and their livelihood, we can go a long way in reducing
opportunities for conflict. We can directly and
indirectly prevent conflicts.

