Mr. Skoog (Sweden): In accordance with paragraph
24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February 2011, I
have the honour to report to the Security Council on
the work of the Committee established by the same
resolution. The report covers the period from 17 July
to 5 September, during which time the Committee met
once in informal consultations and conducted additional
work via the written silence procedure.

During the informal consultations held on
23 August, the Committee heard a presentation by the
Panel of Experts on its final report under resolution 2376
(2017) and discussed the recommendations contained
therein. I will not summarize the report, as it will be
published shortly. As per practice, Libya was invited to
read the report, after discussion in the Committee and
prior to publication, in the offices of the Secretariat.

Committee members expressed their support and
appreciation for the work of the Panel of Experts. The
main issues raised during the discussion included
violations of the arms embargo; violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, including in
the context of human trafficking and migrant smuggling;
illicit exports of crude oil and refined petroleum
products from Libya; and the implementation of the
assets freeze. Of the 14 recommendations contained
in the report, seven are addressed to the Security
Council and seven to the Committee. Of the seven
recommendations addressed to the Committee, the
Committee agreed to take follow-up action on two. The
Committee requested additional written justification
from the Panel regarding three recommendations. The
remaining two recommendations require no Committee
action at this stage.

With respect to the arms embargo, the Committee
received a request for exemption, invoking paragraph 9 (c)
of resolution 1970 (2011), from Malta. Consideration of
that request is ongoing.

Concerning the measures aimed at preventing illicit
exports of petroleum, including crude oil and refined
petroleum products, the Committee received a vessel
designation request. The Committee referred the matter
back to the requesting State seeking some clarification
and recalling the procedures contained in resolution
2146 (2014), as modified and extended by resolution
2362 (2017). The Committee also sent a letter to Libya
seeking any information it may possess in relation to
the matter.

With respect to the asset freeze, the Committee
received a notification, invoking paragraph 19 (a)
of resolution 1970 (2011), from the United Kingdom,
regarding the legal expenses of a listed entity, the
Libyan Investment Authority.

In connection with the travel ban, the Committee
approved an extension to the exemption request
submitted on behalf of Mr. Sayyid Mohammed Qadhaf
Al-Dam, who had been authorized to travel from
Libya to Egypt on the grounds of humanitarian needs.
The Committee also approved an extension request
submitted by Ms. Safia Farkash Al-Barassi, who had
been authorized to travel from Egypt to Oman, on the
same grounds.

During the period under review, the Committee
received communications from the Focal Point for
De-listing, established pursuant to resolution 1730
(2006), in connection with the de-listing requests, from
the travel ban measures only, of Ms. Fakash Al-Barassi
and Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi. The process ofconsideration
of both de-listing requests is ongoing.

Lastly, I received a letter from the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005) concerning the Sudan, proposing the convening
of a joint meeting with that Committee, as well as the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan, to discuss the activities
and presence ofDarfuri rebels in Libya and South Sudan.
A specific date for that joint meeting, which would be
the second such meeting, is yet to be determined. The
Committee also received an implementation report
from a Member State.

