Mr. Carmon (Israel): As we took part in
consultations today, more Qassam rockets were
launched by terrorists in Gaza towards the town of
Sderot, and other areas in southern Israel. Three
persons were wounded and four more persons were
treated for shock - and we speak only of today - yet
another day of terrorist attacks from Gaza.

As some of the representatives here today
referred to the present, i.e., to ongoing Israeli activity, I
thought it would be only right to update them on the
actual facts. As we spoke today, more terror was
launched against my country.

Today, we have been dealing with the escalation
of the situation in our region, due to the increased

terrorist activities against Israel, and Israel's self-
defence response, and, in light of the tragic event
yesterday that we have been talking about; we have
heard pretty hard remarks on a complicated issue and a
very complicated situation.

Among the things we have heard here today, I
must refer to two specific presentations that I think are
completely unacceptable coming from the
representatives of two Member States of this
Organization. Responsibility for the pressing changes
in the reality on the ground discussed this morning
belongs to the Palestinian Authority - and we have
explained that - it is nevertheless clear that extremists
are also being urged by outside forces acting for their
own selfish agenda.

Many in this Chamber would not argue that
extremists, such as Hamas, are fuelled by Syria and
Iran, who indirectly orchestrate chaos in Gaza,
Lebanon and probably elsewhere behind the scenes.
Let me remind them that Syria is still being
investigated by this very Council for perpetrating such
activity in Lebanon. Let me remind you that Syria is
home to countless terrorist organizations and leaders,
in particular Khaled Mashaal, the exiled leader of
Hamas who maliciously undermines any progress and
stalls all efforts towards peace. Mashaal's most recent
vicious theatrics, taking - as they say - an offer he
could not refuse to thwart negotiations on the release
of the kidnapped Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, confirm
his relentless objectives to obstruct and destroy all
prospects for peace. Note also that Mashaal resides in
the capital of Syria. To receive a lecture from the
representative of Syria on who should or should not be
part of the international community completely
surpasses the limits of the regular cynicism we have
been accustomed to.

As far as Iran is concerned, that Government is
led by a President who denies the Holocaust, while
preparing the next one - acquiring the capabilities to
do so - while making an open call to wipe Member
States off the map. As if that were not enough, Iran's
infamy was reconfirmed for us again last week, when
Argentina, a member of the Council, called for judicial
arrest warrants of Syrian and Iranian political officials,
including a former president, in connection with the
1994 attack on the Amia Jewish Community Centre in
Buenos Aires, which killed 85 people and wounded
300 more. Another blatant act of terrorism, carried out
by Hizbollah in 1992 - destroying the Israeli embassy
in Buenos Aires, killing 22 people and wounding
hundreds - also originated in Tehran.

It is clear that Iran is not just a destabilizing
influence in the region. The international community
must take steps to nullify the ongoing threat posed by
Iran to world peace and stability, as well as its long-
standing policy of sponsoring terrorist organizations.

Finally, Syria and Iran, by financing terror and
harbouring terrorists, are trying to divert international
attention from their own problems, as they already did
once before this year, during the summer conflict in
Lebanon. They have reconfirmed for the Council in no
uncertain terms why the danger from Damascus and
Tehran must be stopped before it is too late.

