Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): In adopting
this resolution today, the Security Council takes a historic
step in reversing the campaign of terror, brutality and ethnic
cleansing in Kosovo. This resolution will advance a goal
that is shared by all members: the goal of returning
hundreds of thousands of Kosovars to their homes with
security and self-govemment. The United States is proud to
have voted in favour of this milestone in the search for
peace and security in Kosovo and the region.

This resolution lays out a concrete plan for ending the
humanitarian tragedy in Kosovo and building a better future
for its people. Regrettably, its adoption comes much later
than it should have. Months of death, destruction and forced
displacement of Kosovars could have been avoided if, in
Paris last March, the Belgrade authorities had joined the
Kosovar Albanians in saying yes to peace and no to war.
While we welcome Belgrade's agreement to principles for
resolving this crisis, we cannot forget the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia' s brutal, pre-planned, systematic campaign of
repression and ethnic cleansing carried out against the
people of Kosovo in violation of recognized principles of
international law. In this resolution, the international
community has clearly demonstrated that such policies and
such behaviour will not be tolerated.

Today's vote would not have been possible without
the resolve and unity of members, the support of our
partners in neighbouring States and elsewhere and the
courage and commitment of the men and women of our
armed forces in putting an end to the humanitarian tragedy
in Kosovo and the surrounding region.

The resolution addresses all of our key objectives as
set out by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
Let me reiterate them here. The Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia must ensure a verifiable and immediate end to
violence and repression in Kosovo; must withdraw from
Kosovo all its military police and paramilitary forces; must
agree to the stationing in Kosovo of an international
security presence with substantial NATO participation and
unified command and control; must agree to the
unconditional and safe return of all refugees and displaced
persons and to unhindered access to such persons by
humanitarian aid organizations; and must provide credible
assurance of its willingness to engage in a political
process aimed at the establishment of an interim political
framework agreement providing for substantial self-
government for Kosovo, taking full account of the
Rambouillet accords.

This resolution establishes an international security
force in Kosovo, which will create a safe and secure
environment in which the people of Kosovo can return to
their homes and rebuild their lives. NATO has signed a
military-technical agreement with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia authorities that specifies the details for the
rapid withdrawal of all Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
forces from Kosovo and the details of the role and
authorities of the international security force (KFOR). The
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia authorities have accepted
that that international security force, KFOR, will operate
with a unified NATO chain of command, under the
political direction of the North Atlantic Council, in
consultation with non-NATO force contributors.

We welcome in particular the reiteration in this
resolution of the strong mandate of the authority and the
jurisdiction of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia over war crimes committed in the former
Yugoslavia, including Kosovo, contained in Security
Council resolution 1160 (1998). Indeed, paragraph 14 of
today's resolution demands full cooperation with the
Tribunal.

The Security Council's vote today also sets up a
civilian United Nations mission to provide an interim
administration for Kosovo. This is a task of great
magnitude to which all Member States will need to
contribute. It is important to note that this resolution
provides for the civil and military missions to remain in
place until the Security Council affirmatively decides that
conditions exist for their completion. The United States
will work to ensure that the people of Kosovo are given
the meaningful self-govemment they deserve, as
envisioned in the Rambouillet accords.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has accepted the
principles of the Group of Eight foreign ministers and has
agreed to withdraw all of its security forces. Only a few
will be permitted to return, to perform very specific and
limited functions in accordance with the Belgrade
principles. All other groups, including the Kosovo
Liberation Army, also must end immediately all offensive

 

actions. They must demilitarize as they have agreed, and
should turn their energies to building the democratic
institutions necessary for their future in the European
mainstream. Both sides to this conflict must demonstrate a
firm commitment to peace. In this context, we welcome
public assurances by the Kosovo Liberation Army that it
intends to abide by the terms of the Rambouillet accords.

To all the people of South-Eastern Europe, we say that
we will dedicate ourselves to fulfilling the vision of a
region that is at peace and integrated fully into the Euro-
Atlantic community. We are committed to a robust
programme of reconstruction and reconciliation through the
European Union's Stability Pact for South-Eastem Europe.

To the people of Serbia, we say that now is the time
to look to the future and to abandon violence, repression
and ethnic hatred. You must begin a journey towards
integration into the community of nations dedicated to the
principles of international law. You deserve a chance at
democracy and a better economic life, as part of the Euro-
Atlantic community, with a Government that can lead you
responsibly towards these goals without resorting to
repression and war.

To the people of Montenegro, we commend you for
your principled stance, for your pursuit of democracy and
political and economic reform in a difficult environment
and for your tolerance and composure as you shoulder the
heavy burden of sheltering and providing for refugees and
displaced persons.

On behalf of my Government, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank all of the international envoys and
personnel on the ground who have worked tirelessly for
peace, for justice, for relief and for protection for the
people of Kosovo over the last year and a half. The
resolution the Security Court has adopted today is a tribute
to their hard work and dedication to the goal of peace
around the world.

