The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of February, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Emilio J. Cardenas,
Permanent Representative of Argentina to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security Council
for the month of January 1995. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Cerdenas for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Croatia

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Croatia, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nobilo
(Croatia) took a place at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/1995/56, letter
dated 18 January 1995 from the Permanent Representative
of Croatia to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council; S/1995/82 and S/1995/93, letters
dated 25 and 31 January 1995, respectively, from the
Permanent Representative of Croatia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its support for
the efforts to bring about a political settlement in the
Republic of Croatia which ensures full respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Croatia and which guarantees the
security and rights of all communities living in a
particular area irrespective of whether they constitute
in this area the majority or a minority.

"The Security Council strongly supports the
recent efforts of representatives of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia, the European
Union, the Russian Federation and the United States
of America aimed at achieving a political settlement
in the Republic of Croatia. The Security Council
calls upon the Government of the Republic of
Croatia and the local Serb authorities in the United
Nations Protected Areas to enter urgently and
without preconditions into negotiations on such a
settlement, benefiting from proposals now made to
them as part of these efforts. It calls upon all other
relevant parties to support this process.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the search for an overall negotiated
settlement of the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia
ensuring the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all the States there within their internationally
recognized borders and stresses the importance it
attaches to the mutual recognition thereof.

"The Security Council reaffirms its view that
UNPROFOR's continued and effective presence in
the Republic of Croatia is of vital importance for
regional peace and security and expresses its desire
that discussions over the weeks ahead will lead the
Government of the Republic of Croatia to re-
examine its position taken on 12 January 1995 in
relation to the continuing role of UNPROFOR in the
Republic of Croatia."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/6.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.35 pm.

