Mr. Ivanou (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): We
have become convinced yet again that history only
teaches us that it teaches nothing.

Today we are witnessing armed aggression
against a sovereign Member State of the United
Nations, which had been planned well in advance and
launched in circumvention of the authority of the
Security Council, with which it is empowered under
the Charter.

To our deepest regret, the efforts undertaken by
peace-loving nations proved insufficient to avert war.
The position of the international community was
completely ignored, and the process to settle the Iraqi
issue through political and diplomatic means under the
aegis of the United Nations was disrupted.

The President of the Republic of Belarus, its
Government and the entire Belarusian people condemn
the aggression against Iraq. We resolutely oppose any
unilateral attempts to enforce systems of administration
and governance upon peoples of the world. Bombers
and missiles cannot serve as means for delivery of
humanitarian aid.

Belarus is very well aware of the horrible toll
taken by war. During these tragic days the Iraqi people
can rely on our full support.

The use of force as a last resort constitutes an
exclusive prerogative of the Security Council,
disregard for which leads to the undermining of the
existing world order and the diminishing of the norms
of international law.

The Republic of Belarus calls upon the Security
Council to immediately stop the aggression and prevent
further unjustified civilian casualties.

As a United Nations founding Member State,
Belarus insists that an adequate assessment be made of
the military action and urges our Organization to
reassert at this critical moment its direct responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and the rule of law.

Resolution of the Iraqi issue, in conformity with
the objectives of the United Nations, can only be
attained through peaceful means based on respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq and the
sovereign right of the Iraqi people to independently
choose its own path of development.

