Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I welcome you,
Mr. President, Minister Liow Tiong Lai of Malaysia,
Minister Bishop of Australia, Minister Klimkin of
Ukraine, and Minister Koenders of the Netherlands to
the Security Council. Their presence here is a testament
to the commitment of their Governments to seek
accountability and justice for the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 near Torez, Donetsk oblast, on
17 July 2014.

Our deepest sympathies go to the families of
the victims in the Netherlands, Malaysia, Australia,
Indonesia, the United Kingdom, Germany, Belgium,
the Philippines, New Zealand and Canada. Words may
soothe the grieving families, but the heinous crime that
was committed calls for an answer from the Security
Council. It needs all States to cooperate fully in
establishing accountability, which is what was precisely
demanded by resolution 2166 (2014) unanimously
adopted by the Council.

Today's veto by Russia has denied for now an avenue
for the families of the victims to bring perpetrators to
justice. Russia's actions are deeply troubling, but they
are hardly surprising. Since 17 July 2014, Russia has
been acting with regard to the independent Flight MH-
17 investigations as if it had something to hide, as if
there was somebody to mislead, someone to throw off
course by disinformation. Today is no exception. The
grim reality on the ground, however, belies the Russian
narrative.

Russian-backed illegal armed groups in control of
the crash site tampered with evidence for days and weeks
and precluded and restricted access for international
experts and monitors from the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Only after
immense international pressure under resolution 2166
(2014) were independent investigators able to conduct
identification of the remains of the victims and collect
evidence. Their work is vital, and we call on all States
concerned to cooperate.

The Dutch-led independent international
investigation team includes experts from Australia,
France, Germany, Indonesia, Italy, Malaysia, Russia,
Ukraine, the United Kingdom and the United States, as
well as from the European Aviation Safety Agency and
the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
and enjoys the full trust and confidence of the concerned
countries and the international community, including
the ICAO and the United Nations. We have every
confidence in the investigation. It has been conducted
in a manner consistent with ICAO procedures and
standards and the Chicago Convention. We thank the
Joint Investigation Team countries for their consistent
outreach and for their keeping the Council updated.

Lithuania was a sponsor of the draft resolution put
forward today by Malaysia (S/2015/562). Today, along
with a majority of Council members, we are sending
the clear message that acts of violence against civilians
will not go unpunished. The shooting down of Flight
MH-17 amounted to a threat to international peace and
security and was a deliberate act. Accountability is not
a concept on paper. An international tribunal backed
by the Security Council under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations would have been the best
way to ensure the judicial process's impartiality and
independence. We will support further efforts to pursue
accountability, with or without Russia's cooperation.

The unhindered flow of arms, mercenaries and
Russian troops into the sovereign territory of Ukraine
created the conditions that enabled this tragedy to
happen. Weeks before the downing of MH-17, the
separatists claimed that they had acquired an SA-ll Buk
missile system and used it to shoot down an Antonov
AN-26 cargo plane at high altitude. Such weapons
cannot be bought in a downtown Luhansk market. Nor
can they be operated by a Donetsk miner.

The foreign-orchestrated conflict in eastern
Ukraine continues unabated, despite Russia's denials
of non-involvement, as was also the case with the
occupation of Crimea. The ceasefires of September
2014 and February 2015 were intended to enable the
combined Russian-separatist forces in Donbas to
regroup. Recently, 52,000 Russian troops have been
massing on the Ukrainian border. Since last fall, at two
Russian-Ukrainian border crossings alone, the OSCE
has counted 20,000 men in military uniforms crossing
to and fro. That is two divisions without a single visa
request. What would the OSCE be able to record if
Russia were to comply with the Minsk agreements and
allow it to monitor vast areas in Donbas, including the
400-kilometre-long Ukrainian-Russian border?

The ominous signs do not end there. The OSCE
has registered large concentrations of heavy weapons
in the militant-held areas, including at a railway
hub in Komsomolske. Only a few weeks ago, Alexei
Markov of the Ghost Brigade in the self-proclaimed
Luhansk People's Republic said that his fighters were
eager to launch a summer offensive, but that they
wanted weapons from Moscow because they had very
few, were running short of supplies and needed more
troops, artillery and combat vehicles. All hostages and
illegally detained persons were supposed to have been
released. Russia has evidently found other excuses for
ignoring the provisions of resolution 2202 (2015). Nadia
Savchenko and other illegally held Ukrainians remain
in Russian prisons, facing sham trials.

This human tragedy and suffering in Ukraine must
stop. The Minsk agreements must be implemented in
good faith. The trilateral contact group, the OSCE and
the United Nations should play critical roles. Russia and
its militants must stop paying mere lip service to the
agreements. Under extremely difficult circumstances,
Ukraine is implementing the Minsk agreements. It
has begun constitutional reform. It has made genuine
efforts to implement painful reforms, fight corruption
and liberate itself from the past. Ukraine must be free
to pursue the path of reforms its people have chosen.
Ukrainians want peace.

Our solemn duty today was not to take sides but to
ensure that justice was served. The Council has failed
in that task. Today's veto was a desperate attempt to
delay accountability, but the efforts of the international
community will not end here and those responsible will
be held to account.

Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French). I would first
like to welcome all the ministers in the Chamber today.

Exactly one year and 12 days ago we witnessed the
horror of the downing in Donetsk province in Ukraine
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, which resulted in
the deaths of 298 innocent people, 85 of them children.
Chad would like to reiterate its firm condemnation
of that abominable attack on a civilian aircraft and
offer its deep sympathy and heartfelt condolences
to the bereaved families and the Governments of the
countries from which the victims came. We share in the
immeasurable sorrow of the victims" relatives and loved
ones and we understand their justifiable impatience to
know the truth and demand accountability from those
who were responsible for the disaster.

We should recall that resolution 2166 (2014),
adopted immediately after the crash on 17 July 2014,
states that those responsible for it should be held to
account and that every State should cooperate fully
with efforts to establish that responsibility. According
to the preliminary report on the crash published on
10 September 2014 by the Dutch Safety Board, the
plane disintegrated in mid-air as a result of "structural
damage caused by a large number ofhigh-energy objects
that penetrated the aircraft from outside". However, the
origin of those objects was not specified.

Chad continues to support every effort by
the international community aimed at demanding
accountability and assigning responsibility for the
destruction of the aircraft. In that regard, we would
like to thank the Malaysian delegation for presenting
today's draft resolution S/2015/562, on the creation of
an international criminal tribunal. For several reasons,
we were in favour from the start of the idea of creating
such a tribunal, aimed at bringing to justice the
perpetrators of these hateful crimes.

The first is in order to respond to resolution 2166
(2014), which the Security Council adopted unanimously
following the incident and which demanded that the
destroyers of the Malaysian aircraft be brought to
justice. The second is in order to honour the memory
of the victims of the tragedy and emphasize our total
solidarity with their loved ones, whose legitimate
impatience - and that of the many delegations who
have come to represent them here today - in the
quest for truth and justice we share. The third is in
order to ensure a credible, independent and impartial
investigation aimed at achieving justice unshadowed
by any pressure or manipulation, and to encourage
cooperation between all States to that end. Fourth and
last, to send a strong message of deterrence to all those
in other areas of conflict who might make attempts
to attack the security and safety of international civil
aviation.

For all those reasons, Chad voted in favour of the
draft resolution presented by the Malaysian delegation,
but unfortunately it was not adopted, owing to the
opposition of some permanent members of the Council,
a fact that we deeply regret. Despite the rejection of the
draft resolution, we remain committed to supporting
every effort designed to meet the demands of justice
and we encourage the countries concerned and the
members of the Council to do everything possible to
respond to the legitimate expectations of the Victims'
loved ones.

