Mr. Miliband (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by setting out an explanation of vote in relation to
the resolution we have just passed before moving on to
my broader statement.

The United Kingdom has voted in favour of the
resolution adopted because we support robust action to
address the serious threat to international navigation,
including deliveries of humanitarian aid to the people
of Somalia, posed by piracy and armed robbery off the
coast of Somalia.

The authorization conferred by paragraph 6 of the
resolution to permit States cooperating with the
Transitional Federal Government to use "all necessary
measures that are appropriate in Somalia, for the
purpose of suppressing acts of piracy" enables States
and regional organizations, with the consent of the
Transitional Federal Government, to act, using force if
necessary, against pirate activities on land in Somalia.
This is an important additional tool to combat those
who plan, facilitate or undertake acts of piracy from
the territory of Somalia.

The United Kingdom considers that any use of
force must be both necessary and proportionate. These
concepts include an assessment that the measures taken
must be appropriate to the circumstances to which they
are directed.

That concludes my explanation of vote, and I
would like to now make a statement on the wider issue
of piracy and related issues.

I am obviously grateful to our colleague,
Ms. Rice, for her initiative in taking this resolution
through and for securing unanimous support for it. I
think this is an important opportunity to discuss both
the narrow issue of piracy and the wider situation in
Somalia. I will try to do so briefly.

The seas off Somalia are a key economic artery
for global trade and for many nations represented here.
But they are also essential to the delivery of essential
humanitarian supplies to the people of Somalia. The
United Kingdom and many others are working to
address the issue of piracy at sea, with the European
Union, NATO and Combined Task Force 150 all

playing their role in seeking to escort World Food
Programme vessels, deterring pirate activity and,
where possible, disrupting attacks. Others are
contributing naval assets to undertake similar tasks.
The cooperation at the military level amongst those
contributors is demonstrating how we can work
together on this difficult issue.

However, it is important that we work not just on
the military front, but with the shipping industry, either
on a Government-to-industry basis or through the
International Maritime Organization. To support these
efforts, I welcome the practical measures that we have
agreed in the resolution today.

However, as my Russian colleague has intimated,
we cannot look at the issue of piracy through the prism
of international trade or shipping alone. In Somalia
itself, as people understand from watching television or
reading the newspapers today, the political,
humanitarian and security situations carry real risks.
The Djibouti process has, for many people, opened a
potential new chapter for Somalia. It is a Somali-
owned process and must remain so. But we have a
responsibility, as members of the Security Council, to
do what we can to support it. It will not succeed in
isolation from the political process.

I hope that all those engaged in the negotiation
can do what is necessary to turn it into practical reality.
The clear and shared goal is to work for a credible
commitment from the Transitional Federal
Government, the Alliance for the Re-Liberation of
Somalia and other political forces to re-energize the
Djibouti political process with the aim of producing a
more representative political system.

There are, however, two major areas of
uncertainty that raise questions for the United
Kingdom. One is about political uncertainty, the other
is about uncertainty relating to the security situation.

With respect to the political uncertainty, there is a
necessity for early concrete steps to deliver a viable
way forward. Sheikh Sharif's recent visit to Mogadishu
is an important example of this. We also need to see an
orderly transition to the proper Government of national
unity and the clear appointment of key cabinet figures.
This will be vital if Somalis are to be effective in
developing an indigenous security sector.
At the same time, it is clear that there are major
questions relating to the security situation as well. I
look forward to learning in this debate of the views of
a range of members here, including the Somali
delegation, about their understanding of the intentions
of Governments in the region, about the future of the
African Union Mission in Somalia and about the
security needs in Somalia. We understand that the
history of intervention in Somalia is one that carries a
great number of important lessons for all of us. We will
be addressing these issues in a manner consistent with
our own commitments, not just to the humanitarian
situation, but also to the political support that is going
to be necessary to take this forward.

