Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are happy to welcome you to the Security
Council chamber, Madam President. We are grateful to
Mr. Olara Otunnu for his briefing, his introduction to
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2003/1053) and
for the work he does to protect children in conflict. We
are grateful to Ms. Carol Bellamy, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) for her major contribution to the work of the
Council today.

Children are one of the most vulnerable segments
of populations in armed conflicts. Children who
participate in hostilities, children who are the victims
of war, refugee children, disabled children and outcast
children - these have become the tragic result of
many civil and international conflicts. Given the
magnitude and severity of this phenomenon,
particularly in Africa, it can be viewed as a new threat
to peace and security in individual regions.

The protection of the rights of children, inter alia,
in armed conflict and in post-conflict situations, is one
of the most important tasks of the international
community. The most reliable way to protect children
is to prevent conflicts from arising. Here it is hard to
overestimate the role played by the United Nations and
its Security Council, which bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

We appreciate the report of the Secretary-General
prepared for today's meeting of the Security Council,
and we would like to dwell on a few points that we
think are of priority importance.

First is the problem of the use of child soldiers by
armed groups - and not just by illegal armed groups,
either, but by Government forces as well. We strongly
condemn the recruitment of child soldiers. According
to international law, these are war crimes that are
massive in nature. In this connection, we support the
efforts of the Secretary-General to identify those
parties to armed conflicts that continue the outrageous
practice of using child combatants. However, we would
like to refer here to the need for a more careful, more
balanced approach to a legal assessment of the
situation and to the need for correct terminology, in
particular when talking about specific countries'
situations.
It is important that the international community,
including the United Nations Security Council, become
more actively involved in resolving this problem. We
need to consider how already adopted Security Council
decisions in this area are being implemented, and we
need to appeal to specific culprits to stop recruiting or
using children in armed conflicts. It is time to assess
what practical measures, including measures contained
in Council resolutions, need to be taken against those
people who systematically disregard the requirements
of the Security Council in this area.

However, international efforts in this area are
clearly insufficient. We regret that national bodies are
not demonstrating the proper will to do this, although
they are the ones that bear the primary responsibility
for resolving the problem of impunity. We need to take
a careful look and see whether countries that are
affected by this scourge have a sufficient legislative
foundation and we need to see how adequate their
system of justice is. If necessary, the international
community could provide appropriate assistance.

We agree with the widely held view of the
usefulness of an additional system of monitoring and
information regarding the protection of children in
armed conflict in individual sub-regions. For example,
given the transborder nature of this problem in Western
Africa, the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in this sub-region, in cooperation
with the United Nations missions in C6te d'Ivoire,
Liberia and Sierra Leone, could undertake this
monitoring.

We agree with the sections of the report that refer
to the mainstreaming of the child factor in the
mandates of peacekeeping missions, to providing
access to humanitarian organizations in conflict areas,
to the separation of civilians from combatants and to
the maintenance of the civilian nature of places where
refugees and internally displaced persons are held.

An important topic is the sexual exploitation of
children, in particular that of girls, who are the most
vulnerable group of the population in conflict
situations in this respect. Particularly outrageous are
instances where sexual violence is practised not merely
by armed factions and groups, but by humanitarian
personnel and by peacekeepers, in whom the victims
place special trust and from whom they expect
kindness and assistance. Russia fully supports the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to provide comprehensive training for
United Nations personnel, to establish strict control
over their behaviour and to prevent impunity for the
perpetrators.

The implementation of the humanitarian
component of the protection of children in armed
conflict should be a particular prerogative of the
specialized organizations - the World Health
Organization, UNICEF, the World Food Programme,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and others that have their own mandates. Overall
political support in implementing these tasks should be
provided by the Security Council, with a key role
played by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children in Armed Conflict, in particular
when it comes to helping to create and coordinate
activities in the monitoring mechanism. It is hard to
overestimate the role that is being played here by the
many non-governmental organizations. These selfless
people deserve our particular gratitude.

We hope that the draft document that will be
adopted following today's discussion will reflect the
need for strict compliance with the United Nations
Charter and the appropriate resolutions of the Security
Council, as well as the norms and principles of
international law, including humanitarian law.

