Mr. Messahel (Algeria) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to tell you, Mr. President, how
much we welcome your important initiative of
organizing a special meeting of the Security Council
devoted to the situation in Africa. This initiative,
crowning your country's brilliant presidency
throughout the month of January, once again bears
witness to the constancy and firmness of your personal
commitment, and that of Mauritius, in the service of
peace and security on our continent and throughout the
world. The eminent part you played in the peaceful
resolution of the Comoros crisis, which led to the
initiation of a process of restoring constitutional order,
will allow the nation of the Comoros to regain
institutional and political stability. This result is all the
more praiseworthy when we consider that it supports the
wise and responsible decision taken at the 1999 Summit
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), in Algiers,
not to recognize regimes installed as the result of coups
d'etat, nor to admit them to our continental
organization. In re-establishing their fundamental right
to free expression and sovereign choice, the Comorian
people are supporting the general movement in Africa
to establish and consolidate democracy.

Today's debate is all the more timely because it
takes place after the OAU Summit in Lusaka adopted,
last July, the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD) initiative. In this context, I
would like to emphasize that this African initiative,
which in a global and pragmatic way tackles the
problems of African renewal, places at the top ofits list
of priorities the settlement of disputes and the
resolution of conflicts on our continent. It incorporates
the overall lines of a plan of action that considers the
question of peace and security in all its dimensions. In
its analysis of the causes of conflict in Africa, the
initiative recognizes that shortcomings in the field of
governance have contributed significantly to the
aggravation of poverty and feelings of marginalization.
The New Partnership for Africa's Development enshrines
peace, security and stability in Africa as the key to the
process of launching an authentic and lasting dynamic of
growth and economic and social development.

The strategy defined by the initiative rests on
three fundamental pillars. The first pillar is the promotion
of long-term conditions favourable to development and
security. This means addressing the roots of conflicts by
promoting good governance at the political and economic
levels, combating poverty and actively integrating the
continent within the world economy.

The second pillar consists in strengthening the
capacity of African institutions in terms of early
warning, preventive diplomacy and the management
and settlement of conflicts. In this connection, let us
recall that the OAU, for more than a decade, has had a
specific mechanism to settle conflicts and promote
peace. In particular, support should be given in many
forms to this organ of primary importance for Africa.

The third pillar has as its goal the lasting
establishment of the principles on which the New
Partnership rests.

By committing themselves to the great new
NEPAD project, the African heads of State and
Government have clearly demonstrated their will to
concentrate on the added value inherent in such an
initiative. NEPAD does not overlap with existing
mechanisms and is not designed to replace any current
programmes or activities. Rather, its task is to improve
and strengthen existing institutions by playing a
political role as a catalyst and facilitator in the
promotion and maintenance of peace and in post-
conflict reconciliation and reconstruction. It is
designed to bring about better coordination and
consistency in the mechanisms and structures at the
subregional, continental and international levels.

To better carry out these tasks, the
Implementation Committee of Heads of State and
Government of NEPAD has decided to create a
subcommittee for peace and security, composed of the
heads of State of Algeria, Gabon, Mali, Mauritius and
South Africa. The subcommittee will also examine
policies and institutional arrangements, as well as the
mobilization of resources to establish lasting peace,
security and stability in Africa.

Algeria has always promoted the peaceful
settlement of disputes, and it has often been called
upon to play the role of mediator, either in internal
conflicts, such as those in northern Mali and the
northern Niger, or in bilateral disputes, as that between
Ethiopia and Eritrea. My country has also participated
in peacekeeping operations in several parts of the
world. The experience we have acquired, and in
particular our experience with conflict settlement in
Ethiopia and Eritrea, has enabled us to learn a number
of lessons that I would like to share with the Council.

First, if a peace mediation is to succeed, it is
essential to make sure that the political will to seek
peace exists among the belligerent parties.

Secondly, recourse to mediation should take place
in an atmosphere of clarity and transparency. Whoever
is designated mediator must enjoy recognized
credibility, must be known to be impartial and must
enjoy the full trust of the parties to the conflict.

Thirdly, the intervention of facilitators,
coordinated perfectly with the activity of the mediators
at crucial phases of the process, can lend momentum to
the peace process. An example of this is when the
United States of America and the European Union
supported President Abdelaziz Bouteflika during his
mediation between Ethiopia and Eritrea.

Fourthly, the creation of a regional environment
favourable to peace is a determining factor in the
success of peace mediation.

Fifthly, it may also be necessary to set up targeted
sanctions designed to prevent the sale and delivery of
arms and ammunition as well as illicit trade in strategic
mining resources or other products, as has taken place
in the case of certain belligerents.

Finally, the settlement of a conflict must be
accompanied by measures to bring about rehabilitation
and reconstruction.

The new momentum that the United Nations
wishes to lend to its activities in the context of conflict
prevention and settlement is in keeping with our will to
see a genuine synergy emerge in Africa between the
various direct and indirect actors involved, so that our
common undertaking, carried out in a spirit of
solidarity, will serve to bring about lasting and genuine
peace on the African continent.

In the context of this collective effort, and on the
basis of our modest experience in mediating African
conflicts, we deem it crucial to ensure that 10
conditions are met, in order to bring about the full
realization of the peace objectives we seek to achieve.

These 10 conditions are as follows: first, the
strengthening of continental and subregional capacities
to prevent, manage and settle conflicts, through
financial and technical contributions; second, the
provision of significant support to the OAU and to
subregional organizations to develop their early-waming
systems; third, strengthened international cooperation
with respect to training in the areas of conflict prevention
and peacekeeping; fourth, significant assistance for
demining; fifth, increased support for the demobilization
and disarmament of combatants as well for their
reintegration into economic and social life; sixth, the
adoption and implementation of a plan of action to put
an end to the illicit traffic in, and the proliferation of,
light weapons; seventh, increased assistance for post-
conflict rehabilitation, reconstruction and development;
eighth, assistance to countries hosting refugees, in
order to ease their burden; ninth, ongoing cooperation
in the fight against terrorism; and tenth, special efforts
to protect children and to prevent their being forcibly
recruited into conflicts.

These are some of the essential prerequisites that
must be met in the context of the efforts of the
international community in order truly to establish
lasting peace and stability in Africa.

In conclusion, I should like to state that Africa
has embarked on a peace process that must be
consolidated, expanded and deepened. I am convinced
that Africa's efforts will receive the full support of the
members of the Security Council and of the
international community as a whole. The Council's
debate, under the wise guidance of my brother, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritius, will, I am
sure, lend the necessary momentum to peace efforts in
Africa and ensure their full success.

