Germany fully supports the call by Special Envoy Pedersen for a complete and immediate nationwide ceasefire throughout Syria. Although there has been a decrease in violence in the north-west, and the arrangements in the north-east are broadly holding, the security situation throughout the country remains very fragile, especially in the so-called reconciled areas. Nevertheless, the Syrian city of Afrin was shaken yesterday by a devastating terrorist attack that reportedly killed dozens of civilians, including many children. We strongly condemn this crime. Our deepest sympathy goes to the families and the relatives of the victims. We wish the injured a speedy and complete recovery. We will continue our efforts to find a peaceful solution to the Syrian conflict and an end to war, displacement, State persecution and terror. In the end, we need a lasting nationwide ceasefire. This has become even more urgent in the light of the crisis caused by the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We will discuss the humanitarian situation and the impact of the pandemic in Syria later this afternoon. But there is one point that needs to be made right now: an effective nationwide humanitarian response to COVID-19 is possible only once a nationwide ceasefire is in place. The same goes for the political process under the leadership of the United Nations Special Envoy. We stress the central role of the United Nations in reaching the genuine and sustainable nationwide ceasefire called for in resolution 2254 (2015), keeping in mind that a nationwide ceasefire is a central element of the resolution and an important precondition for successful negotiations in Geneva. Sustainable peace, stability and security in Syria can be achieved only through a political process under the auspices of the United Nations, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). We therefore call for a swift return to the political process and reiterate our full support for the efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen in this regard, including for adapting working methods to the current coronavirus-related restrictions, so that progress can be made. In the end, the Syrian regime must finally stop obstructing the Constitutional Committee and start engaging meaningfully in the Committee and the political process more broadly. We call on Russia to use its influence over Damascus in this regard. We also support the call by Special Envoy Pedersen for a large-scale release of detainees and abductees on humanitarian grounds. Bearing in mind that the overwhelming majority of detainees are held by the Syrian regime and that arbitrary arrests, enforced disappearances and torture for which the Syrian regime is responsible remain ongoing, it is important to move beyond one-for-one prisoner exchanges and to release political detainees at a meaningful scale, starting with elderly people, women and children and those with health conditions. Accordingly, we would like to recall United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Bachelet's call for the release of especially vulnerable detainees to prevent a catastrophic spread of COVID-19. We have taken note of the regime's announcement to do so but have yet to see evidence of actual steps taken in this regard. We also call on the Syrian regime to allow immediate, unconditional and unhindered access for relevant humanitarian organizations to all prisons and detention facilities under its control. In addition, we call on the regime to ensure the provision of adequate medical care and protective measures for all persons in detention, in order to prevent COVID-19 leading to still further misery and loss of life in Syrian prisons. We will continue to support all efforts, in particular those of the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the commission of inquiry, aimed at ensuring that the crimes and atrocities committed during the Syrian conflict do not go unpunished, that perpetrators are held accountable and that victims obtain justice. In this context, we also welcome the most recent reports of the Investigation and Identification Team of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and of the Board of Inquiry. There has to be follow-up to the findings of these two reports: impunity for those responsible for these serious violations of international law is not an option. We remain convinced that national reconciliation and sustainable peace in Syria will not be possible without justice and accountability. The trial of two former officials of the Syrian regime's security service, charged with crimes against humanity, at the Higher Regional Court in Koblenz is an important step towards justice and accountability. For the first time, abductions, torture and abuse in Syrian prisons are being prosecuted before a court in Germany. That sends a clear message - those who commit crimes against humanity cannot feel safe anywhere. To date, it has unfortunately not been possible to refer the situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court (ICC) because of the Russian veto in the Security Council. For that reason, those who committed, and are still committing, international crimes cannot be prosecuted by the ICC, and they remain in power in Damascus. But, as the trial in Koblenz clearly shows, they should not feel safe and will eventually also be held accountable. We encourage other States to initiate similar criminal proceedings under universal jurisdiction against individuals suspected of the most serious crimes. We call in particular on Russia to contribute to the fight against impunity and to ensure that those responsible for torture and killing in the prisons and detention facilities of the Syrian regime are held accountable. There were reports that the Syrian national Hamadi Taha Al-But was tortured and murdered by mercenaries of the Wagner Group after being captured in June 2017 near the Al-Shaer gas field in central Syria. One of the perpetrators was identified as Stanislav Dychko, and evidence was reportedly submitted to Russian investigators. We would like to inquire about the current state of the criminal investigations by the Russian authorities into these alleged war crimes by the Wagner Group in Syria. The position of Germany and the European Union (EU) on reconstruction remains crystal clear. We will assist in any reconstruction of Syria only once a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political transition is firmly under way. As long as the Syrian regime does not change its brutal behaviour and end its grave violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law, there will be no lifting of sanctions. It is important to stress that the sanctions are targeted at the Syrian regime and do not affect the delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need, as they contain specific provisions allowing for the provision of humanitarian aid, including the supply of medicines and medical equipment needed in order to respond to COVID-19 in Syria. We have specifically looked into allegations that EU sanctions were preventing the delivery of equipment for the treatment of COVID-19 in Syria, and we found out that that was not the case.
