Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): My delegation would like, through you, Sir, to
welcome His Excellency, Mr. Muhamed Sacirbey,
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
My delegation would like to say how much we share his
feelings at this historic moment which his country has just
gone through.
My delegation would also like to convey its
congratulations to the United States of America on the
occasion of the peace agreement among the various
parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

At the same time, my delegation would like to
congratulate these various parties for having agreed to
make concessions and, thereby, to put an end to four
years of fratricidal warfare, rife with crimes against
humanity. "Ethnic cleansing" was beginning to become
such a widespread practice that everyone was becoming
more and more reluctant to speak about it, even in
resolutions of the Security Council.

My delegation is particularly gratified that these
agreements are putting an end to a war in which innocent
people have suffered, particularly women, children and
other people who were not directly involved in the
hostilities. What happened in Bosnia, as well as what
happened in my country, Rwanda, is a lesson from which
the world and all of us should learn. It is a lesson in
humility for mankind, because what happened in this
country is evidence of the fact that this can happen
anywhere in the world. This type of crime knows no
boundaries; nor is it peculiar to any one society.

The second lesson impresses upon the international
community the need to do everything possible to combat
crimes against humanity, and also the fact that this is a
battle which must begin in the Security Council.

We are delighted that these two resolutions will now
make it possible for a balance to be struck among the
various forces involved. After the end of the Second

 

World War, appropriate machinery was created in order to
handle conflicts, in order to avoid such events - events
which were similar to the two nightmares which humanity
experienced at the beginning and in the middle of this
century. But the generalized historical amnesia which
prevailed after the Second World War, nationalist interests,
and the thirst for power leading to the creation of zones of
political influence simply undermined all these hopes.

After having broken out of the deadlock in the
negotiations regarding the division of territory, the
maintenance of peace will no longer be a question of
territorial claims, but rather a question of political will on
the part of the parties concerned.

The embargo imposed upon Bosnia-Herzegovina is in
many respects similar to that which is now inflicted upon
the current Government of Rwanda. We are very pleased
that it has been lifted, and it is our hope that this will bring
about a balance of forces which will make it possible for
better understanding to prevail in the region.

My delegation is confident that henceforth the member
countries of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, as well
as the Russian Federation, will have sufficient leeway to
consolidate the peace thus restored and that they will
assume stewardship for stability in the region.

