Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like once again to extend
to the Ambassador of China our sympathy and
condolences over the earthquake in his country that has
resulted in numerous victims.

My delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this public meeting
of the Security Council on the subject of general issues
relating to sanctions. Allow me, at the outset, to
congratulate Mr. Hans Dahlgren, State Secretary for
Foreign Affairs of Sweden, for his outstanding
briefing. On behalf of my country, Cameroon, I would
also like to commend the efforts made by his
Government to organize and finalize research on the
issue of sanctions, a matter to which the international
community attaches great importance.

Sanctions represent one of the major instruments
available to the Security Council for carrying out its
responsibilities with respect to the maintenance of
international peace and security. That is, in any case,
what is stated in Article 41, which speaks of non-
coercive measures.

The proliferation of crises and conflicts over the
last few years has led to more frequent use of
sanctions. However, the various sanctions regimes thus
imposed have had different outcomes. Moreover, we
deplore the negative consequences for third countries
and the pointless suffering inflicted on the population
of targeted countries.
It is therefore understandable that the Security
Council, together with the international community, is
continually trying to enhance the scope and
effectiveness of sanctions regimes. That need for
effectiveness indicates a dual concern: first, the
creation of sanctions regimes designed to make the
targeted individuals or entities adapt their behaviour to
comply with the wishes of the international
community; and secondly, the need to minimize
collateral effects on civilian populations and third
countries.

This dual concern is having an impact on the
direction of work of the sanctions committees of the
Security Council. It is also the basis for the work of the
Working Group on General Issues on Sanctions, which
it has been my honour to chair for the past year. This
dual concern also underlies the work done in the
framework of the various processes - that is,
Interlaken, Bonn-Berlin and Stockholm; today we are
seeing the results of the latter process.

My delegation would like to welcome the
opportunity provided here today to engage, with the
other members of the Security Council and with a
representative of the Swedish Government, in a highly
enlightening exchange of views, which is the
culmination of the work done within the framework of
the Stockholm Process.

We would like to emphasize the particular
importance of that work, which is supplementing, in a
most timely manner, the work done in the framework
of the Interlaken and Bonn-Berlin processes, whose
outcomes were submitted to the Council in 2001.

As we all are aware, the Interlaken process dealt
with the practical and technical aspects of financial
sanctions, while the Bonn-Berlin process focused on
the negative effects of sanctions on civilian populations
and on third countries.

The Stockholm Process made good use of, and
built on, the achievements of the first two processes.
The outcome of its work, which was presented to us
today in the report before us, is particularly interesting
and should be of great value to the Council. One of the
major merits of the Stockholm Process is that it
consolidates the concept of targeted sanctions. Today
there is a genuine consensus on that concept within the
international community.

The Stockholm Process has also been engaged in
systematizing the conceptual, technical and practical
elements needed to enhance the effectiveness of
financial sanctions, arms embargoes and travel bans.
The various stages - creation, implementation
and monitoring - of the process of the imposition of
sanctions have been duly noted. So, too, have measures
designed to strengthen the role of the United Nations,
of States and of other actors of the international
community in the implementation of sanctions.

Relevant recommendations are made in this
report on the role of the Security Council, its various
sanctions committees, expert panels and States.
Particular emphasis is placed on the need for
coordination and communication among these various
actors. The pivotal role played by States deserves our
attention. Indeed - and this should be stated - it is
the behaviour of States which determines the
effectiveness, or lack thereof, of the various sanctions
regimes. That is why the report wisely recommends
that appropriate assistance be provided to the countries
of the regions affected by sanctions regimes.

Other ideas can also be emphasized, such as the
adoption of a model for national legislation governing
the implementation of sanctions, as well as the
recommendation for holding States responsible for any
violation of sanctions by their nations. All of these
ideas deserve careful consideration by the Security
Council.

The Working Group on General Issues on
Sanctions could, moreover, make good use of these
ideas in achieving its goals. The Group, established in
2000, was, as we are aware, entrusted with the
elaboration of general recommendations regarding
measures to be taken to strengthen the effectiveness of
sanctions imposed by the United Nations.

The work of the Group - chaired, when it was
created, by my colleague Ambassador Anwarul
Chowdhury of Bangladesh - dealt with the
administration of sanctions and the sanctions
committees, the strengthening of the capacities of the
United Nations Secretariat, and the required
cooperation between all of those who are participating
in the implementation of sanctions.

Significant emphasis has been placed on the
concept of sanctions and on problems dealing with the
termination of sanctions; on their implementation; on
their consideration and on their assessment, as well as
on assistance to those States that are implementing
them.

Under the chairmanship of Cameroon, the group
has made progress on the issues of procedure and
humanitarian exemptions. Thus, the group has reached
agreement on provisions for improved monitoring to
strengthen the effectiveness and viability of sanctions
and concerning the unintended effects of sanctions on
third-party States.

Despite this considerable progress, differences of
opinion remain that are not only hampering the
conclusion of the group's work on establishing norms,
but are also affecting the management of sanctions
regimes. These fundamental differences of opinion are
concerned primarily with the scope and duration of
sanctions. We would hope that these two issues will
receive due attention from the Security Council and
civil society.

The reports of the Bonn-Berlin, Interlaken and
Stockholm Processes contain a wealth of ideas and
proposals that we are convinced will promote progress
and the adoption of general rules both to improve the
effectiveness of sanctions and to make them a better
instrument in the service of international peace and
security, in accordance with the Charter.

