We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Ms. Susannah Sirkin for their briefings. As the economic situation in Syria continues to deteriorate and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic further increases the risk to the livelihoods of millions of Syrians, my delegation believes that an all-out effort to fulfil the humanitarian needs of people in Syria is, now more than ever, highly critical. As mentioned by Mr. Lowcock, the World Food Programme has estimated that around 9.3 million people in Syria are food insecure and 11.1 million are in need of humanitarian assistance, of whom 4.7 million are in acute need. These numbers are deeply disturbing. They represent men, women and children, the elderly and disabled persons who are struggling to meet their basic needs. Accordingly, efforts to save lives in Syria must continue. My delegation wishes to focus on the following points. First, we share the Secretary-General's view that a sustained and large-scale cross-border response will continue to be necessary in order to meet the enormous humanitarian needs in the north-west. We note that the use of the Bab Al-Salam and Bab Al-Hawa border crossings is a lifeline for millions of civilians and that the United Nations does not have any alternative ways of reaching those people. The recorded monthly average aid trucks crossing into Syria this year was 1,350, with the highest number crossing last month using this cross-border operation. We note the ability of the operation to scale up its activities as crisis intensifies and as people's needs increase. Therefore, it is, as recommended by the Secretary-General, necessary to renew the cross-border authorization for an additional 12 months in order to guarantee the continuation of life-saving assistance. We encourage all colleagues to be united and to find a consensus outcome while taking into account what is most important - saving human lives. My delegation encourages the United Nations to continue working with its partners and other relevant parties to ensure the accountability systems and the United Nations monitoring mechanism. Secondly, the impact of the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing needs to be mitigated. We note that the aid deliveries to the north-east have not been sufficient to address the needs that were previously met through Al-Yarubiyah. My delegation encourages Council members to discuss this issue wisely, taking into account the millions of people in need across Syria. Lastly, there is an urgent need to address the groups vulnerable to COVID-19. I wish to underscore the risk and impact of COVID-19, especially on vulnerable groups in Syria. We have taken note of what Mr. Lowcock alluded to, namely, the already fragile health systems and facilities in many parts of the region, including in Syria, and, thus, the need for the international community to bolster them, particularly during this time of COVID-19. Overcrowding in camps in some areas of Syria, where medical facilities and sanitation are lacking, increases the spread of the pandemic in those sites. We therefore appreciate the continued support of the United Nations in assisting with COVID-19 preparedness and response across Syria and encourage it to redouble its efforts to help vulnerable groups. We urge all parties to the conflict to cooperate and provide the United Nations and its humanitarian partners with all the necessary access for humanitarian deliveries, particularly to the camps for internally displaced persons. In this challenging period, the Syrian people not only need increased humanitarian assistance but also yearn for a period of sustained calm across the country. We call on all parties to respect the call by the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy for a nationwide ceasefire. We cannot afford more violence and tensions. We urge all parties to uphold their obligation under international humanitarian law to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure.
