Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): Iwould
like to begin by congratulating the Russian delegation
on its presidency and thanking the Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation for presiding
over this meeting. We support the convening of this
open debate dedicated to the very important issue of
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
welcome the focus of your concept note (S/2018/524, annex), Mr. President, on the Middle East and North
Africa, given the fact that the region is facing serious
threats to its security and stability.

When His Majesty King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa
of Bahrain spoke at the Summit of the League of Arab
States, he emphasized that the international community
must play a greater role in ensuring respect for the
resolutions on this subject and their implementation,
and in creating an environment that is conducive to
resolving the crises and conflicts in the Arab region.
The international community must also play a greater
role in imposing and implementing its resolutions and
creating a positive environment that provides more
opportunities in order to achieve political solutions
to Arab and regional crises, end foreign interference
and provide the necessary protection to affected
peoples so as to facilitate the development of practical
solutions that will allow those States to maintain their
sovereignty, independence and security.

Stability and security in the Middle East and
the entire world require a common political will and
serious, concerted action from all parties, based on
respect for the norms governing relations among States,
in order to confront as one the greatest challenge facing
us - terrorism - and stop all those who sponsor,
finance and support it, be they individuals, States or
other entities. Terrorism is not limited only to terrorist
groups that we can combat and eradicate. It is a tool that
is sometimes used by certain States to generate crises in
targeted countries in the service of their own interests
and agendas, thereby turning them into essential
accomplices in terrorism and a destabilizing element
that adversely affects international peace and security.
We therefore cannot allow those States to play a part
in settling the conflicts and ending the humanitarian
crises that they have instigated. It is the international
community's responsibility to confront those countries,
demand accountability and prosecute them so as to
achieve security and stability in the world.

Concerning the Palestinian people and their
leadership, the Kingdom of Bahrain reaffirms its
unwavering position. That is one of our top priorities.
We underscore the need to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace, with the goal of establishing an
independent and sovereign Palestinian State within
the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, based on the two-State solution and the Arab
Peace Initiative, as well as the relevant international
resolutions. We underscore that final status issues
can be achieved only through negotiation between the
Palestinians and Israelis and will never be resolved by
unilateral decisions that run contrary to international
resolutions and hinder the settlement of the crisis and
achieving peace.

One of the main causes of the crises in the Middle
East and North Africa is the intervention of certain
countries, led by Iran, in the internal affairs of States
by destabilizing them through their support of terrorist
groups like Hizbullah. Cooperating with terrorists is
a flagrant violation of international law. We see that
demonstrated by the crisis in the brotherly country of
Yemen, where thugs and militias supported and led by
Iran carried out a coup d'etat against the legitimate
Government and violated its sovereignty and territorial
integrity in a blatant violation of international law, while
impeding any attempt to achieve a peaceful solution
based on international initiatives, in particular the
Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council, international
dialogue and Security Council resolution 2216 (205).
In that regard, we underscore the need to respect fully
the unity, sovereignty and stability of Yemen and to
reject any form of interference in its internal affairs.
We emphasize the need to find a political solution and
to support the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General.
We are fully committed to participating in the Arab
coalition to support the legitimate Government in
Yemen. The port of Al-Hudaydah must also be liberated
so as to end weapons trafficking benefiting militias,
including missiles threatening the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and other countries of the region.

Countries that are struggling to restore their
stability and sovereignty and fighting against attempts
to transform them into crisis zones are investing all
their material and human resources in the quest for
development and reconstruction, which entails an even
greater responsibility on the part of the international
community to end the actions of rogue States that,
through their actions, have prolonged the suffering of
world's youth and prevented them from achieving their
aspirations.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain underscores
that the maintenance of international peace and security
is the collective and individual responsibility of all,
and that we have worked and will always work towards
further strengthening our commitment to supporting
the principles underlying that responsibility, including
respect for the sovereignty of States and strengthening
international partnerships based on tolerance and
spreading the culture of peace. We will spare no effort
to build on the accomplishments that we have already
achieved, support our region and put it on the path to
security and stability.

