Mrs. Mulamula (United Republic of Tanzania): I
am all for breaking the monotony of your duties,
Mr. President, by mainstreaming the female agenda,
and especially by participating in today's debate.
My delegation is grateful to you, Mr. President,
for organizing this meeting on conflicts in Africa, a
subject of great concern to our continent. Indeed,
Tanzania recognizes and appreciates Pakistan's
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Africa.

The fact that this meeting is being held the day
after we observed the first International Day of United
Nations Peacekeepers is in itself laudable. Allow me to
pay tribute to the more than 1,800 peacekeepers who
have lost their lives serving in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

In the recent past, Africa has occupied no less
than 60 per cent of the Security Council's agenda.
While that is not a source of pride for Africa, it is a
demonstration of the Council's commitment to
resolving what seem to be endless conflicts in our
continent. We commend the Council for having
succeeded in restoring peace in Sierra Leone and in
Ethiopia and Eritrea.

Those achievements notwithstanding, conflicts in
Africa rage unabated, causing millions of deaths,
displacing civilians, separating families and
devastating economies, to say nothing of the
destruction to property and infrastructure that they
cause.

It is not my intention to revisit the root causes of
conflict in Africa. The Secretary-General's
comprehensive report of April 1998 (S/1998/318) and
subsequent reports have resulted in resolutions being
adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly. It is important, however, always to bear in
mind that, without addressing the root causes, it will
not be easy to resolve the conflicts afflicting the
African continent.

In this context, my delegation wishes to remind
the Council that it should attach the greatest
importance to the implementation of, inter alia, the
Millennium Development Goals, the Monterrey
Consensus and the conclusions of the World Summit on
Sustainable Development, held last year in
Johannesburg. Poverty eradication remains an
overarching priority if we are to achieve durable peace
and sustainable development.

If words were deeds, Africa could be sailing
through a conflict-free environment, since so many
statements, proposals, resolutions and action plans
have been put forward in this Chamber. The question
before us, therefore, is how much we have achieved as
a consequence of the numerous meetings and debates
that have been held and the resulting statements and
resolutions. I believe that the search for an answer to
that question underlines the significance of today's
debate.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains unresolved, despite the achievements
on the political front. The Security Council must act,
and act swiftly, if we are to avoid a genocidal and
humanitarian catastrophe in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo - the troubled region of Ituri.
While we welcome today's action by the Council in
authorizing the deployment of a multinational force to
Bunia, that, as specifically set out in the resolution
adopted earlier, is an interim measure. It is our hope
that the Secretary-General will be able to deploy a
more robust and effective force to effectively deal with
the situation on the ground so as to ensure the
restoration of lasting peace and stability in the whole of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The killings in
Bunia are a sad testimony to the inept mandate of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). Any
future mandate given to MONUC short of Chapter VII
of the Charter, as envisaged in the Lusaka Accord,
would fail the Congolese people, on whose behalf that
peace agreement was signed.

The commitment of the Government of the
United Republic Tanzania to the restoration of peace in
the Great Lakes region needs no elaboration. Tanzania
recently signed a MONUC status-of-mission agreement
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations as
part of our effort to strengthen and facilitate the
effective presence of MONUC in peace-building efforts
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The smooth transfer of power of the transitional
Government in Burundi was a matter of great
satisfaction for Tanzania. Tanzania thus welcomes the
decision of the Council to send a mission - including
a visit to Tanzania - to the region, which will allow
Council members, inter alia, to assess the situation on
the ground and to obtain first-hand information from
the parties. Hopefully, the visit will convince the
Council to take further concrete measures in advancing
the peace process and to seriously attempt to find a
lasting solution to end the conflicts raging in the region
and to achieve durable peace and stability.

In welcoming the forthcoming mission of the
Council to our region, I would like to take this
opportunity to assure you, Mr. President, of Tanzania's
unwavering commitment to, continued support for and
cooperation in efforts towards the restoration of lasting
peace in the Great Lakes region.

Finally, we would like to call upon the Council to
gather up the necessary political will and implement
fully all that it has committed itself to doing in Africa
through its several resolutions and presidential
statements. We have confidence that a determined
Security Council can bring results that will be in the
interests of lasting peace and stability in Africa and, in
particular, in the Great Lakes region.

