Mr. Celem (Turkey): The question of Afghanistan is
once again on the agenda of the Security Council. My
delegation welcomes this timely meeting as an opportunity
to focus the attention of the international community on the
serious and deteriorating situation in Afghanistan. My
country's close ties with Afghanistan and the Afghan
people are deep-rooted in history. I would go so far as to
say that a special relationship exists between my country
and Afghanistan.

We are deeply concerned about the recent turn of
events in Afghanistan. The encouraging changes that took
place on the Afghan political scene, after a long and painful
struggle for the liberation of the country, have gradually
been overtaken by developments that deepen our
pessimism. It is regrettable to note that the fratricidal
conflict continues unabated. The consequences of this
enormous human tragedy have affected large segments of
the population, devastated the entire country, and dashed
the hopes and expectations of millions of people both inside
and outside Afghanistan. Most discouraging of all is that
the military option still seems to be the course of action
preferred by the parties. These parties show no genuine
desire for a serious dialogue which, in our opinion, remains
the only way out of the present impasse. It does not take a
prophet to state that the continuation of this senseless civil
war will produce no winner. It will simply bring more
destruction to Afghanistan and further suffering to its
people. Today, the developments in Afghanistan are a
matter of grave concern and anguish for us because they
are rapidly acquiring a dimension which, through a possible
spillover effect, might threaten peace and stability in the
entire region, leading to a crisis situation of unmanageable
proportions.

The situation in Afghanistan clearly warrants the
continued concern of the international community, which

 

has identified the essential political elements for the
restoration of peace and a return to normalcy in
Afghanistan. These elements are contained in General
Assembly resolution 50/88 of 19 December 1995, adopted
by consensus. With this resolution, we, the Member
States, committed ourselves:

"(a) To respect Afghanistan's sovereignty and
territorial integrity, strictly to refrain from interfering
in the internal affairs of Afghanistan and to respect
the right of the Afghan people to determine their
own destiny;

(b) To take all steps necessary to promote peace in
Afghanistan, to stop the flow of arms and of
equipment related to arms production to all parties
and to put an end to this destructive conflict."
(resolution 50/88 B, para. 9)

At this stage, these two points constitute the
cornerstone of the international community's
responsibility towards Afghanistan.

We also fully support the statement made on 28
September 1996 by the President of the Security Council
on behalf of the Council, by which the Security Council
reaffirmed its commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan.

In these circumstances, what is most urgently needed
is an immediate and unconditional cessation of all armed
hostilities. That should be the principal objective of all
efforts by the international community aimed at bringing
peace to Afghanistan. Otherwise, it will not be possible to
envisage an effective process of national reconciliation. It
is time for the Security Council to give a new impetus to
the efforts of the United Nations Special Mission in
Afghanistan, headed by Mr. Holl, to bring together the
leaders in Afghan groups in order to negotiate an
immediate and durable ceasefire and to resolve their
internal political differences. This will facilitate national
reconciliation with a view to the restoration of a fully
representative, broad-based Government and also to the
start of the process of rehabilitation and reconstruction of
this country, as affirmed in the preambular part of
General Assembly resolution 50/88 B.
It should be stressed, however, that the primary
responsibility for bringing the devastating war in
Afghanistan to an end lies with the warring parties, as the
destiny of Afghanistan can and will be determined only

 

by the people of the country. We therefore appeal once
again to all sides in the Afghan conflict, in particular to
their leaders, to lay down their arms and agree on a
national reconciliation process conducive to the restoration
of Afghan statehood.

In this respect, my country attaches special importance
to the continuation of the constructive role the Organization
of the Islamic Conference (OIC) has been playing to forge
a common understanding among the parties in Afghanistan
and welcomes the recent decision of the Secretary-General
of the OIC, Mr. Hamid Algabid, to send another OIC
mission to Afghanistan. We understand that the efforts of
the OIC will be conducted, as in the past, in close
cooperation and coordination with the United Nations
Special Mission and will be complementary in nature to
those of the United Nations.

My country will continue to follow developments in
Afghanistan closely and remain ready to do whatever it can
to contribute to the normalization of the situation in this
brotherly country. As already declared by the Turkish
Foreign Minister at the General Assembly almost a
fortnight ago, we stand ready to hold a meeting in Turkey
with the participation of all parties to the Afghan conflict,
under the auspices of the United Nations, to help to bring
about reconciliation and a settlement based on the territorial
integrity, sovereignty, independence and unity of
Afghanistan.

