Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of today's briefing
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. We thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her briefing, which shed
light on the challenges that must be overcome to achieve
peace and stability in the region.

The stalemate in the Israeli-Palestinian crisis is a
source of serious concern for Cote d'Ivoire, owing to the
recurrent violence and the failure of the international
community's many peace initiatives. The outbreaks of
violence have, over the years, eroded the possibility of a
compromise without which lasting peace is not possible
and have contributed to the gradual deterioration of the
security and humanitarian situation.

My country has always advocated the peaceful
settlement of disputes through dialogue and calls
again on all parties to give peace a chance, as they did
when negotiating the Oslo Accords. In this regard, the
international community must be relentless in pursuing
mediation efforts in order to achieve the unconditional
resumption of negotiations among the various parties.

Cote d'Ivoire would like to reaffirm its commitment
to the security of the State of Israel and the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
and, consequently, its support for the two-State solution
and the peaceful coexistence of two States based on
the 1967 borders. The resumption of dialogue between
Israelis and Palestinians therefore appears to be much
more than a necessity: it is above all a political and
security emergency, the achievement of which would
help to prevent further outbreaks of violence.

As with the current political impasse and its
security consequences, the humanitarian situation in
the Palestinian territories remains a matter of concern.
Youth unemployment, the depletion of medicine, the
lack of water and electricity, particularly in hospitals
and other public facilities, and insufficient fuel reserves
for the desalination of sea water that supplies Gaza City
are all vulnerabilities that can push segments of the
population to despair and radicalization. This situation
could deteriorate further if the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), which provides assistance to more
than 3 million Palestinians, does not regain a level
of financing that will enable it to meet the needs of
populations in distress. My country therefore welcomes
the holding of the annual donor conference, on 25 June
in New York, and endorses the Secretary-General's call
for resource mobilization to close the approximately
$211 million deficit in UNRWA's annual budget.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its conviction
that dialogue remains the only path to a lasting
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian crisis. It therefore
urges the international community to do more to bring
both sides back to the negotiating table with a View to
achieving a compromise that can help to restore lasting
peace and stability in the region.

