Mr. Babaa (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Sir, for presiding over the work of
the Security Council and for this excellent and well-timed
initiative, which we hope will prompt the Security
Council to give serious attention to the problems of the
African continent. I must also express my appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his practical proposals, which
have provided a framework for this interactive debate.

The partnership between the United Nations and the
international community in Africa must be an effective
one based on equality, not on hegemony and exploitation.
The causes of the problems of Africa are well known and
documented in United Nations reports, prominent among
which are those of the Secretary-General. What the
continent and its peoples and countries really need is the
mobilization of the material resources necessary to solve
these problems.

African problems are common to all African
countries. Among the most significant of these are the
foreign-debt crisis, poverty, illiteracy and disease, in
particular HIV/AIDS. If poverty is a consequence of war,
war is also a consequence of poverty. Hence, the
eradication of poverty is one of the best ways to eliminate
one of the major causes of conflict in Africa. If these
problems are to be solved, vast financial and human
resources must be made available. Without such
resources, statements about the United Nations partnership
with Africa will remain empty rhetoric that cannot be
implemented, regardless of any resolutions or initiatives
the Council may adopt.

 

It has therefore become important to establish a United
Nations fund for financing African development and
reconstruction, and to promote effective coordination
between all the various international and regional agencies,
United Nations specialized agencies and financial
institutions working in Africa. In this context, I wish to
stress the special responsibility of the countries that
colonized and exploited the continent for many decades.
They are obligated to pay compensation for their lengthy
exploitation of the peoples of the continent and must
contribute generously to the proposed fund. We must also
enable Africa to obtain fair prices for its raw materials,
imported very cheaply by the industrialized countries.
Africa is also entitled to have an increase in the rates of its
raw materials equivalent to the price rates for imported
manufactured goods.
I turn now to the role of the Security Council. The
Council can play an important role in establishing stability
and peace in Africa by supporting efforts and implementing
resolutions agreed upon by Africans themselves in order to
achieve peace, settle current conflicts and prevent their
resumption. Such measures include the following:

First, it must provide political support by adopting
resolutions promoting the initiatives of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and subregional organizations. The
Council has assumed this role but with unnecessary
hesitation and caution.

Secondly, it must provide financial and human support
for African peacekeeping operations, which should, in fact,
be fully financed. As regional and international
peacekeeping operations, they should be the responsibility
of the United Nations, the Security Council in particular.

Thirdly, it must provide and finance peacekeeping
training for African States so as to strengthen their
capacities in that field. Such training should not be
relegated to bilateral relations.

Fourthly, it must support the OAU Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, pursue
consultations with the OAU on settling conflicts in Africa
and support its initiatives and efforts to settle disputes, both
physically and morally.

Fifthly, it must be prepared to face many risks and
obstacles. The United Nations, the international community
in general and donor countries should be willing to accept
a minimum level of risk. The United Nations cannot wait
for peace to be achieved in any given region before it
participates through missions and forces. A United
Nations intervention at that stage would be meaningless.
Why are we still waiting for forces to be deployed in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo? Is the Security
Council waiting for peace to reign there before approving
the deployment of United Nations forces, or for the re-
emergence of conflict there?

Sixthly, in addressing African conflicts, it must
employ the same means and standards it uses to settle
disputes in other continents, such as Europe and Asia.
Why has the United Nations allowed Somalia to burn and
tear itself apart without any intervention other than the
issuance of occasional statements?

It is very important to send peacekeeping operations
to Africa, but the Security Council's members should
occasionally go to Africa themselves and hold their
meetings in proximity to the conflict regions in order to
gain a clearer understanding of the various dimensions
and aspects of the problems of the African continent. The
peoples of Africa look up to the Council in the hope that
it will now adopt decisive resolutions that eschew limited
national interests and that can truly solve the continent's
problems, maintain its peace and security and foster its
economic development and prosperity. If the Council does
so, it will help Africa emerge from its dilemma and give
the best gift to the peoples of that continent: hope for the
next century.

I thank you once again, Sir, for convening this
meeting. The contribution of the United Nations and the
Security Council to settling African conflicts and solving
African problems requires a change in perceptions of
Africa, an improvement in the traditional methods and the
adoption of new ones.

