Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay is especially grateful for the convening of
this debate. Efforts to improve the working methods
of any entity with a view to making it more efficient
and transparent are always welcome and should be an
ongoing objective, especially as we are talking about the
organ with primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security.

We have always maintained that improving the
Security Council's working methods is a valid and
necessary exercise. The Council needs improvements
that will make it more transparent, inclusive, effective
and accountable for its actions - improvements that
cannot be postponed in the times we live in. This is both
feasible and necessary, even in the short term, so long
as the political will is there, as the progress made in
previous years has shown, including in the recent work
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions chaired by Portugal.

There is much room for improvement in the
Council's working methods. The recommendations
contained in draft resolution A/66/L.42/Rev.2 are a
good example of what can and should be done. Most
require no substantive modifications and yet would still
have positive effects both on practical issues and on
outside perceptions ofthe Council. Others, such as those
relating to the use of the veto, will undoubtedly require
a thorough debate, particularly among the permanent
members, but we believe that debate is inevitable.

As a country that is deeply committed to the
peacekeeping system of the United Nations, Uruguay
attaches particular importance to all issues relating to
the establishment and development of peacekeeping
operation mandates, and especially to the interaction and
transparency that should characterize relations between
the Council and troop-contributing countries, which is
not only an end in itself but also a way of enhancing
the mandates' effectiveness. Uruguay acknowledges
that we have seen significant improvements in this area
in recent years, but we believe that they have not been
consolidated and that their implementation has been
uneven. Much remains to be done in this area.

It is important that we not lose momentum on this
matter. We hope this debate will be a catalyst for the
prevailing desire of the majority in the United Nations
and the international community as a whole for this
organ to be more effective, transparent, and capable of
rising to today's complex challenges. Uruguay is ready
to play a proactive and constructive role in those efforts
for the benefit of all.

