Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank High Representative
Inzko for his briefing. I also commend him for the
diligent manner in which he has carried out his mandate.

Nigeria notes with concern the limited progress
made in implementing the Dayton Peace Agreement, the
frequent calls of the President and officials of Republika
Srpska for secession from Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and the public attacks against key State institutions.
We share the concern of the High Representative over
statements made by public figures. Promoting secession
could have a destabilizing effect on the country. Such
divisive rhetoric is inimical to national cohesion and
could indeed have negative consequences for the peace
and stability of the region.

Another threat to the cohesion of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the use of constitutional blocking
mechanisms at the State level to prevent the country
from making progress, and then exploiting that to
justify calls for the dissolution of the country. Political
leaders, especially at the State level, must understand
that the country's Constitution precludes the possibility
of secession. We urge them to refrain from calling for
the dissolution of the country. We support efforts to
strengthen the State at the national level while preserving
the rights and prerogatives of all communities.

We note with concern the other challenges to the
General Framework Agreement for Peace, mentioned
in the report before the Council (S/2014/314), including
the blocking of the functioning of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's central institutions, challenges to the
competencies of those institutions, challenges to the
single economic space in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
challenges to national judicial institutions. We urge
political leaders in Republika Srpska to cooperate with
the central Government and refrain from taking steps
that would challenge the constitutional authority of the
central Government and relevant central institutions. It
is necessary for leaders at the State level to appreciate
the limits of power at that level.

We call for more support for the revised strategy
for the implementation of annex VII of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, which addresses
issues of non-discrimination, non-segregation and
inclusiveness. Nigeria would like to see all the citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina accorded equal status
across the country regardless of their ethnicity. We
therefore urge political leaders to refrain from adopting
residency laws at the entity level that are solely within
the competence of the central Government and do not
comply with the provisions of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace.
We are pleased to note that more active engagement
by citizens has led to greater accountability on the part
of the Government and has encouraged the political
class to refocus its energies on serving the interests
of citizens. As the High Representative said in his
briefing, that has the potential of deepening democracy
and fostering good governance in the country.

As Bosnia and Herzegovina approaches the
general elections in October, we are concerned that
the Constitution grants only ethnic Bosniaks, Serbs
and Croats the right to contest in presidential and
parliamentary elections. That curbs the political rights
of the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina who do not
belong to those three ethnic groups and effectively
shuts them out of elective office. In the interest of
inclusiveness, we would like to see that law changed
so that all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina can
participate freely as candidates in elections.

