Mr. Zarif: The report before the Council
(S/2011/514) details the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) from 16 April to 15 July 2011. As the
Council is aware, in the days following the end of the
reporting period - on 25 July, to be exact - an
attempt by the Kosovo authorities to take control of
Gates 1 and 31 on the administrative boundary line led
former Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Alain Le Roy to brief a closed session of
2

the Council on 28 July on the situation in northern
Kosovo. While the situation has improved somewhat
since then, it remains tense and unpredictable.

The report before the Council paints a hopeful
picture of the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade
as of the end of the reporting period. However, the
situation changed in the days immediately thereafter,
beginning with the postponement of the sixth session
of the Pristina-Belgrade dialogue due, inter alia, to
continuing disagreements between the parties on the
issue of Kosovo customs stamps. On 20 July, Pristina
announced the imposition of what it described as
"reciprocal measures" on Serbian goods, effectively
putting them under an embargo.

On 25 July, with no advance warning or
coordination with the international presences, the
Kosovo authorities attempted to deploy members of the
Kosovo Special Police Unit (ROSU) to the two
northern boundary crossing points where Kosovo
customs have not been able to operate. The Kosovo
Prime Minister, Mr. Hashim Thaci, explained that the
purpose of such action was to establish the rule of law,
including Kosovo customs controls at the northern
gates, as well as to enforce the embargo on goods
coming from Serbia.

I will briefly recap the events that followed.
ROSU succeeded in reaching Gate 31, where one
officer was wounded as a result of an improvised
explosive device, but it was unable to deploy at Gate 1
due to roadblocks set up by northern Kosovo Serbs
soon after the operation started. Due to the presence of
those roadblocks, ROSU was unable either to move
ahead or to retreat. The Kosovo Force (KFOR)
responded by deploying eight of its 15 companies to
northern Kosovo and, on 26 July, the KFOR
Commander facilitated an agreement on the withdrawal
of all ROSU units from northern Kosovo. A gunfight
erupted during the ROSU movement that resulted in
the death of a ROSU officer.

In a separate incident, the facilities at Gate 1
were torched by masked perpetrators. Both incidents
are currently the subject of a priority criminal
investigation that is being conducted by the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). The
torching of Gate 1 led KFOR to declare both gates
military protected zones, under the control of KFOR
troops.
11-48292

Following further mediation by the KFOR
Commander, a common understanding emerged that,
inter alia, KFOR will be responsible for the gates at
least until 15 September. That understanding is
intended to manage the situation until Belgrade and
Pristina resume the European Union-facilitated
dialogue in Brussels, currently scheduled for
2 September.

It is hoped that, when the dialogue resumes, the
parties will resolve their long-standing commercial
dispute and find a mutually agreeable way forward. In
the meantime, EULEX has increased police patrols in
northern Kosovo, especially in multi-ethnic areas, and
maintains a strong presence at the Mitrovice/Mitrovica
District Court, which remains a symbol of discord and
contention.

Although the situation was contained and further
loss of life prevented, we should note that the events
that took place in northern Kosovo last month were the
most serious security incidents since the violence in
2008, which claimed the life of an international police
officer and resulted in scores of injuries. They serve as
a stark reminder that the issues underlying such
incidents remain unresolved and constitute a serious
threat to Kosovo's peace and stability. It remains
essential, therefore, that all sides refrain from any
unilateral action that could escalate existing tensions.

We must all work together to avoid any further
deterioration of the situation and allow progress to be
made through dialogue, as expected of responsible and
trustworthy interlocutors. The leadership in both
Pristina and Belgrade has a responsibility to set a
public example and to demonstrate, in practical terms,
their confidence in the dialogue as a means of
resolving disputes, as opposed to unilateral action.

While tensions in the North, thankfully, did not
spill over into the rest of Kosovo, we nevertheless saw
an increase in cases of intimidation of Kosovo Serbs
and attacks on their property in communities south of
the Iber/Ibar River. We are of the belief that the recent
troubles must be a wake-up call to all that rebuilding
trust and promoting inter-community cooperation and
understanding cannot be further postponed. During the
crisis, the language and tone of the messages
originating both from those speaking for Pristina and
from those speaking on behalf of Belgrade were too
often messages of domination and division, and too
seldom of cooperation and inclusion. This kind of
11-48292

public discourse only exacerbates the deep-seated
mistrust and animosity that still exist between the
majority population and the Kosovo Serb minority,
particularly in the North. There is a pressing need for
leaders on both sides to speak the language of peaceful
coexistence and reconciliation and to accompany their
words with concrete actions. UNMIK has been
conveying this message clearly and widely.

Fractured inter-community relations seriously
risk undermining the considerable investments made
by the international community towards advancing
Kosovo's overall institutional, economic and social
development. UNMIK, as well as United Nations
funds, agencies and programmes, which we refer to as
the "United Nations Kosovo team", and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
are taking concrete steps to increase reconciliation
efforts. Our staff in northern Kosovo are working daily
with the communities to clarify misunderstandings,
allay anxieties, and mediate, as necessary, including
between the communities and other members of the
international community. We also continue to liaise
with the political leadership in both Pristina and
Belgrade with a view to maintaining the confidence of
all sides.

The United Nations Kosovo team's current
common plan is focused on the themes of inclusion,
participation and accountability, takes advantage of the
United Nations Kosovo team's quality as a neutral
partner, and works with Government structures as well
as civil society, both north and south of the Iber/Ibar
River. In this regard, I wish to note that the United
Nations Kosovo team has suffered a decrease in its
funding of approximately 40 per cent. At the same
time, interventions by the major donors do not focus on
either conflict prevention or reconciliation.
Consequently, I would appeal to the international
community to continue to support the work the United
Nations Kosovo team is doing to rebuild trust and
foster reconciliation.

Before moving on to other issues, I wish to
highlight another matter that concerns northern
Kosovo, and which is threatening the livelihood of
some 3,500 employees and their families and risking
further damage to the relationship between the Kosovo
authorities and the Kosovo Serb community in the
North.
3

UNMIK has learned that the Kosovo Tax
Administration has seized bank accounts belonging to
the socially owned enterprise Trepca, a mining
company that is the single largest employer in northern
Kosovo. The reason alleged, but entirely
unsubstantiated by the Tax Administration, is that there
are tax liabilities owed by Trepca. Whatever the
reason, however, the action by the Tax Administration
is in clear violation of applicable laws and procedures.
Consequently, UNMIK has addressed the relevant
court, requesting an immediate reversal of this seizure
of bank accounts and the return of all monies seized.

We are also concerned that the effects of this
action could be perceived by the population of northern
Kosovo as a deliberate attempt to target their well-
being at a time when it is imperative that the Kosovo
authorities clearly and credibly convey their stated
concern for the welfare of all those who inhabit the
territory of Kosovo - North and South.

A loud and clear expression of that concern may
also allow us to see greater progress in the area of
returns, which, as reported by the Secretary-General,
remains very slow. According to figures released by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the total number of voluntary returns to
Kosovo between April and July was 333, of whom all
but eight are members of minority communities. As we
have repeatedly reported, returns are impeded both by
the lack of economic prospects for returnees and by the
lack of reconciliation, on which the issue of the
missing persons bears heavily.

Today, 30 August, marks the International Day of
the Disappeared. Regrettably, during the reporting
period there was no significant progress to report in the
clarification of the fates of local missing persons. The
number of those still missing from the Kosovo conflict
and its immediate aftermath still stands at over 1,800. I
therefore renew the call on all those who can help to
clarify the fates of the missing to pass on relevant
information to the International Committee of the Red
Cross so that the surviving family members can learn
about the fates of their loved ones and achieve closure.

I would like to update the Council on two issues.
The first is UNMIK's facilitation of external relations,
starting with the Central European Free Trade
Agreement (CEFTA). As I mentioned at the outset, on
20 July the Kosovo authorities imposed an embargo on
shipments of goods bearing stamps of the Serbian tax

and customs administration. While Belgrade has
initiated a dispute resolution procedure to address the
issue under CEFTA, a consensus has been facilitated
between Belgrade and Pristina that they will deal with
the matter in the next dialogue session. In consultation
with Belgrade, Pristina and all relevant stakeholders,
UNMIK is ensuring coordination between the dialogue
process and the CEFTA procedure. The common,
acknowledged goal is a swift and successful resolution
of the issue.

While the issue of UNMIK's facilitation of
Kosovo's external relations remains a delicate issue for
Pristina, we have noted a more pragmatic approach to
the matter by the Kosovo authorities and, in this
context, we particularly welcome Pristina's decision to
resume participation in meetings of the Sarajevo-based
Regional Cooperation Council.

Finally, I wish to update the Council on the steps
taken by EULEX to investigate the allegations
contained in Council of Europe Special Rapporteur
Marty's report on inhuman treatment of people and
illicit trafficking in human organs in Kosovo. EULEX
has informed us that the members of the special
investigative task force that will conduct an
investigation into the issue have been recruited, that
facilities and equipment in Brussels have been secured,
and that the task force is expected to begin its work in
September.

In closing, on behalf of all UNMIK staff, I wish
to thank the Council for its continued support and to
reiterate our assurance that we will continue to
implement the mandate with which it have entrusted
us.

