Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President,
and to thank Her Excellency Mrs. Marsudi, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia, for
convening today's open debate of the Security Council
on the theme "Investing in peace: improving safety and
performance of United Nations peacekeepers."

This subject is becoming increasingly important,
especially with the momentum created by the
Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
The primary aim of the initiative is to enhance the
effectiveness of the peacekeeping system in responding
to changing operational environments by renewing
the shared commitment of all actors, namely, Member
States, the Security Council, host countries, troop- and
police-contributing countries, regional partners and
financial contributors.

Undoubtedly, there is an important correlation
between providing training and capacity-building for
peacekeepers and their contribution to strengthening
the security, safety and performance of peacekeepers.
At the same time, we must recognize that training and
capacity-building are just two enabling factors along
with other factors. In addition to the operational aspects,
there are political aspects that should be recognized,
particularly that peacekeeping ultimately is a tool to
support the political resolution of conflicts and that the
enhanced political impact of peacekeeping operations
can provide an environment that is conducive to
sustainable peace and stability.

The training and capacity-building of troops in
the absence of clearly defined and verifiable mandates
that include priorities and adequate resources will not
produce the results we seek. That is why it is important
to adopt a comprehensive approach to addressing
the issue of the security, safety and performance of
peacekeepers, one that addresses the relevant political
and operational aspects, starting from designing the
mandate pertaining to a peacekeeping operation, to its
renewal and review and ending with an exit strategy
that includes drawdown and the complete withdrawal
of the operation.

In that context, I would like to highlight that
United Nations peacekeeping reform initiatives focus
on enhancing capabilities despite the fact that many of
those initiatives - such as former Secretary-General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali's An Agenda for Peace, the
Brahimi report of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations (see S/2000/809), the report of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015446) and the Secretary-General's own Action for
Peacekeeping initiative - have all covered a wide array
of peacekeeping dimensions that are not limited to the
technical and operational aspects. They all stressed the
importance of the need for a comprehensive political
strategy and a clear vision to achieve sustainable peace.

Egypt has always been committed to enhancing the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations and has always
been one of the largest police- and troop-contributing
countries. Egypt was also one of the first countries to
support the initiative of the Secretary-General on the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations. Egypt has also actively
contributed to implementing that initiative. My country
organized the high-level regional meeting on enhancing
the performance of peacekeeping operations that took
place in Cairo in November 2018. That conference
served as a forum for major African and Arab troop-
contributing countries to exchange views on this very
important issue.

The conference also produced Cairo Roadmap for
Enhancing the Performance ofPeacekeeping Operations
from Mandate to Exit, which represents a practical
and balanced operational framework to implement
the initiative of the Secretary-General. The Roadmap
places peacekeeping operations in a comprehensive
and shared framework that brings together all actors
in an objective and balanced manner. It includes
the Security Council, the Secretariat and Member
States - whether they be financial contributors or
troop- and police-contributing countries - as well as
peacekeeping mission host countries. The first phases
of mission design through to the fulfilment of the
mission mandate are included. The Cairo Roadmap
also provides certain practical recommendations for
all actors concerning training and capacity building.
Allow me to highlight some specific points.

First, Member States and the Secretariat should
operationalize the light coordination mechanism in
order to assess training needs and adapt predeployment
training to the contexts and the operational environments
of the tasks to be performed.

Secondly, Member States and the Secretariat
should develop training materials for predeployment
and in-mission training in order to raise awareness and
learn from previous experiences.

Thirdly, Member States should explore funding
mechanisms to satisfy the specific peacekeeping
training needs. The Secretariat should identify the
financial gaps in the provision of training and capacity-
building.

During the Peacekeeping Ministerial held on
29 March, Egypt made pledges in the areas of training
and capacity-building. The most important was its
pledge to organize a train-the-trainers workshop on
providing civilians with comprehensive protection, to
be held at the Cairo International Centre for Conflict
Resolution, Peacekeeping, and Peacebuilding.
Arrangements are currently under way with the
Secretariat to hold the training workshop during the
second half of this year, which will include the major
troop-contributing countries.

Egypt also committed to provide a training
session for African military observers, as well
as a train-the-trainers session on fighting sexual
exploitation and abuse, in accordance with the treaties
and policies adopted by the United Nations and the
African Union. Those trainings would complement past
trainings organized by the Cairo Centre this year, with
the possibility of expanding the scope ofthat training in
future. In addition to providing mobile training teams
to provide in-mission training on the issues of fighting
sexual exploitation and abuse, we are also committed,
through Cairo Centre, to translate into Arabic training
materials on the protection of civilians.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the presidency
once again for convening this important meeting at a
highly critical and challenging time for peacekeeping
operations. This requires all of us to work collectively
to make peacekeeping operations more fit for their
purpose and better able to achieve their desired goal.

