We thank the Acting Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), Stephanie Williams, for her briefing on the situation in Libya and the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, Juergen Schulz, for his report on the work of that subsidiary body. To our regret, we see how the trend of a protracted armed conflict is being consolidated in Libya. Clashes continue in various parts of the country. Unfortunately, the level of distrust between Libyan parties is so high that it is virtually impossible to enforce a ceasefire despite the calls made by many, including the Secretary-General. Humanitarian pauses introduced separately by the Government of National Accord and the Libyan National Army were not respected. The threat of coronavirus has become another challenging issue in Libya, especially given the grave humanitarian situation on the ground and basically destroyed health-care system. The parties continue to exchange aggressive rhetoric. At the same time, Mr. Agila Saleh, Speaker of the Libyan House of Representatives, called for a cessation of hostilities in connection with the holy month of Ramadan. We note that this statement contains a number of constructive proposals on how to pull Libya out of the crisis. Among them are the creation of unified bodies of power on the basis of proportional geographical representation, the development of a new constitution and the holding of presidential and parliamentary elections. We believe that these ideas could form a basis for political discussions in the framework of the comprehensive Libyan settlement process. However, so far there has been no progress in military consultations in the 5+5 format or on the political track. We believe that the early appointment of a new Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya can help break the deadlock in the political process. This issue is long overdue. We are convinced that further armed conflict will bring more disastrous consequences for Libya and its people. We urge all parties to immediately cease hostilities and resume dialogue under the auspices of the United Nations on all three tracks of the settlement: military, political and economic. We continue efforts in that regard, including through participation in follow-up meetings of the Berlin Conference and communication with the parties concerned. At the same time, we proceed from the principle that we have repeatedly voiced - that any decision and recommendation must be agreed in advance by the Libyans. Otherwise, we will never succeed. We would like to remind the Council of its adoption of resolution 2510 (2020). I note that Russia abstained in the voting, not because we were whimsical or capricious, but rather - as we said - because without involving the protagonists, the resolution would fail. In my explanation of vote on that resolution (see S/PV.8719), I said publicly that if I was wrong and the resolution worked, I would be the first to acknowledge it. I regret to say that I was, unfortunately, right. We are concerned about reports of ongoing violations of the arms embargo in Libya. We believe that the supply of arms and mercenaries should be stopped. That practice has continued in Libya from the very start of the conflict in 2011, when Libyan statehood was destroyed as a result of NATO's illegal aggression. We are pushing Libyan parties to pursue dialogue and search for compromises. We are closely following preparations for the launch of a European Union military operation off the Libyan coast. We once again emphasize that this operation must be in accordance with the mandate of resolution 2292 (2016). Any modification must be subject to Council review. I have listened to some allegations of Russian participation in the Libyan conflict. I will reserve my right to say a few words about it today after all speakers have spoken. We hear a lot of speculation about so-called Russian mercenaries. The United Kingdom representative went as far as to say that they are responsible for all the troubles and mishaps in Libya. That is an interesting way to shift responsibility. I remind the Council that the primary reason for all of Libya's troubles today is NATO's aggression, which destroyed Libyan statehood. Instead, today some prefer to miss the point and pretend to not hear. I now move on to the report of the Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011). First of all, we are dismayed that the confidential report of the Panel of Experts was leaked to the press. This is not the first time that a report of a sanctions committee Panel of Experts has been leaked. We demand an investigation of the incident by the Secretariat. We are still studying the report. However, our first reading of the text allows us to draw certain conclusions. To begin with, there is no concept of a private military company in Russian legislation. The report incorrectly interprets and arbitrarily uses excerpts from Russian law. For the most part, the report is based on unverified or clearly fabricated data and is aimed at discrediting Russia's policy in Libya. Experts use sources of dubious quality that have a direct interest in the Libyan conflict. In the report a significant number - not just one or two - of Internet links are not working. That can be verified by anyone who ventures to do so. That is not accidental. The reliability of the information, particularly the portion based on so- called confidential discussions, is impossible to prove. Much of the data, especially regarding the Russian citizens mentioned in the report, is simply unfounded. The Russian people allegedly fighting in Libya have not left our country. The so-called wounded are quite healthy. This information is all publicly available and verifiable. It is worth noting that the lists selected by the experts were copied from the notorious Ukrainian database Myrotvorets, or "Peacemaker". I reiterate that there are no Russian servicemen in Libya. We are aware, however, that there is a host of foreign military personnel in the country, and not just foreign terrorist fighters. If there is great interest, we are willing to disclose the names of the countries involved. Council members would be surprised to hear them. A lot of mistakes or deliberate falsifications have been made regarding weapons. In particular, it is not clear why the drone is attributed to Russia, since its manufacturing characteristics point to one of Russia's neighbours. In the same vein, equipment that has long been in Libya is misidentified as newly exported from Russia. Another fabrication in the report is photos from Syria passed off as Libyan landscapes. Another story tells of Syrian militants transported to the west of Libya to support the Government of National Accord. Deliberately or not, the facts are turned inside out, as the report turns mercenaries associated with terrorist organizations into fighters in the Libyan National Army. These are only the most apparent mistakes in the report. To us it is clear that the report is intended to mislead the international community about Russia's policy in Libya. We will provide a more detailed assessment of the Panel's findings when the time is right.
