Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to present the 90-day report of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), in accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of that
resolution. The report covers the period from 12 June to
12 September 2012, during which time the Committee
held no meetings but conducted its work using the silent
procedure envisioned in paragraph 15 of the guidelines
for the conduct of its work.

I would first like to congratulate the Panel of Experts,
which was formally reappointed by the Secretary-
General on 5 July following the adoption of resolution
2049 (2012) on 7 June, by which the Security Council
decided to extend the Panel's mandate until 9 June 2013.
In accordance with paragraph 3 of resolution 2049
(2012), the Panel submitted its programme of work to
the Committee on 9 July. The programme covers the
Panel's work over the period 2012-2013, including plans
for consultations with Member States, inspections
of reported incidents, outreach and reporting to the
Committee.

As mentioned in my previous report to the Council
(see S/PV.6786), the Committee, with the participation
of the Panel of Experts and the Secretariat, held an
open briefing on 9 July, in which the mandates and the
work of the Committee and the Panel were presented.
Discussions focused in particular on activities relating
to consultations, outreach and inspections, as well as on
ways to strengthen collaboration with Member States at
the national and regional levels.

The Committee has received a number of
communications relating to the implementation of
the relevant Security Council measures, as well as
to requests for exemptions pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). The Committee granted exemptions to
two separate requests by a Member State by which it
authorized access to certain economic resources to
the benefit of the Atomic Energy Organization of the
Islamic Republic of Iran for the purchase of chemicals
and other items exclusively intended for the use of
development of radiopharmaceutical products for
medical or humanitarian purposes, in accordance with
relevant provisions of resolution 1737 (2006).

The Committee also authorized an exemption from
the travel ban on a designated Iranian national who had
been invited to attend the General Conference of the
International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna from
15 to 23 September 2012.

On 26 June, the Committee received a
communication from a Member State in response to
its request for additional information in connection
with the previously reported inspection and seizure
of a shipping container of arms on board the vessel
MS. Finland.

On 23 August, the Committee received another
communication from a Member State on the arrest on
15 August of four individuals allegedly involved in
illegal trafficking of special valves for use in a heavy
water reactor in the Islamic Republic of Iran. In that
regard, the Committee welcomed the invitation from
the Member State for the Panel to visit the concerned
State to discuss the case, including issues related to the
arrest, with the relevant authorities.

With regard to the earlier reported incident related
to the inspection and seizure, on 15 March 2011, of
three shipping containers of arms and arms-related
materiel on board the M/V Victoria, the Committee is
continuing its efforts, following the inspection reports
of the Panel on the contents of the three containers,
to examine the case with the assistance of the Panel
and is seeking full cooperation from Member States in
gathering information related to the incident.

One State sought clarifications from the Committee
on whether the supply of certain specified items would
contribute to the development of technologies in
support of proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities in
the Islamic Republic of Iran. In response to that request,
the Committee granted authorization for the export of
the specified items.

The Committee also answered a written query from
a Member State seeking additional information about a
company registered in the Islamic Republic of Iran that
was one of the prospective bidders in a construction
project to build a hydropower plant on its territory. The
Committee was able to confirm that, at that juncture, it
did not foresee any problems for the Member State to
proceed with its evaluation of the shortlisted bidders for
the construction project.

In following up on a written query from another
Member State concerning the export of machinery
equipment to an Iranian company, the Committee is
still awaiting additional information from the Member
State in order to provide an appropriate response.

The Committee is still considering a general query
from an international organization seeking its advice
and clarification on whether a proposed technical
assistance programme that the organization intends
to carry out within the Islamic Republic of Iran could
violate applicable sanctions.

During the reporting period, the Committee
received three communications from a Member State
informing it of the deliveries of materials for the
Bushehr nuclear power plant in the Islamic Republic
of Iran.

Regarding the Panel's activities, the Committee
welcomed the invitation by the United Arab Emirates
for the Panel to assist the relevant authorities in their
inquiry relevant to the intercepted items that were
reported to the Committee on 21 May.

I am happy to note that, during the reporting
period, the Committee received a communication from
Uruguay transmitting its report on the implementation
of resolution 1929 (2010).

