Mr. Mawe (Ireland): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing today's debate
on this important subject. I would also like to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his briefing
and to record our appreciation to Christophe Deloire
and Mariane Pearl, who today have provided important
personal insights into this issue.
Ireland aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.

Journalists are key cogs in the civil society machine,
and a free media has been a powerful force for positive
change and democratic transformation everywhere.
However, at present we are witnessing unprecedented
infringements on journalists' freedom to do their jobs.
Being a journalist, particularly in conflict situations,
has rarely been more dangerous.

Too many Governments continue to use repressive
and out-dated laws to target individual journalists and
activists. Intimidation and violence, assaults, arbitrary
detention and even death are just some of the dangers
faced byjournalists. Where that occurs, basic freedoms,
such as freedom of expression, freedom of association
and freedom of peaceful assembly, have been violated.
We need to take such violations very seriously, as
they reflect and frequently foretell greater violations
of human rights, ultimately leading, if unchecked, to
outbreaks of conflict.

All States have a duty to respect, protect and
promote human rights. It is crucial that journalists
and other media actors, as part of civil society, have
the space in which to do their jobs free from violence
and intimidation. A free and independent media is
indispensable for democracy.

Supporting civil society space has been one of
Ireland's key commitments for our membership of the
Human Rights Council. In the light of that, Ireland
supported resolution 27/5, on the safety ofjournalists,
adopted at the twenty-seventh session of the Council,
last September. The resolution urges States to promote
a safe and enabling environment for journalists to
perform their work independently. Earlier, at the
Council's twenty-fourth session, Ireland took the lead
in presenting and negotiating resolution 24/21 - along
with Chile, Japan, Sierra Leone and Tunisia - entitled
"Civil society space: creating and maintaining, in law
and in practice, a safe and enabling environment".

In those resolutions we remind States of their
obligation to respect and fully protect the civil, political,
economic, social and cultural rights of all individuals,
including the rights to the freedom of expression and
opinion and to assemble peacefully and to associate
freely, both online and offline. If those basic freedoms
are respected, citizens can exercise their democratic
rights, including that of dissent, and meaningfully
contribute to the governance of their State.

Ireland's policy for international development,
entitled One World, One Future, recognizes the
powerful role that a diverse, pluralistic and professional
media environment can have in providing access to
information and debate and in ensuring the enjoyment
of the right to freedom of expression as recognized in
international human rights law. The policy highlights
the important contribution media can make in holding
Governments and others to account and includes a
commitment to support initiatives that can strengthen
their role in key partner countries.

In Tanzania, for example, support is provided
to the Tanzania Media Fund, which provides grants
to media professionals and institutions in order to
improve journalism standards, including investigative
journalism. In Zambia, support is provided to the Media
Institute of Southern Africa to support community
radio stations, a source of over 80 per cent onambians'
current affairs information and an important tool for
enhancing domestic accountability.

The World Press Freedom Index reports that no
journalists were killed in these countries in 2014. Other
countries were not so safe, however, with 99 media
personnel killed worldwide in 2014. If the general
trend continues, all but nine of these crimes will go
unpunished. This is not good enough, and Ireland
underlines the need to end the widespread impunity
associated with attacks onjournalists. The investigation,
prosecution, conviction and punishment of such attacks
make an essential contribution to prevention by
deterring would-be attackers. Unfortunately, attacks
onjournalists are often committed at the State's behest
or with its tacit consent, exacerbating the problem of
impunity.

Ireland is appalled by the terrorist attacks on
freedom of speech, including the murder ofjournalists
by groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham.
There needs to be accountability for all such actions,
including where necessary and appropriate through
referral to the International Criminal Court. In Ireland's
case, we are working closely with our partners in the
EU and through the United Nations to coordinate our
efforts and to strengthen the tools at our disposal.

In conclusion, Irelandjoins with our EU colleagues
in encouraging the Secretary-General to continue to
include the issue of protection of journalists in armed
conflicts in his reports on the protection of civilians.
We also encourage the Security Council to address
the protection of journalists, including through public
statements, reporting requirements for peacekeeping
missions and the strengthening of mandates.
