Mr. Zarif: Since my last briefing to the Council
in August (see S/PV.7026), the implementation of
the 19 April first agreement on principles governing
the normalization of relations between Pristina and
Belgrade has passed an important milestone. It has
entered a critical and broadly more challenging phase.
The milestone was reached through the extensive
preparations and successful conduct of Kosovo-wide
municipal elections on 3 November.

Despite the brief window opened for the preparation
of these elections, a significant number of Kosovo
municipalities recorded substantially higher turnout
than was the case in the most recent local elections,
held in 2009. For example, turnout in the Serb majority
municipalities south of the Ibar River was far higher
than during previous local elections over the past
decade. In municipalities north of the river, turnout
was comparatively lower, yet significant, despite a
frequently contentious atmosphere and numerous
practical challenges.

On election day, serious problems occurred in
northern Mitrovica, which unfortunately drew the
greatest part of attention from the international media.
Towards the end of the day, masked persons forced
their way into three major polling centres and managed
to destroy or otherwise contaminate many boxes of cast
ballots. Instances of voter intimidation and the stoning
of some vehicles belonging to the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
was also witnessed. These reprehensible criminal acts
were universally condemned by local and international
actors. A full investigation into the break-ins was
launched by the Kosovo Police, with the support of
EULEX.

On 6 November, a principal-level meeting of the
political dialogue was held in Brussels by European
Union (EU) High Representative Catherine Ashton
in order to jointly assess the situation. Taking into
account the irreparably damaged integrity of the
voting materials in northern Mitrovica, a repeat vote
at the three affected polling centres was subsequently
ordered by the Central Election Commission. Thanks
to extensive additional security measures, the re-vote
at all three centres was successfully organized two
days ago. The re-vote proceeded peacefully, without
significant incidents or problems.

Where required, the second round of the elections
of mayors will take place on 1 December. Due to some
procedural irregularities, the Electoral Complaints
and Appeals Panel has recommended to the Central
Electoral Commission a re-vote for two polling centres
in Zvecan municipality in northern Kosovo.

I have commended both parties to the Brussels
negotiations, as well as participating political entities
and the public at large, for their conduct during a
largely peaceful electoral process, which produced
unprecedented turnout in many areas. I take this
opportunity to commend the very close mutual
coordination carried out among the international
presences during the elections, and to express
special gratitude for the efforts undertaken by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
to ensure timely registration and voting procedures in
the northern municipalities and to facilitate the voting
outside Kosovo.

The perpetrators of the crimes committed in
northern Mitrovica on election day need to be brought
to account. Equally, it is important to observe that these
deplorable incidents were isolated ones, and did not
reflect the positive conduct ofthe elections overall. The
results of the 3 November vote clearly demonstrated
the growing maturity of Kosovo's polity, as well as a
strong public desire and motivation for participation in
the democratic process.

The United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) is continuing to focus its greatest
efforts and resources in support of the EU-led political
process and towards the fulfillment of its mandate. In
particular, the mission is making this support available
to the newly elected municipal authorities, especially
in the North, where significant tensions still persist
and where the high demands and expectations of the
population will accordingly be directed to newly
elected municipal presidents and councils.

The formation of the future association/community
of Serb-majority municipalities, a key component of the
l9 April agreement, will require major efforts during the
forthcoming period, demanding the close attention not
only of the parties, but of the international community
as well. UNMIK intends to play its role as part of a
carefully coordinated collective effort, drawing on the
comparative advantages and resources of all those who
are ready to contribute.

The municipal elections were an indispensible step
forward towards securing fully legitimate and fully
empowered representation of the local communities in
Kosovo, both in the North and the South. At the same
time, no one involved can afford to close their eyes to the
deep uncertainties that persist among significant parts
of the population. Enthusiasm over the considerable
success achieved through these local elections must be
tempered. This success marked an essential but still
preliminary step in translating progress at the high
political level into local confidence and ownership on
the ground. Achieving this latter result will necessarily
be a gradual process. To succeed, it will demand the
continuous effort and attention of all those in a position
to assist.

Influential actors on every side should pursue a
more sustained engagement with the local stakeholders
in northern Kosovo. Effective partnerships and
cooperation with newly elected municipal leaders, along
with the provision of appropriate resources and support,
will be some of the critical elements; improving the
extent and quality of communication and dialogue at
local levels throughout Kosovo will be another, and one
which we believe demands closer attention. UNMIK
has committed its own resources to supporting such
comprehensive dialogue, including through a range of
local initiatives. We hope that this same commitment
will run across the board of all stakeholders; the process
demands combined and mutually reinforcing effort.

The aspirations of the people to fuller association
with the institutions of Europe continue to be a
crucial factor underpinning the current process of
normalization agreed between the leaders of Pristina
and Belgrade. At the top level, the European Union is
poised in one month's time to take important decisions
regarding the further integration of States of the
Western Balkans. In late October, talks commenced on
a Stabilization and Association Agreement between the
European Union and Kosovo, which, when completed,
will mark the first contractual relationship established
between these two parties. Serbia is expecting detailed
consideration of its accession negotiating framework at
the forthcoming European Council meeting scheduled
for December. We welcome these developments as they
are fundamental to the further consolidation of peace
and security in the region.

These steps are much more than formalities. Both
Pristina and Belgrade have committed themselves
to the institutional steps required for a closer future
association with the European institutions. The
myriad reforms demanded for closer association must
be carried out alongside the dialogue process and in
harmony with the provisions specified in that process.
In Kosovo, this means, among other things, significant
reforms of public practices, not just in the crucial area
of the rule of law, but across the full range of Kosovo's
public services and institutions.

The members of the Council continue to play
a key role in supporting the long-term prospects of
the process under way in Kosovo. This encompasses
not simply the provision of resources adequate to
safeguarding the progress achieved, but also continued
political engagement with the parties to ensure that
their commitments hold fast through future challenges
and occasional setbacks.

Besides the difficult and often complex issues
involved in the direct implementation of the 19 April
agreement, attention must be focused on pressing
economic issues, as well as some fundamental
humanitarian issues. Recently, it has proved significant
that Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb family
associations of missing persons - those who have
suffered so deeply - have been able to lead the way
in working together to pursue progress. It is incumbent
upon political leaders in Pristina and Belgrade to engage
one another in the same spirit, as well for international
partners to ensure the adequate resources and other
support needed for the parties to persevere along the
path they have so wisely chosen.

The period ahead will be essential in consolidating
the positive outcomes of the Kosovo elections and the
important progress achieved in the Belgrade-Pristina
dialogue. Sustained engagement by the two parties will
also be important in securing the advancement towards
European integration, the normalization of relations and
inter-community reconciliation and lasting stability in
Kosovo.

I wish to express my deep appreciation to the
members ofthe Council for their continuing engagement
with the parties in that regard, despite the number of
other pressing matters that demand their attention.
Such engagement is indispensable to keep the process
moving forward. For our part, UNMIK continues its
close engagement to the same ends, both at political and
ground levels. The Council's continuing support for the
work of UNMIK is deeply appreciated.

