Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would first like to
thank Togo for its leadership in convening this debate
and, in particular, President Gnassingbe for his
presence today and you, Mr. Minister, for your
presence this afternoon. As everybody has recognized
today, the challenges facing West Africa and the Sahel
clearly demand a much greater international focus. The
Secretary-General's warning this morning of the fear of
a humanitarian crisis of the magnitude of that affecting
the Horn of Africa should be a wake-up call for us all.

Transnational crime takes various forms that are
all too often viewed as separate phenomena. However,
in truth, as we know, transnational crimes tend to feed
off and reinforce each other. Such crimes obviously
thrive in environments where there are challenges to
governance, where Governments, law enforcement
agencies and judiciaries lack the capacity to pursue and
prosecute criminals, and where unemployment,
including of the youth, is such a serious problem.

The challenges confronting the Sahel are
particularly acute. Existing challenges have been
exacerbated by the Libya crisis, with resultant flows of
weapons and the influx of returnees. More broadly, as
the representative of Mauritania has just starkly
reminded us, the region faces existing threats of
regional drug trafficking, piracy and terrorism. Today,
we have heard worrying warnings about the links
between organized crime and terrorist groups. The
exacerbating impact of the effects of climate change -
as recognized by the assessment mission to the
Sahel - compounds those challenges.

The assessment mission report (see S/2012/42)
clearly spells out necessary actions, and we must note
them. They include multisectoral reintegration
initiatives for returnees, with a strong focus on conflict
prevention, social cohesion and protection.
Programmes that focus on youth unemployment are
vital. In the long term, conflict prevention programmes
need to address access to justice, particularly given the
weak rule of law structures in the areas of return. More
broadly, across West Africa and the Sahel, national
Governments need support to secure their national

borders, including against the transfer of weapons, and
to implement national programmes to destroy illegal
arms. We need to build the capacity of Governments to
tackle transnational organized crime and terrorism by
strengthening national institutions and facilitating
information and intelligence exchange, coordination
and joint operations.

We must also support regional security strategies
and mechanisms. Here, of course, the role of the
Economic Community of West African States is
critical. Given that there is no one subregional
organization that covers all the Sahel, the roles of the
African Union (AU) and the United Nations are,
obviously, particularly important.

We support the strengthening of the United
Nations system's security capacity and presence on the
ground in the region, and are interested in the
Secretary-General's proposal this morning for
specialized police units within peace operations to
work alongside national units to build capacity and
tackle crime. We also support the recommendation of
an overarching framework to bring together all affected
countries in the Sahel to address those challenges.

Australia seeks to play its own part in such
issues. My written statement includes a fair amount of
detail, but I would mention - only as examples - a
few of the efforts that are needed in the region: our
active work, for example, with the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate to enhance
border control capabilities; our strong efforts against
money laundering; our active role in preparing for the
arms trade treaty, to be negotiated in July. That is
obviously a vital instrument for Africa and, of course,
we need to do much more to implement the Programme
of Action on Small Arms and an effective and quick
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme across North Africa, arising out of the
Libyan problems.

In terms of our own assistance, we have
particularly focused on seeking to improve mutual
legal assistance between Francophone and Anglophone
countries and on developing, with the AU, a series of
transnational crime guides.

Briefly, in relation to piracy, I might note that
Togo's concept note for today's meeting (S/2012/83, annex) explains the need to examine how pirates of
various regions interact and what kind of problems that
can mean. As part of the effort to better understand the
root causes and to draw from experience across
different regions, Australia will host a conference on
piracy later this year, certainly by mid-year, which will
specifically compare, or seek to compare, the
experiences of counter-piracy cooperation in the Indian
Ocean, South-East Asia and West Africa.

Towards concluding, the Council has regularly
reaffirmed the strong nexus between security and
development. We all need to recognize - and cannot
pretend that we do not - that there is an urgent
priority to quickly mobilize programmes to ensure that
unemployment, particularly youth unemployment, lack
of education and poverty do not continue to feed
violence and extremism. As we know, those
vulnerabilities are a toxic combination.

We must also, of course, address the urgent
humanitarian needs facing the Sahel region, but longer-
term resilience to meet food security challenges, in
particular, is vital. Last week, my own country
announced another contribution of $10 million to assist
with that, in addition to a $100-million programme that
we recently launched to focus on resilience, including
agricultural productivity and community resilience,
particularly in West Africa.

To conclude, Australia remains committed to
continuing to work with all partners to make a secure
and sustainable future for the people of the region a
reality. We pledge to do more.

