Mr. Sahovic' (Federal Republic of Yugoslavia):
Before I proceed with my statement, I would like to
thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting and to
congratulate you on the exceptional manner in which
you conducted the business of the Council during the
month of June. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his as usual very informative and
comprehensive briefing.

Three years of the international presence in
Kosovo and Metohija were marked recently. The
Special Representative, Mr. Steiner, spoke on that
occasion in very positive terms of the results achieved
in their mission thus far.

No doubt, there has been some progress in some
areas. Kosovo and Metohija is certainly not the same
place it was in June 1999. However, we must be fair
and realistic in our assessment in order to be able to
move forward. So much has yet to be done and
achieved in order to restore normalcy to the province.
Therefore, we find it necessary to recall a few facts
concerning the three-year presence of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).

Recent pronouncements of a dramatic drop in
crime and improved security for minorities do not give
an accurate picture of the dangers that the ever-
dwindling minority population faces every day. Two
thirds of the total number of murders and abductions of
Serbs and other non-Albanians in the last four years
have been committed since the arrival of international
forces. Few, if any, perpetrators have been brought to
justice. Only recently, Aleksandar Dodic, 18, was
murdered at mid-day in the Vitina marketplace.

Freedom of movement outside enclaves is still
non-existent. Some time ago, it was mentioned here at
the Council that when Serbs and other non-Albanians
travel in Kosovo and Metohija, they take buses that
have no timetables. For security reasons, dates and
times of arrivals and departures are unknown. This
situation continues.

Unforgivably little has been done to clarify the
fate of 1,300 abducted and missing non-Albanians. The
property of minorities has been usurped, their cultural
heritage destroyed. In the town of Orahovac, 60 per
cent of Serbian graves have been desecrated. The
Serbs, the largest minority in the province, have
received no reassurances whatever that even their
language will survive. The Serbian language
programme of TV Kosovo lasts seven minutes a day.

Bearing all this in mind, it is not surprising that
only about a mere few hundred Serbian internally
displaced persons out of a total 226,000 have ventured
to return to Kosovo and Metohija to date. If this tempo
remains unchanged, Kosovo and Metohija will forever
remain a mono-ethnic society. Consequently, we find it
difficult to comprehend what constitutes the improved
chances for returns that UNMIK officials have recently
been speaking about.

My Government welcomes the constitution of the
Kosovo Government as one of the positive
achievements. The representatives of the Serbian
Coalition Povratak have taken their rightful place,
thereby affirming their willingness to participate in
building the future of Kosovo and Metohija. In
particular, we welcome the Prime Minister's pledge to
work on behalf of all residents of the province.
Yugoslavia expects that this pledge will result in the
first step towards ending the current situation, in which
Povratak deputies come to the Assembly in armoured
vehicles accompanied by a heavy international security
detail.

We also feel obliged to recall that the Kosovo
Assembly, acting contrary to Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), the Constitutional Framework
and the repeatedly stated positions of this Council,
recently adopted a resolution rejecting the agreement
on the delineation of the border between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republic of
Macedonia, as well as the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia-UNMIK Common Document. My
Government expressed its appreciation of Mr. Steiner's
prompt declaration of the resolution as legally invalid.
However, our concerns about the political implications
of this act remain, even more so in the light of the
attempt by the provisional institutions to sign a trade
agreement with Albania, which we strongly condemn.

We agree that Kosovo and Metohija will not be
able to move forward until and unless an economic
recovery begins. In that context, the Government of
Serbia has informed UNMIK of its full support for
privatization in the province, believing it to be a basic
precondition for future stable economic development.
After all, we in Yugoslavia have also embarked on the
path of privatization.

However, my Government considers that the
model proposed by UNMIK fails to respect the
fundamental principle of the protection of creditors. In
view of the many interconnections in terms of present
ownership and the need to build a common economic
space in our region, we believe that it is of utmost
importance that Serbia be actively involved in the
privatization process in Kosovo and Metohija.

On a related matter, the Republic of Serbia is
being held responsible for, and is servicing,
$1.4 billion of debt incurred by entities in Kosovo and
Metohija. At the same time, many Serbian banks have
substantial receivables due them from entities in the
province. UNMIK, however, proposes to carry out
privatization while unloading the enormous debt
burden on a fragile Serbian economy.

The situation in Kosovska Mitrovica has often
been cited as a cause for international concern. While
we fully agree that a solution for this sensitive issue
needs to be agreed on, I would like to bring to the
Council's attention a fact that is less frequently
mentioned. Northern Kosovska Mitrovica remains the
only multi-ethnic urban area among otherwise mono-
ethnic Kosovo and Metohija cities. Its population
comprises thousands of Serbs, Albanians, Bosniacs,
Turks and Roma.

Ill-conceived action aimed at finding a hasty
solution could result in a new, and possibly final,
exodus of Serbs. It is our firm position that equal
standards and rules regarding returns to cities need to
be applied throughout Kosovo and Metohija. The
consideration of various proposals regarding the
possible organization of local government would be
very useful in dealing with the problem, taking into
account the rights of minorities.

The international community has a huge
responsibility in Kosovo and Metohija in the period
ahead. UNMIK and the Kosovo provisional institutions
should concentrate their efforts on strengthening the
rule of law, full respect for the human rights of all
residents, especially minorities, building of a
democratic, multi-ethnic society and institutions,
combating organized crime and corruption, and
improving of the economic situation. The benchmark
concept presented by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in his April statement to the Council
presupposes certain standards in these and other areas
that ought to be met in the future. The most important
benchmark, however, will be a change of attitude of the
majority that will make the return of displaced Serbs
and other non-Albanians a reality. This should be the
responsibility of local Albanian politicians, to be taken
up in deed rather than in word.
For our part, we affirm once again our readiness
for dialogue and cooperation in the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999), as stated in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia-UNMIK Common Document.
Within this framework, UNMIK and the Kosovo
Government can rely on our full support in the efforts
to bring Kosovo and Metohija into Europe eventually,
which is our common goal.

