Allow me at the outset to welcome the convening of this briefing on the consideration of the ninth report (S/2020/531) of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). His presence here today is a sign of the interest he attaches to this issue. I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs; Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve, Permanent Representative of Belgium, in his capacity as Facilitator; and Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union, in his capacity as coordinator of the Joint Commission to the Security Council, for their briefings. We are honoured by the presence of the United States Secretary of State, Mr. Michael Pompeo, and of Mr. Mohammad Javad Zarif, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran, and I wish them a warm welcome. I wish to reaffirm the Niger's commitment to the full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), which in 2015 approved the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) on the Iranian nuclear programme. My delegation has taken note of the conclusions contained in the ninth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and calls on Member States and all stakeholders to comply with the obligations they have undertaken. It is indisputable that the Plan of Action, as an expression of the will of the international community, supported by the Security Council, is an essential instrument in the fight against nuclear proliferation. In that regard, it must be preserved. That is why we deplore both the withdrawal of the United States from the agreement, with its resulting consequences, as well as the measures taken in response to that withdrawal since 8 May 2019 by the Islamic Republic of Iran to backtrack on certain commitments it has made with regard to nuclear disarmament within the framework of the Plan of Action. In that regard, we urge all parties to the agreement to strictly implement its provisions in terms of both obligations and rights. As it is customary to say, legally formed agreements serve as law for those who made them. Should difficulties arise in the implementation of the provisions of the agreement, recourse should be made to the dispute-settlement mechanism provided for in the Plan of Action. My country, the Niger, believes that while there is no doubt that the Islamic Republic of Iran must respect its obligations under the agreement, in particular by submitting to the control measures of the International Atomic Energy Agency so as to eliminate any risk of proliferation, there should be no doubt either that the international community must lay the foundations for a new relationship with the Islamic Republic of Iran, based on mutual trust and respect. Therefore, it is urgent, in accordance with the appeal made by the Secretary- General, to alleviate, on humanitarian grounds, all unilateral economic measures that could prevent Iran from mobilizing the means to combat the current coronavirus disease pandemic. If the implementation of the JCPOA is to be pursued in good faith, it is no exaggeration to say that the situation currently prevailing in the Persian Gulf region* carries within it the seeds of suspicion and mistrust, which makes it difficult to establish a climate of trust among States. The worrying prospects of the forthcoming annexation of the occupied Palestinian territories are not, alas, cause for optimism. It could, if nothing is done - and this is, indeed, the right time to do something - add to the difficulties that concerns us today by plunging the entire region into cycles of violence whose unforeseeable consequences could have incalculable repercussions on international peace and security. *
