Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the five Nordic countries - Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway.

As long-standing and consistent supporters ofpeace
and security in Africa, the Nordic countries welcome
this timely debate. We commend African countries,
as well as the African Union (AU) and other African
entities, for their increasingly active engagement
in peace operations in Africa, to the benefit of our
collective security. The most recent example is the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, which several
Nordic countries support, both directly and through
participation in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.

However, in spite of those efforts, and in spite
of positive developments in several countries, the
situation remains challenging. We believe that the
Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative
will benefit all peace operations in Africa. As outlined
in the initiative, a comprehensive approach is needed
to sustain peace. We would also like to emphasize the
importance of providing adequate training for personnel
and using innovations and modern technologies.
The Nordic countries would like to highlight four
additional issues.

First, peace operations should always support
a political process. Joint visits and assessments by
the United Nations and the AU and/or other African
partners are vital for developing a common approach
so that threats to peace and stability can be dealt
with effectively. The revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan illustrates the importance of a united message
for moving political processes forward.

Secondly, much more needs to be done to increase
the number of women peacekeepers. Seminars such
as the one organized by Rwanda, Indonesia and
Norway here in New York in May are one way of
sharing experiences. We were encouraged to see the
joint visit to South Sudan last month by the Head of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UN-Women
and the AU Commissioner for Peace and Security.
That was a welcome sign of willingness to join forces
in mobilizing women and promoting the gender
perspective as key to the success of peacekeeping.
Thirdly, we applaud the work of Nobel Peace Prize
laureate Denis Mukwege and the many others who
are engaged in addressing sexual and gender-based
violence in conflicts in Africa. We call on the United
Nations and the AU to join forces in countering that
scourge, including through peacekeeping. We have to
make sure that peace operations also effectively prevent
and combat sexual exploitation and abuse. The Nordic
countries will continue to support that important work.

Finally, the strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the AU must be further strengthened
as well with regard to financing. The Nordic countries
are in favour of a system that combines assessed
contributions from the United Nations with AU
funding. It should be based on transparent financial
reporting, and AU-led operations should comply fully
with United Nations standards, including the human
rights due diligence policy.

