Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): I should like first of all
to extend to you, Madam, my delegation's congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of February. I am sure that through your
wisdom and guidance the Council will successfully meet
the challenges that lie ahead. We would also like to
express our great appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, Sir John Weston,
for his excellent stewardship of the Council during the
month of January.

My delegation is most appreciative to the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/1996/75) of 31
January 1996, concerning the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. 111). My delegation
believes the report provides us with important information
regarding the political, military, humanitarian, financial,
economic and social aspects of the situation in Angola,
which, in our opinion, will prove invaluable to our
discussion concerning the future of UNAVEM. III. In this
context, we wish to express our gratitude to the Special

 

Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Alioune
Blondin Beye, for his persistent efforts towards a peaceful
solution to this tragic crisis in Angola. We also pay tribute
to the men and women of UNAVEM. III for their
outstanding contributions in the service of peace under
difficult circumstances.

We are also grateful for the opportunity this meeting
provides to expand the discussion by eliciting the valuable
and constructive input of the general membership of the
United Nations, which is necessary for the Council to take
the appropriate decision. As a consequence, my delegation
is confident that our discussion today will be a fruitful and
beneficial one.

Having carefully examined the Secretary-General's
report, my delegation cannot but express its regret at the
conflict in Angola, which continues despite the genuine and
patient efforts of the international community to lay the
groundwork for a political settlement. It is frustrating for
my delegation to witness a disturbing pattern whereby
progress rapidly gives way to renewed hostilities in a
conflict that has been waged for so long. The parties
themselves are hard pressed to provide a rationale for the
continued fighting, which has torn Angola apart at the cost
of thousands of lives.

We are disappointed by both parties' continued
hesitation over fully implementing the Lusaka Protocol,
which we deem indispensable to the objective of achieving
a political settlement. In this connection, my delegation
strongly urges both parties to rededicate themselves to the
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol, with particular regard to
troop disengagement, disarming the civilian population and
quartering UNITA troops. We call on the leadership of both
parties to put their personal differences behind them and to
exercise the political will needed to put the peace process
back on track without further delay. It is our considered
View that any delay would in turn adversely affect the
implementation of the other essential aspects of the peace
process, including the issue of power-sharing between the
main protagonists to the conflict.

While recent events in Angola have provided ample
reason for pessimism, we note, however, that some
important steps have recently been taken to redress the
situation and revive the peace process. In particular, my
delegation urges both parties to fulfil their obligations and
responsibilities under the agreement reached on 21
December 1995 establishing a new timetable for the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. In addition, we
welcome the steps taken by the Government of Angola to
cease offensive operations; withdraw its troops from
offensive positions in the vicinity of UNITA quartering
areas; release all prisoners registered by the International
Committee of the Red Cross; begin quartering the rapid
reaction police; and terminate the use of expatriate
personnel. These are major steps in the direction of peace.
My delegation notes UNITA's stated intention and
commitment to quarter 16,500 of its troops in an
expeditious and comprehensive manner. UNITA's
leadership must fulfil this commitment, and must also
immediately release all its remaining prisoners.

My delegation also notes that the Government of
Angola and UNIT A have agreed to establish a "conflict
prevention group" aimed at deterring cease-fire violations.
As in the past, however, my delegation is cautious about
agreements such as this, because of the gap between the
statements made by the parties and the reality of their
commitment to the peace process. We therefore highlight
the importance the Council attaches to monitoring what
actions the parties pledge and what actions they take.

My delegation believes that the parties can
fundamentally improve the prospects for peace by
beginning to negotiate in good faith. This would establish
their credibility and provide an environment conducive to
confidence-building. We also take the View that no long-
term peace can be achieved without accelerating the
quartering and disarming processes. We therefore call on
the parties to institute processes and procedures that will
facilitate the implementation of these essential elements.

In this regard, we would impress upon the parties
that the international community can neither afford nor
tolerate any further delays.

We are keenly aware of the close interlinkages
between the various aspects of the peace process and the
revitalization of the Angolan economy. Angola will
require a continued international presence, including
peace-keeping forces, and assistance from international
organizations such as the International Monetary Fund,
the World Bank and the United Nations Development
Programme to build upon the progress that has been
made. Such assistance will be forthcoming only if both
parties truly meet their obligations as set out in the
Lusaka Protocol.

Though my delegation fully understands the
international community's growing frustration, given the
alternative we must urge all those that can do so to lend

 

whatever they can so that the process of assisting Angola
to rebuild can begin. Rebuilding Angola cannot be achieved
by abandoning the country; on the contrary, it can be
achieved only through hard work and perseverance.

In conclusion, and in the light of these considerations,
my delegation believes that there is still much that the
parties to the conflict themselves must do to resolve all the
outstanding issues peacefully. Bearing in mind that
assistance from the international community cannot
continue indefinitely, my delegation therefore strongly urges
both parties to strive for substantial progress in the peace
process and to demonstrate a genuine political will to
achieve national reconciliation consistent with the objectives
of that process.

Prolonging the conflict would only be a disservice to
the people of Angola, who have for far too long been
deprived of the opportunity to live in peace and develop
their economy.

