Mr. Foradori (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First,
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for the
invitation to participate in this open debate, which is on
an issue of such great importance to the international
community, as well as to congratulate the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on its presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing at the beginning of
this debate.

The establishment of a special and strategic
arrangement at the end of the Second World War
conceived and forged the founding principles of world
peace. That emblematic and collective decision sought
to build a solid base for mutual and lasting trust among
nations. The men and women who drafted the Charter
of the United Nations possessed an explicit will to
integrate and a vision as long as history itself. What is
more, they knew that an idea without a goal was only
a dream and accordingly drafted a number of guiding
principles, the architecture of which was intended to be
nearly indestructible.

The maintenance of international peace and
security and the desire to take all the necessary
measures to ensure both would materialize only if
acts of aggression were suppressed and disputes were
resolved through peaceful means, based on justice and
international law. The battle fatigue that followed the
brutal war was the most compelling reason to appeal
to the collective will to not repeat the past. Friendship,
cooperation and respect were therefore the words that
dictated the path set out in San Francisco, when that
universal constitution was drafted. Mutual respect was
also one of the pillars that supported the fundamental
principles with regard to relations among States.
The sovereign equality of all Members of the United
Nations, refraining from the use or threat of the use
of force against the territorial integrity and political
independence of any State, and non-intervention in
internal affairs were the cardinal and guiding principles
that motivated that iron-clad collective will.

At that time, one had to be extremely bold to have
dreams and translate them into reality, avoiding the
arrival of a day in which those hopes might be merely
faded memories. However, the firm conviction of those
men and women allowed for an end to the macabre
ritual characterized by mutual suspicion, giving way
to mutual trust. In that process, there was no shortage
of sacrifice and effort, paving the way for the tireless
search for peace. The levelheadedness ofthose thinkers,
for whom the memories of the ravages of war were still
fresh, allowed them to assert, without major debate,
that cultural, social and humanitarian problems should
be solved. They also noted the need for economic
development and for encouraging respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all, regardless
of race, gender or religion, among other things. Those
principles were also considered necessary conditions
for ensuring peace and harmony among peoples and
nations.

It was in the context of the dynamic balance
between non-intervention in internal affairs and the
need to respect human rights that one of the premises
of the Sustainable Development Goals, among others,
was born: the promotion of peaceful and inclusive
societies for sustainable development, access to justice
for all and the creation of effective, responsable and
inclusive institutions at all levels. Strengthening the
rule of law and promoting human rights were basic to
that process. The promotion of peace and justice was
thus established as one of 17 Goals of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1). We therefore must make progress by
having a comprehensive approach to the consolidation
of all of those Goals. It is necessary that States not
conceal the absence of respect for human rights within
the handy premise of non-intervention in the affairs of
other States.

In an increasingly interdependent world, events
can no longer be seen apart from their impact on world
society. What happens in each of those events affects
everyone, and the most delicate responsibility rests on
striking a fine balance in terms of what opinions can
be considered a violation of a principle or construed as
strict respect for another. The United Nations therefore
made a decision to support peace processes with special
missions, staffed by men and women with experience,
to avoid further deepening conflicts. Accordingly,
Argentina certainly supports those processes and has
decided that when a conflict or a crisis breaks out, it will
cooperate actively to mitigate, to the extent possible,
the human consequences of those situations through the
participation of White Helmets. Cooperation, peace and
intervention in those processes therefore come together
on the basis of recovering to the maximum extent the
deepest sense of humanity.

It is difficult to perceive the fair measure of things,

as has always been the case. However, it is preferable to
make mistakes in trying to achieve peace and respect for
human rights than to show excessive zeal for respecting
non-intervention, according to the letter of the law, to
such an extent that it becomes indistinguishable from
disinterest or indifference to the suffering of others.
The calling to promote peace and friendship through
constructive criticism is not disrespectful and should
aim at building a lasting prosperity among peoples. It
is worth mentioning here that, when the Charter of the
United Nations highlights the need to respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all, Argentina
understands that exactly as "all", without distinction as
to race, gender or religion, inter alia. Our commitment
to these purposes is also expressed in our fundamental
norm on the basis of which our own society is built. But
we also believe that compliance with those purposes
is not optional on the part of Members of the United
Nations, but mandatory.

In addition, our concept of society assumes that
the need to enjoy those fundamental freedoms and
to respect for human rights must be complied with
by all States, given our belief that for peoples, as for
individuals, who are genuinely close and friendly, it
is quite easy to cry in solitude and almost impossible
to laugh alone. That is why we believe that those who
drafted the Charter of the United Nations charted a
path for the future that is not contradictory but rather
complementary. We consider that vision to be as global
as the world in which we live, and it should be seen in
that way. It is not an option. It is a dictate, not one based
on a standard or a fundamental charter, but rather one
based on the collective conscience of our global society.

