Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (spoke in French): Before
the Council is the report ofthe Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic (S/2019/147),
which I have the privilege to introduce today for the last
time in my capacity as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic. I
would like at the outset to express my deep gratitude
to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for the
confidence he has placed in me, and to all the members
of the Security Council for their invaluable support
throughout my tenure at the head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).

I come here today with mixed feelings - the
optimism and satisfaction of a duty accomplished mixed
with a certain apprehension. Divided parties came
to Khartoum from all corners of the Central African
Republic on 21 and 22 January for negotiations that
promised to be difficult; the sons and daughters of
that country, torn by years of fratricidal conflicts,
came together on 6 February, two weeks later, to
sign in Bangui the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
marking their determination to collectively meet the
challenges of their common destiny. The path that
Central Africans have taken, not only during the
Khartoum talks but at greater length over the past five
years, thanks to the invaluable support of the Security
Council, was not easy.

The signing on 6 February of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation was the culmination of
a long process. After a difficult transition that was
crowned by the return to constitutional order, new
legitimate and democratic institutions have been in
place since 30 March 2016. Together we have patiently
contributed day after day to creating the conditions
for the gradual strengthening of State authority,
facilitated the launching of the national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme and
supported security sector reform through support for
the administration of justice, the fight against impunity
and the progressive deployment of State security agents
in the 16 prefectures, and defence and internal security
forces. At the local level, peace and reconciliation
agreements have helped to reduce the level of violence,
while territorial integrity and republican institutions
have been preserved and strengthened at the national
level. Those multifaceted, joint efforts of the
Government, MINUSCA and all partners in the Central
African Republic have paved the way for a gradual
return to a certain normalcy.
The Government and the people of the Central
African Republic, thanks to the commitment of
President Touadera, signed on 6 February a peace
agreement that, with the tireless support ofthe Security
Council, could mark a turning point in the history of
the country. although the dangers remain numerous.
I stress that the agreement differs in several respects
from the previous agreements signed in the Central
African Republic.

First, it reaffirms from the outset the commitment
of the signatory parties to fundamental principles,
especially those derived from the country's
Constitution, and it was sought and signed by a
legitimate Government. Secondly, the Central African
Government and the armed groups - the signatory
parties - have, by undertaking concrete commitments,
called on their fellow citizens, the region and the world
to bear witness. In addition, the implementation ofthese
commitments will be supervised by a certain number
of inclusive monitoring mechanisms involving all
forces in the country, including civil society, political
parties, parliamentarians, women's organizations and
young people, as well as representatives of religious
denominations. Their deliberations will focus on
security, political and legal issues at the national,
prefectural and local levels. Presidential decrees
establishing these mechanisms have already been
published. The agreement also reflects the African
Union's commitment to silencing the guns on the
African continent.

Importantly, the 6 February agreement reinforces
the Secretary-General's vision of the primacy of politics
that must underpin any peace operation. In that spirit,
the 6 February agreement clearly expresses the desire
of Central Africans to renew their social contract, to
reaffirm their deep desire to live together and in peace
in their rich diversity, to ease tensions and to create
the conditions for their country's recovery on more
solid bases - a country where the use of violence as
an instrument of conquest or the preservation of power
will be banned forever.

Thus, the success of the 6 February political
accord is first and foremost the expression of a deep
desire of the Central African nation to regain control
of its destiny in equity, justice and reconciliation and
with due compensation to the victims. This success,
however, is also the culmination of a long process led
by the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic and supported by
the United Nations. In that regard, I commend the
commitment of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, to the cause of
peace in Africa and in the Central African Republic in
particular. I reiterate my gratitude and congratulations
to the African Union Commissioner Peace and Security,
Ambassador Smai'l Chergui - who is here with us
today - for having deftly and resolutely facilitated
the Khartoum dialogue, in close collaboration with the
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, testifying to the fruitful and fruitful
strategic partnership between the African Union and
the United Nations. It was a great privilege for my team
and me to contribute, alongside them, to the success of
the dialogue among Central Africans.

I would also like to acknowledge the role of the
countries of the region, which, in the framework of the
panel of facilitators of the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation - to whom I pay a well-deserved
tribute - have made an important contribution to
the preparatory phase of the dialogue. Lastly, let me
commend the contribution of the Government and
the people of the Sudan for their investment and the
generous welcome they offered to all participants. My
thanks also go to all the other partners, near and far,
who played a discrete but decisive role towards the
successful conclusion of the peace talks.

While we rightly welcome the fact that our
multifaceted efforts have allowed this important
political advance in the Central African Republic,
we must remain clear-eyed and vigilant because the
situation is still serious. The unbearable situation of
displaced people and refugees - a reflection of the
precarious humanitarian situation - the scenes of
senseless violence and the numerous victims remind us
painfully of that fact. All of us know - the Central
Africans surely better than anyone - that through the
signing of the agreement the country has taken just
one step. It is a necessary and decisive step, certainly,
but only one step. The hardest remains indeed to
come. The real test will be in the full and good faith
implementation of the agreement. I solemnly appeal to
all parties to scrupulously honour all the commitments
made under the agreement. I urge them not to betray
their word and the trust placed in them by the Central
African people and all those who supported them in
the peace process. Less than two years before the next
elections, whose organization will require substantial
support to consolidate the entrenchment of democracy,
the country has a real opportunity to turn its back on its
painful history once and for all.
I express the hope that, faced with differences
that are inevitable in the process of implementing any
peace agreement, the highest interests of the Central
African people and their legitimate aspiration to live in
peace will always be safeguarded in order to guarantee
strict compliance with the agreement. I urge the
parties to always favour dialogue in order to sustain
the new political and social consensus promoted by
the 6 February agreement. It will also be incumbent on
the parties to promote national ownership of the peace
accord through strategic communications to raise
awareness of the content and scope of that important
agreement, because what is at stake is the future of
the entire Central African nation, which is entitled to
believe that the agreement heralds the dawn ofa new era.
The role of the guarantors, especially the neighbouring
countries and the region, and that of the facilitators will
be decisive for the full realization of the agreement.
The support of all partners will be equally essential.

In that regard, the recent visit to Bangui by the
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador
Omar Hilale, accompanied by Assistant Secretary-
General Bintou Keita and Under-Secretary-General
Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, was most timely. I thank
them very much and have no doubt that the analyses
and recommendations they will make will be a major
contribution to the indispensable effort to realign the
targeted assistance that will be needed urgently to
facilitate the implementation of the agreement and,
more broadly, accelerate the recovery of the country
through the realization of its strategic plan, the National
Strategy for Recovery and Peace Consolidation. I
welcome the joint initiative of the United Nations and
the African Union to hold a meeting of the International
Support Group on the Central African Republic as soon
as tomorrow, because time is running out and we will
have to remain engaged and to act quickly and in a
concerted manner.

Finally, our faith remains strong that the Council
will provide the necessary political support for the
agreement and continue to support both the Government
and democratic institutions of the Central African
Republic and the work of MINUSCA, in particular
its new Head, my successor, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye,
whom I fraternally greet and wish every success in his
noble mission.

(spoke in English)

Allow me to conclude with a few words
to commemorate our fallen heroes. Too many
peacekeepers have paid the ultimate sacrifice for peace
to begin to take root in the Central African Republic.
These peacekeepers gave their lives to help assist,
protect and comfort the Central African people and
support the country's young democratic institutions
when they were under threat. Let us not doubt the
value of their sacrifice, the criticality of our presence
or the value of our contribution. Today, as the shadow
of violence begins to lift, the people of the Central
African Republic are growing more confident in their
ability to bend the arc of their volatile history in a new
direction. By turning their grievances into a powerful
transformative force, they have new reason to hope for
a brighter future.

The unified political support of the Council, the
countries of the region and the international community
will remain critical to the successful implementation of
the 6 February peace agreement. Never before has the
support of the international community and the region
been so vital for the Government and the people of
the Central African Republic. I have no doubt that, as
they do their part, taking full ownership of the peace
process, they can continue to count on the Security
Council's unflagging backing.

