Mr. Wolzfeld (Luxembourg) (interpretation from French): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia and Cyprus have aligned themselves with this
statement. Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway also associate
themselves with this statement.

The multinational protection force in Albania has just
come to the end of its mandate. This past March, the
Albanian Government asked the international community
for assistance in support of its efforts to overcome the
chaos and anarchy into which the country had been
plunged. The international community reacted speedily, and
on 28 March the Security Council adopted resolution 1101
(1997) authorizing a multinational protection force to
facilitate the safe and prompt delivery of humanitarian
assistance in Albania and to help create a secure
environment for the missions of the international
organizations.

On 19 June the Security Council extended the force's
mandate to ensure, by means of an international presence,
inter alia, the stability required to enable the electoral
process to take place in a calm and secure environment.

The European Union wishes to express its appreciation
to the troop-contributing countries, among which were eight
contingents from the European Union member States, and
in particular to the Italian Government, which played a key
role in setting up and steering the multinational force.

The international community's action in Albania
would not have been possible without the action of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). The European Union extends its warmest thanks
to Mr. Vranitzky, the personal representative of the
President-in-office of the OSCE, for his tireless work on
the ground and in the international organizations to ensure
that elections could be held under acceptable conditions.

The various international organizations, among them
the Western European Union and the Council of Europe,
which worked together within the framework coordinated
by the OSCE, have done a remarkable job, avoiding
pointless duplication and delivering effective assistance to
the Albanian people in the most trying of times.

Between 1991 and 1996, the European Union has
given considerable assistance to Albania, amounting to
450 million ECU, especially in the field of humanitarian
assistance and technical cooperation. Since the start of the
crisis, the European Union has played to the full the role
incumbent on it in restoring political stability and security
in Albania. Working alongside the other organizations
cooperating within the OSCE framework, it has played an
active part in efforts to establish democracy and protect
human rights, including the rights of people belonging to
minority groups, as well as in preparing and monitoring
the elections.

The European Union has stated on several occasions
its determination to help Albania regain political stability
and restore security. However, it emphasizes that it is first
and foremost for the Albanian authorities to determine
appropriate responses to the challenges of restoring
stability and security and bringing about national
reconciliation, as well as promoting democratic
institutions and ensuring the country's economic recovery.
In this context, the European Union welcomes the recent
success of the Albanian security forces in Vlore in
collecting illegally held weapons and confronting armed

gangs.

Above all, law and order must be restored; human
rights, including the rights of people belonging to
minority groups, must be respected; and democratic rules
must be applied. The setting up of Parliament and the
rapid formation of a Government based on the election
results were a fundamental stage in this process.

The European Union considers that with the
withdrawal of the multinational protection force the
emergency has come to an end, and that it is now time to
embark on the process of stabilization and return to
normal conditions. The international community will
support the efforts of the Albanian Government in
rehabilitating State institutions, consolidating democratic
life in Albania and rebuilding its economic and financial
system.

 

For the period 1996-1999, the European Union has
already budgeted assistance totalling up to 212 million
ECU. Once the new governmental and administrative
structures are established, this aid will be reviewed in the
light of the situation on the ground.

At the Conference of Senior Officials on Albania, held
in Rome on 31 July 1997 under the chairmanship of Italy's
Minister for Foreign Affairs, the participants called for the
establishment of constructive working relations between the
new Government and the opposition in a true spirit of
national reconciliation. The European Union will closely
watch the commitments given by the Albanian Government
on this matter. The international community, and the
European Union in particular, announced that international
aid would be tied to political and economic conditions,
which would determine the operational measures to be
carried out within the reform process.

The European Union has prepared a draft international
agenda for Albania, which will be presented in its final
form at a ministerial meeting on Albania, to take place in
Rome in the autumn. The aim of the meeting will be to lay
the foundations for future institutional and economic
assistance. In addition, a donors' conference will be
convened in Brussels by the European Commission in
cooperation with the World Bank, once the Albanian
Government and the International Monetary Fund have
agreed on a programme of economic reform.

Finally, the European Union welcomes the decision by
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to examine the
possibility of setting up a programme to rebuild the
Albanian army in the framework of the Partnership for
Peace.

The Albanian people have lived through a painful and
particularly difficult time over the last few months. The
European Union and the international community have lent
their political, humanitarian and economic support to
overcome the crisis. The multinational protection force has
played a major role in this undertaking. The European
Union wishes to express its gratitude to all the men and
women who took part in this endeavour. It is now for the
Albanian people and their newly elected Government to
initiate comprehensive political and economic reforms
within the framework of human rights and the principles of
democracy. In taking up this challenge, Albania can count
on the European Union's continued support.

