Mr. Muchemi (Kenya): I wish to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Council for allowing me to participate
in the proceedings of the Council today and to make
my short statement.

Kenya appreciates the work of both the
Presidents and the Prosecutors of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), as well as the manner in which they have
conducted the affairs of their respective Tribunals. We
strongly support the international criminal justice
system. We recognize that the ad hoc criminal
Tribunals established by the Council and the
International Criminal Court must provide for, and
protect, the proper administration of justice by
prosecuting those who promote impunity. To that end,
the cooperation of Member States is vital if the courts
are to succeed in carrying out their mandates. Kenya is
fully aware of its international obligations and
continues to stand ready to offer its maximum
cooperation in that connection.
As we have stated on previous occasions, Kenya
supports the case put forward by the President of the
ICTR on behalf of ad litem judges. We urge that there
be an urgent resolution of that matter.

My delegation now wishes to comment on the
work of the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICTR, and
in particular on the issue of referrals. In paragraph 54
of the report on the activities of the ICTR (see S/2009/587, enclosure), it is implied that Kenya
continues to provide safe haven for Felicien Kabuga.
We note with disappointment that, despite Kenya's
demonstrated support and cooperation with the Court
since its inception, both the President and the
Prosecutor, in their addresses this morning before the
Council, have continued to insinuate that Kenya is
either hiding fugitive Kabuga or is otherwise refusing
to fully discharge its obligation vis-a-vis his arrest. My
delegation strongly refutes that allegation and
reiterates that that fugitive is not in Kenya.

The Kenyan Government's efforts in cooperating
with the ICTR are not in doubt. My country has
worked closely with the Tribunal. In that regard, we
have arrested and surrendered to the ICTR the largest
number of indictees. Kenya has also played a major
role in the relocation, protection and facilitation of
movement of witnesses for the Tribunal.

Several steps have been taken in a bid to trace
Mr. Kabuga, including the establishment of a joint
Kenya-ICTR task force, obtaining a freeze order on
property registered in the fugitive's name and offering
cash rewards for anyone giving information that would
lead to his arrest. The search for Mr. Kabuga should
therefore be widened to other areas, because we might
be over-concentrating on Kenya whereas the fugitive
could be comfortably living elsewhere.

On 30 September 2009, as part of its continuing
and unreserved commitment to the work of ICTR,
Kenya concluded an extradition treaty with the
Republic of Rwanda that provides, inter alia, for the
extradition of Rwandans suspected of having
committed genocide. This underscores Kenya's
commitment to and seriousness in the apprehension of
all perpetrators of the various crimes covered by the
treaty and their extradition to Rwanda to face justice.

My Government calls upon any person,
institution or other actors with information relating to
the whereabouts of the fugitive, whether in Kenya or in
any other country, to provide such information
forthwith to the ICTR, INTERPOL or any other
investigative agency in Kenya and elsewhere to
facilitate the expeditious apprehension of this indictee
so that he can face justice.

I wish to conclude my remarks by re-emphasizing
that, in the Kabuga case, the Government of Kenya has
fully discharged its international obligations and
cooperated with the ICTR officials, as called for by the
Security Council. We reiterate our commitment to the
high ideals of international criminal justice and the
eradication of impunity, and we will continue to
implement the recommendations of the Joint Kenya-
ICTR Task Force and the resolutions of the Security
Council.
