Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First, Sir, allow me to congratulate you on
acceding to the important functions of President of the
Security Council. I would also like to thank the
delegation of Libya for its effective work in the Chair
last month. We wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Hedi
Annabi, for the substantive briefing on recent events in
Haiti and for presenting the Secretary-General's report
on the work of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (S/2009/129). We agree
with the basic assessment and the recommendations
contained in the report.

The year 2008 was one of serious ordeals for the
Haitian people. There were hunger riots, which were
followed by a heightened Government crisis. There
were destructive tropical storms that claimed the lives
of some 800 people and caused great economic losses.
In total, around 800,000 people suffered from natural
disasters.

The destructive global crisis has aggravated an
already difficult socio-economic situation for Haitian
people. In March this year a Security Council mission
went to Haiti. Its purpose was to express support to the
people and Government of that country in overcoming
the challenges facing them and also to reassert the
willingness of the international community to continue
providing assistance to the Haitian people in terms of
establishing peace and security. We commend also the
recent visit to Haiti by the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, accompanied by the former President of the
United States, Mr. Bill Clinton.

It is important that the people of Haiti do
everything possible to achieve national unity and
reconciliation and have a broad political dialogue
establishing effective cooperation between all branches
of government. We support the combined plan of
progress indicators prepared by the Secretary-General
for Haiti for the period 2008 to 2011. We are convinced
that the implementation of that plan will facilitate
gradual progress in working on the priority areas for
Haiti.
We express our support for MINUSTAH, which is
playing an important role in supporting law and order
in the country. United Nations peacekeepers helped
re-establish control in Haiti during the unrest in April
and also provided comprehensive support to Haitian
people in mitigating the consequences of the
hurricanes. Here, we wish to express to the Head of
MINUSTAH, Mr. Hedi Annabi, and all his staff our
gratitude for their professionalism and selfless efforts
in providing help to Haiti.

We should note the good degree of cooperation
being established between the Mission and the law
enforcement bodies in the country. United Nations
peacekeepers and Haitian police officers are working
closely together in protecting maritime and land
borders and in fighting criminal groups. It is our hope
that States of that region will support Haiti in dealing
with and counteracting cross-border crime. Urgent
measures must now taken to improve the situation with
regard to human rights, fight corruption and reform the
justice and corrections system.

One important element in the work of
MINUSTAH is to help Haiti to re-establish and reform
security bodies. We hope that the planned gradual
increase in the staff levels in the National Police will
make it possible to begin the gradual transfer of
responsibility to Haitian police. The main
responsibility for establishing peace and security in
Haiti lies with the country's Government and people.
However, they continue to need international
assistance. Therefore, we supported the extension of
MINUSTAH'S mandate until October 2009. The
MINUSTAH police component includes Russian
officers and citizens.

We welcome the considerable contribution of
regional organizations of Latin America and countries
of the Caribbean in providing comprehensive support
to the Haitian people. We consider the high-level donor
conference for Haiti, planned for Washington on
14 April, to be very important. The Russian Federation
will continue to support the people and Government of
Haiti in building an independent, stable and democratic
State.

