Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): The
situation in Kosovo was caused by a crisis: the
displacement of many inhabitants of the region, people who
for the most part are Albanians. These displacements were
caused by destructive acts by Belgrade, the burning of the
houses and property of Albanians, as well as acts of terror,
rape and assassination.

The events that have taken place in Kosovo have
reminded us of a similar situation: that which took place in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This proves that the Serb
authorities have not learned any lessons from what
happened in Bosnia. The international community has
helped the Croats, Serbs and Bosniacs to achieve
international legitimacy, but the excesses that caused the
tragedy in Bosnia still remain. The Serb authorities in
Belgrade have started to act with the same ferocity as they
did in Bosnia, and this has led to the displacement of a
large number of people in the region.

We are concerned that, as in Bosnia, there are various
forms of displacement in this tragic situation unfolding in
Kosovo. There are people who have gone to live in the
mountains and people who are lost in various areas. Others
are scattered throughout the region. Others still are in
border areas waiting for the chance to emigrate. And there
are those who are refugees in neighbouring States and
States yet further away.

If one wishes to cite figures, according to United
Nations sources there are more than 840,000 displaced
persons within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
more than 700,000 outside that territory. So the total
number exceeds 1.5 million people out of a population of
two million. This seems to be a way of ridding Kosovo of
its population, of destroying its politics, culture and
religion.

I don't think we need to go into the military and
political factors that have caused this situation in Kosovo,
but these factors cannot be separated from the humanitarian
crisis. Therefore there is a need for us to try to redress the
humanitarian situation - the displacement of the
population - and to help the refugees. The situation of
a refugee, whoever he may be, touches our hearts.

It is in view of this humanitarian situation that the
delegations of Malaysia and Bahrain took the initiative to
submit a draft resolution. It has achieved consensus in the
Council and in the caucus and other groups of Member
States outside of the Council.

The draft resolution was the result of various
consultations and was discussed today. The humanitarian
efforts are particularly cited in this draft resolution, the
purpose of which is two-fold. One goal is to draw the
attention of the international community to the
humanitarian catastrophe occurring in Kosovo today, a
catastrophe that has led to the displacement of thousands
of people. The second goal is to make it possible for the
Council to review the situation in Kosovo from the
humanitarian perspective and to make humanitarian
concerns fundamental to the consideration of the military
and political aspects of the situation when the Council is
ready to do so.

The elements contained in the draft resolution are
the same as those found in other United Nations
resolutions and in non-United Nations resolutions. They
are what is necessary to resolve the problem of refugees.
International organizations have a great deal of experience
in this field.

The points contained in this draft resolution are as
follows. It appeals to States and organizations to
contribute resources to help the refugees, facilitating the
delivery of assistance and helping the refugees return to
their homes after the crisis is over. This humanitarian
draft resolution that is now before the Council, while
being a simple, caring resolution that does not invite
controversy, nonetheless deals with a humanitarian
tragedy which has caused the displacement of a large
proportion of the Kosovo population.

In keeping with this appeal we call upon Council
members to adopt this draft resolution by consensus so
that this humanitarian assistance that is so necessary to
the refugees can be given to them and so that their
situation can be improved pending their return to their
homes.

