I thank Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his briefing. The Syrian people have suffered a particularly harsh winter of violence and terrorism, with many remaining in dire need of life-saving aid in northern Syria. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic outbreak has the troubling potential to compound their suffering and put them at very high risk. Tunisia considers the appeal by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Geir Pedersen, for an immediate and sustainable nationwide ceasefire as a crucial guiding point for coordinated humanitarian relief efforts in Syria. We stress the critical importance of upholding respect for the 6 March ceasefire in Idlib and of restoring calm throughout Syria to enable the principled delivery of humanitarian aid to those areas where it is most needed. We reiterate our call on all parties to comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law and international law to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure. We also condemn the killing of humanitarian workers by armed groups in southern Syria. We stress the imperative of ensuring the safety of humanitarian staff who are on the front line of the emergency response, including the COVID-19 health response. A hybrid approach that combines cross-border and cross-line modalities remains vital to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance, especially in northern Syria. We stress the importance for that approach to be incremental in a way that respects, and ultimately restores, Syria's sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity, in line with international law and the principles of humanitarian action. As the Secretary-General set out in his report (S/2020/327), the COVID-19 crisis has heavily impacted the ability of humanitarian workers to operate, with the closing of most land border crossings into Syria. Cross-border and cross-line humanitarian access therefore needs to be recalibrated, especially in north-eastern Syria, so as to maintain a principled delivery of humanitarian aid, including medical aid. That can be ensured, in particular, by exploring the feasibility of air, land and sea options in collaboration with the Syrian Government and based on the United Nations and its partners' assessment of needs. It is of crucial importance that all parties set their differences aside and facilitate cooperation with the United Nations across the front lines in order to maintain timely, safe, unhindered and sustainable access, including for medical aid, to populations in need. We urge further cooperation between the Syrian Government and the United Nations, including through its country team, to remedy outstanding approvals of vital medical assistance. Finally, let me state that, in these trying times, humanitarian considerations must prevail over political agendas to enable an effective mitigation of the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak in Syria and a focus on the true battle of saving lives.
