Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): My delegation would
also like to thank the Committee of Experts for
preparing this excellent report pursuant to the Security
Council's resolution. We note with appreciation that
the members of the Committee, who worked very
intensively, have fulfilled the Committee's mandate
and provided us with a realistic and thought-provoking
document.

We feel certain that the specific recommendations
on the implementation of resolution 1333 (2000) that
are contained in the report will be of practical value to
the Security Council in achieving the full potential of
its decisions aimed at restoring peace and stability in
Afghanistan. We fully endorse the recommendation
that an international monitoring mechanism should be
established where the sanctions are in place in order to
ensure the credibility of the Security Council. Past and
current experience - specifically in some African
States - proves the importance of a well-designed
structure and terms of reference for such a monitoring
body to be effective and result-oriented.

We also believe that it is important to take into
account the views of the neighbouring countries. Their
cooperation is absolutely essential. Clearly, no
monitoring body will be successful unless there is full
commitment from the Member States involved in the
implementation of sanctions. My delegation welcomes
the fact that six neighbouring countries have confirmed
their full compliance with resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1333 (2000).

We believe that the question of strengthening
control on the borders of neighbouring States is central
to the monitoring process. From the standpoint of
future challenges in the area, they would benefit from a
greater level of coordination, which would be broadly
welcomed. In our view, consideration of this issue in
the "six plus two" group would be a logical step.

We think that the issue of an arms embargo is of
the utmost importance in the context of the ongoing
conflict in Afghanistan. As the report says,

"The flow of arms into and from
Afghanistan is a major long-term cause of
insecurity and instability in the central Asian
region." (5/2001/511, annex, enclosure, para. 33)

We also believe that establishing an effective
mechanism to prevent illicit arms trafficking into and
from Afghanistan will be the most challenging task
before the Council. It is obvious that cooperation on
the regional and international levels will be crucial in
finding the solution to this problem. In that context, we
hope that decisions and recommendations of the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which will be
held at New York this July, will be of practical use in
our deliberations on the situation in Afghanistan.

The report also includes many other
recommendations - regarding drug trafficking, the
closure of terrorist training camps, the establishment of
field teams, et cetera - that fall squarely within the
competence of the Security Council and that need to be
addressed promptly. The Chairman of the sanctions
committee, Ambassador Valdivieso, has elaborated on
this subject. I will simply state that we fully share the
views of the Committee in that regard.

Finally, I want to stress that we believe that the
establishment of a monitoring body in Afghanistan will
be an evolutionary process that will require continued
attention on the part of the Council. Here, I would also
like to reiterate once again my delegation's full support
for the idea expressed by the Secretary-General in his
previous report, and which is also reflected in the
present report, that an integrated or comprehensive
strategy is needed to provide for a solution to the
Afghanistan problem.

