Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to join previous speakers, Sir, in thanking
your country for its leadership on the issue before us
today and for having convened this very timely debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General for the information
he presented to us. We again welcome Ambassador
Lamamra to the Security Council.

We welcome the positive advances that have been
made since the debate that was held on this subject in
October 2009 (see S/PV.6206) in strengthening the
strategic relationship between the United Nations and
African Union, such as the establishment of the United

Nations Office to the African Union, support for the
development of the African standby force, and progress
in establishing the African peace and security
architecture. The cooperation achieved between the
two organizations under Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter is an important signal that should
inspire us to redouble our efforts to consolidate our
energies and common vision of objectives, regular
interaction and the coordination of areas of mutual
interest to meet the challenges to the continent.

We appreciate the United Nations efforts to
provide support and training to the African Union and
subregional organizations in their initiatives to manage
conflicts on the continent through mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding in contexts that are
often difficult and dangerous and with limited
resources. These activities must be complemented by a
review process of peacekeeping operations, such as
that initiated by the United Nations last year, in
particular in the Security Council, in order to ensure
that conflict prevention, the establishment,
maintenance and strengthening of peace, and the
promotion of development have a tangible impact on
the ground.

Challenges to international peace and security
and the multidimensional nature of this century's
conflicts have further complicated the deployment of
peacekeeping missions, in particular in Africa.
Although progress has been achieved in cooperation
between the main bodies of this Organization and the
African Union, much remains to be done given the
challenges we face in such conflicts and humanitarian
situations as those in Somalia, the Sudan, Darfur and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to name but a
few. There are also ongoing risks of destabilization in
certain regions as a result of institutional changes in
Government, political violence, human rights
violations and such transnational threats as organized
crime and the illicit traffic in weapons and drugs,
which undermine institutions and the rule of law.
Against that backdrop, it is important that the
annual meetings between the African Union Peace and
Security Council and this Security Council focus on
substantive issues of mutual interest and that they be
supplemented with joint strategies and measures to
assess results. We believe that the promotion of the
capacities of the African Union must continue to focus
on areas of cooperation with the Organization. It is
essential to continue to move forward in meeting the
objectives of the African Union's 10-year capacity-
building programme, in particular by developing the
operational capacities of the African standby force and
strengthening the African peace and security
architecture.

We recognize the fact that, beyond training,
logistics and material support are key to peacekeeping,
in particular in complex conflict situations. Our
delegation believes that the successful deployment of
any peacekeeping operation requires a clear mandate
and the support and resources necessary to the effective
implementation of that mandate.

The importance of having predictable, sustainable
and flexible financing mechanisms is of the greatest
importance when it comes to peacekeeping missions in
Africa, given the material and logistical constraints of
the African Union. We therefore support the Secretary-
General's recommendation to find a more predictable
and sustainable mechanism, especially in order to
ensure that that regional organization can achieve the
goals set out in the African Peace and Security
Architecture. We also think it is necessary to make
progress on improving peacekeeping operations on the
ground and making them more effective.

We would also like to reiterate the importance of
promoting comprehensive and long-term regional and
local strategies and measures in such areas as
preventive diplomacy and mediation, the protection of
civilians and strengthening institutions and the rule of
law.

We urge the Secretary-General to ensure that
those elements are broadly incorporated in the
capacity-building and cooperation efforts of the United
Nations Office in Addis Ababa. We hope that his next
report, in six months" time, will include concrete
recommendations to improve peacekeeping models in
Africa through lessons learned and the collaboration of
the African Union and the United Nations in Somalia,
Sudan and Darfur.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation's support for the draft presidential statement
that we will adopt at the end of this debate.

