Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Jordan for taking the initiative to convene
this meeting, and I would like to thank Mr. Taye-Brook
Zerihoun for his briefing.

Over the past few months, France has repeatedly
warned of the risks of a new wave of unrest in the
Middle East. That is now upon us. Faced with the
stepped-up construction of illegal settlements, which
daily compromises the viability of a Palestinian State,
and in the absence of a peace process, we have acted to
draw attention to the urgent need for a lasting political
solution to the conflict, which is the only way to avoid a
never-ending repetition of the same cycles of violence.

The explosion has now taken place in the West
Bank, in Jerusalem and in Gaza, but also in Israel,
sowing the fear of a possible third intifada. We have
condemned all the attacks, which both confirm our
concerns and uphold our position. France would like
to renew its appeal for greater mobilization on the part
of the international community to restore a genuine
political vision. The growing number of crises in
the region should not distract us from the urgency of
relaunching the peace process, on the contrary.

As Minister Laurent Fabius said yesterday in the
French Senate, we must relaunch a credible political
process that makes it possible to move towards a just
and lasting peace, to genuinely move forward. We
cannot continue to let the two-State solution unravel
day after day. That is all the more critical in the light
of the risk that Daesh could one day take control of the
Palestinian cause, with the disastrous consequences
that we can imagine.

To that end, we need to work on a number of
fronts. First, to begin with what is most urgent, it is
the responsibility of the Security Council to respond
to the current escalation. France has prepared a draft
statement that it would like to submit to the members
of the Council aimed at appealing to all parties to show
calm and restraint, but also to maintain the status quo
on the esplanade of the mosques.

Thereafter, we need to work to provide a concrete
political vision. The goal is not simply to manage the
crisis, but rather to provide it with a lasting solution.
In that regard, the establishment of an international
support group would be highly relevant. After bringing
the members of the Quartet together here in New York,
expanding its format for the first time to include key
Arab actors in addition to European and international
partners, as France proposed, we believe it is time to
enhance those efforts to restore a political vision in
order to bring pressure to bear on the parties that will
lead them to resume and successfully conclude peace
negotiations.

Such a format would make it possible to work on
three fronts. First, by introducing confidence-building
measures with the effect of immediately easing
tensions. Secondly, by offering our collective support
to Palestinian reconciliation under the authority of
President Mahmoud Abbas. Thirdly, by developing
a set of the guarantees and compensation measures
that each of the parties will need in order to sign an
agreement. France supports the convening of a meeting
of the newly expanded Quartet in the near future.

We cannot simply do nothing. We need to mobilize
all available means to provide a lasting solution to the
conflict. The Security Council has an important role
to play in support of those efforts. We need to assume
our responsibility. As a friend of both the Israeli and
the Palestinian peoples, France is more determined
than ever to play its part and to work tirelessly with its
partners in the service of peace.

