Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing on the situation in the Central African Republic.
We listened with interest to all of today's briefers and
their assessments of the situation in the country.

We agree that the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
signed on 6 February, is an important starting point
towards the eventual resolution of the situation in the
country. The Government and armed groups should
take advantage of that window of opportunity, and the
international community should render them every
assistance. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) has an important role to play
in this context. We realize that the Blue Helmets' task
is not an easy one, given the size of the country, the
logistical problems and the fragile security situation.
The Mission can of course count on our support.

We see signs ofprogress in the efforts to overcome
the crisis and move towards national reconciliation. The
most important thing right now is to make the process
as inclusive as possible, ensure a balanced approach
and take the interests of all stakeholders in the Central
African issue into account. We support President
Touadera's efforts aimed at conducting a political
dialogue, carrying out speedy reforms of the security
sector, improving the capacity of the armed forces and
expanding State institutions throughout the country.
We agree that it is important to combat impunity, but
the approach to that should be a carefully ordered one
and subordinate to the goal of national reconciliation.
The issues of transitional justice and amnesties should
be addressed at the national level. Support mechanisms
must not undermine the progress towards a settlement.

Another important issue is the implementation
of the idea of forming so-called Unite's speciales
mixtes de securite for ensuring security in the areas
controlled by armed groups. We believe that realizing
initiative will make a significant contribution to the
reintegration of combatants and generally benefit
national reconciliation. We hope that MINUSCA will
provide the necessary assistance in that regard.

We are ready to actively participate in the work
of the multilevel monitoring mechanisms to follow up
on the implementation of the Political Agreement. We
intend to support the work of the provincial peace and
reconciliation committees and the technical security
committees in using peace volunteers and civil-
society representatives to raise awareness among the
inhabitants of the Central African Republic's northern
and north-eastern provinces regarding the content,
implementation and impact of the peace agreement.

Russia is making a significant contribution to
strengthening the combat capacity of the Central
African Republic's security forces. At the request of
the country's leadership, we are providing Bangui with
free military and technical assistance. In 2018, with the
permission of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic, the Russian Ministry of Defence sent small
arms and ammunition to the Central African army.
Preparations are currently under way for a second
shipment of military material. With the Committee's
knowledge, Russian instructors have been officially
dispatched to Bangui to assist in training Central
African military personnel. On 27 April in Berengo
the seventh graduation of the Central African Armed
Forces, a 318-strong marine amphibious battalion, was
attended by the country's leadership and representatives
of the diplomatic corps. The number of national armed
force troops trained by Russian instructors now totals
2,236, 126 of them officers, and the Central African
Republic's leadership has repeatedly praised their
combat readiness.

During their time in the Central African Republic,
Russian specialists have been carrying out a number of
measures aimed at normalizing the humanitarian and
social situation of the population, creating conditions
conducive to establishing an interfaith and inter-ethnic
dialogue. Three hospitals have been set up in the cities
of Bria, Ouadda and Mbaiki, with each treating 300
patients a month and providing humanitarian assistance
to all in need. We organized a humanitarian convoy
of more than 15 trucks from Khartoum to Bangui
through remote and inaccessible areas of the Central
African Republic. Russian representatives have visited
the Muslim enclave near the main mosque in Bangui
several times to distribute humanitarian assistance to
low-income families and help with funerals. In the cities
of Berengo and Bria we have provided assistance for
rebuilding prayer houses. We have organized more than
10 round tables on peacebuilding issues in the Central
African Republic and conducted joint football training
for athletes from Christian and Muslim communities.
We will continue to provide comprehensive assistance
to the Central African Republic and work actively
to establish lasting peace in the country. We are
ready to coordinate our efforts with all who are
involved in seeking to normalize the situation without
hidden agendas.

