Mr. Leao Monteiro (Cape Verde)(spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes the convening of this open
meeting of the Security Council, which is open to persons
other than the members of the Council. This enables the
Council to learn of the feelings and views of the largest
possible number of those on whose behalf this organ has
special responsibilities.

After refusing to accept the occupier for 24 years,
the people of East Timor have been cruelly punished for
having taken the opportunity offered them of choosing
independence, something which we all, as Member States
of the United Nations, do enjoy ourselves.

Four months ago, the Agreement was concluded,
arranging for the popular consultation for the people of
East T imor, conducted by the United Nations. Indonesia
formally assumed exclusive responsibility for ensuring
law and order and security for the inhabitants of the
territory. All of the parties involved in the Agreement
kept their word, including the FALINTIL fighters -
everybody except for the occupying power.

For many long months there had been increasing
Violence, better organized every day; more openly
practised every day, suspecting, for good reason, that any
reaction might present a pretext for derailing the popular
consultation. The international community kept a low
profile and prayed. Xanana Gusmao used all of his vision
and did everything he could.

After 30 August, which was fairly tranquil, there
was a feeling that something real, something good, had
just happened in the world. And then the savagery and the
irrational hatred descended on the people of East Timor.
We can see it now before our eyes, and I shall spare you
the details which have already been provided by better
informed and more eloquent speakers.

I would just like to express our admiration for the
United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) and
pay a well-deserved tribute to its staff, who have
demonstrated courageous solidarity vis-a-Vis the refugees,
particularly in Dili. Their conduct was indeed an honour
for the United Nations, and we are very grateful to them.

Yesterday's attack against the UNAMET compound
confirmed how disturbing UNAMET's presence is to
those who wish to be rid of the Mission and of media
representatives so that they can finish their work without
the knowledge of the international community.

 

Every effort must be made to put an end to the
suffering and the terror inflicted on the people of East
Timor and to the repulsive attempt to reverse the process of
the emancipation of its people.

It is generally understood that so far Indonesia has not
had the ability or the resolve to put an end to the
intolerable violence that is ravaging East Timor. We are not
speaking of the events of the last few days but of those that
have been occurring for many months now.

It is also widely believed that unless the actions of the
Indonesian military forces change immediately and
drastically, three types of initiatives or measures must be
taken. These are: insisting on the proposal to send an
international security force; adopting measures involving
economic pressure on Indonesia at the multilateral and
individual levels; and providing, as quickly as possible,
multifaceted, coordinated and duly protected international
humanitarian assistance to the people. These would be
accompanied by the return of the refugees and displaced
persons.

We believe that the members of this Council and the
world in general have irrefutable evidence that something
should have been done yesterday. What confirmation could
the Council be awaiting about the situation in Dili - and
not just in Dili - from the mission it has dispatched to
Indonesia? And how can we interpret the stance taken by
certain high-level Indonesian authorities that it is not yet
time to establish an international force? Might we not
perhaps be forgetting that under international law, which we
must respect, there is no Indonesian province in East Timor
but rather an illegally occupied territory?

The events that have taken place in East Timor
represent a real test for the international community. It is a
question of determining whether, in the final analysis, the
value of human life, the human rights of a people and the
democratic expression of the will of a nation are dependent
on the respective sizes of the oppressor and of the victims.
We must pass that test.

