Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for her briefing.

Since 1948, peacekeeping operations have
encountered great Challenges. Currently, the most
significant among them have been related to the
protection of civilians and the asymmetric threats faced
by the personnel of missions on the ground. Moreover,
there are also logistical challenges in general, as
well as those related to the development of personnel
capacities, adequate equipment, force generation
and the concept of operations, which are instruments
needed to foster the strengthening of the execution of
peacekeeping missions.

For nearly 70 years, through the implementation
of their mandates, missions have contributed to
peacebuilding in various countries. Unfortunately, that
has taken place at a very high cost, owing to the loss of
the invaluable lives of soldiers and civilian personnel
carrying out their duties. Bolivia pays its most sincere
and heartfelt tribute to every man and women among
the contingents and personnel of United Nations
peacekeeping operations around the world, who spare
no effort in fulfilling their mission and mandate
despite material constraints, insufficient resources
in some situations, difficult conditions on the ground
and a volatile security environment. We also thank
troop- and police-contributing countries and those that
contribute observers and civilian personnel for their
impartiality, solidarity with and commitment to the
United Nations system and to countries suffering from
the consequences of armed conflicts and instability.

The international stage is obviously not static in
nature. It is undergoing remarkable transformations.
The constant threat posed by terrorist groups and
transnational crime highlight the need for peacekeeping
missions to undergo structural changes that would
allow them to adapt to deal more effectively with their
respective contexts. Accordingly, the effective and
adequate provision of the necessary financial, human
and material resources to missions requires technical,
logistical and, above all, political analyses in line with
the mandates adopted by the Security Council, which
must be more realistic, precise and better-focused.
We believe that the Vancouver principles provide
an important foundation with respect to training,
monitoring, reporting, the protection of minors and
the participation and inclusion of women in all aspects
of peacekeeping operations. We therefore emphasize
prioritizing the improvement of institutional flexibility
regarding the deployment of troops, as well as selecting
the best trained and most specialized among them
to respond to the asymmetric contexts that we just
mentioned. Similarly, it is essential that improvements
in the material and, above all, technological aspects
enable peacekeeping missions to be more effective in
fulfilling their mandates. It should be highlighted that
adequate equipment and training of troops are not only
the responsibility of contributing countries, but also of
our entire Organization.

The constant attacks against peacekeepers, an
example of which occurred only a few days ago with
tragic consequences, illustrate the need to strengthen
key aspects of missions - especially those involving
situational awareness on the ground, mobility and the
reaction response of units - above all by reinforcing
the defensive and protective resources of the camps and
personnel. In that regard, we must consider all possible
support modalities for funding peace operations
in a sustained, predictable and flexible manner in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 2320
(2016). Those modalities must also be assessed and
revised in a manner that accords greater autonomy
to the United Nations vis-a-vis countries that make
more substantial contributions, as the financial factor
can be used against the very purpose and objective of
the missions.

Moreover, within the context of peacekeeping, it is
imperative to ensure the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda pursuant to resolution
1325 (2000), thereby reaffirming, ensuring and
encouraging women's participation in peace processes
through their active participation in prevention,
mediation, negotiation and dialogue in order to achieve
solutions on level playing fields in post-conflict
reconstruction. Priority must also be given to gender
parity in the area of peace operations, pursuant to
resolution 2242 (2015).

Finally, it is worth mentioning that no peacekeeping
mission can succeed if it does not enjoy the support of
the host country. In that regard, continuous and fluid
cooperation and information-sharing between missions
and local authorities is essential. Bolivia reiterates
that the preventive approach based on case-by-case
experiences is essential when defining mandates,
whatever their nature, with strict respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
States, while promoting their national ownership and
without using them to justify intervention.

In conclusion, as this is the last public briefing of
the year - in principle - my delegation would like
to take this opportunity to congratulate the Japanese
delegation on successfully leading the Council's
work this month. We also warmly commend the six
non-permanent members whose terms are ending in
this important forum, while extending our cordial
congratulations for the significant work that they have
done in pursuit of international peace and security.

