Mr. Nguyen Thanh Chau (Viet Nam): Murphy's
Law applies to this particular case. What the whole
international community has breathlessly feared has
happened. The war against Iraq has entered its seventh
day. It is deeply deplorable that the worldwide protests
and tireless efforts by many Member States and
members of the Security Council have failed to bring
about a solution that could have helped to avoid the
tragedy.
It is sad to learn of human casualties and
destruction under the winds of war. The Vietnamese
have an old saying: "Tears always flow downward", to
describe the pains and the agony of parents who lose
their children. We therefore fully understand the agony
and pain of the parents on both sides of the war who
have lost their sons and daughters and their nightmares,
which last as long as the war endures. It is even sadder
to look at the wounded Iraqi children lying in hospitals,
who never expected to end up there after so much
suffering during 12 years of sanctions. I believe that
they would ask, why they, of all the people, always fall
victim to the mistakes of grown-ups.

The use of force against an independent,
sovereign State and Member of the United Nations
constitutes a gross violation of the Charter and the
fundamental principles of international law. It also
renders the United Nations ineffective and sets an
extremely dangerous precedent in international
relations. We believe that the unilateral and pre-
emptive military actions against Iraq will not help to
resolve the world's complex problems or ensure its
security. It increases the risk of further spreading
misunderstanding, radicalism and spiralling violence in
the Middle East. The outbreak of sheer force of arms in
this already volatile region can only exacerbate the
tensions and fractures that fuel terrorism. Viet Nam is
opposed to the war against Iraq, as the statement by the
spokespersons of the Foreign Ministry and the
Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
made crystal clear on 20 March 2003.

War is always a death sentence for peace. We join
our voice with others who call for an immediate end to
the military actions against Iraq. This fait accompli
demands a swift response from the international
community in the field of humanitarian assistance to
the Iraqi people. As the supplies of essential
necessities, on which 60 per cent of the Iraqi
population depend, are reported to be running very low,
the oil for food programme should be resumed swiftly.
It is imperative for the United Nations to shoulder the
responsibilities of coordinating the international efforts
to help the Iraqi people to overcome the dire
consequences of war and rebuild their country. The
people and Government of Viet Nam are ready to take
an active part in that collective endeavour.

