Mr. Williamson (United States of America):
Iwant to thank the Permanent Representative of
Colombia for drafting the non-paper on the subject of
arms embargoes that has informed our current
discussion. Ambassador Valdivieso's chairmanship of
the Sanctions Committee on Afghanistan, which deals
with arms embargoes, among other things, has been
exemplary. He has been fair, businesslike and effective,
and that the Sanctions Committee has made a
significant contribution to the war against terrorism in
curbing the financing of terrorists and in working on
arms embargoes. Sadly, these weapons are contributing
to violence and suffering around the world.

The United States recognizes the agonizing
consequences of illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, especially in areas of conflict, where the
problem is most acute, such as in Sierra Leone, in the
Central African Republic - where there are three guns
for every citizen - and in Guinea-Bissau, among other
countries.

The United States believes that solutions to the
problem of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons must be practical and effective. The most
effective way to prevent small arms and light weapons
from getting into the hands of those who would misuse
them is through strict export and import controls,
strong brokering laws, ensuring the security of small
arms and light weapons stockpiles, and destroying
excess.

The United States has one of the strongest
systems in the world for regulating the export of arms,
with extremely rigorous procedures. All commercial
exporters and brokers of significant military
equipment- including small arms and light
weapons- must be licensed and must submit each
transaction for approval by the Department of State.
That includes automatic rifles, machine guns, shoulder-
fired missiles and rocket systems, as well as light
mortars. All transactions are conditioned on United
States authorization for re-export. We rigorously
monitor arms transfers and routinely investigate
suspicious activities. In the past six years, we have
interdicted thousands of illicit arms and have cut off
exports to countries that failed to comply with United
States law. Individuals convicted of violating our
export control laws are subject to statutory debarment,
to fines up to $1 million and/or to incarceration for up
to 10 years.

The United States has also been active
internationally in stemming the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons. We offer bilateral financial
and technical assistance to help countries to develop
national export and import controls, to improve border
security against arms smugglers and to secure and
destroy illicit stocks of small arms and light weapons
in conflict-prone regions. The United States has
contributed approximately $100 million in assistance to
improve small-arms controls in Russia, in the
Caucasus, in Central Asian and Eastern European
States, in the United Arab Emirates, in Sierra Leone, in
Uganda, in Liberia, in Rwanda, in Ethiopia, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in Angola, in
Sri Lanka, in Timor-Leste, in the Philippines and in
Colombia. We remain ready to continue that support.
The United States strongly supports effective export
and import controls, restraint in trade to regions of
conflict, strict observance and enforcement of Security
Council embargoes, strict regulation of arms brokers,
transparency in exports, improving the security of arms
stockpiles and the destruction of excess.

The paper submitted by the Government of
Colombia in advance of this session thoughtfully
focuses on the issue of arms embargoes. The United
States supports almost all of the recommendations -
both political and financial - made by the monitoring
group established by resolution 1390 (2002).
Exchanging information on the status of existing arms
embargoes is of great value to the Security Council in
deciding how best to establish and enforce Security
Council arms embargoes.

The lack of success of some of those embargoes
is due to porous borders, to weak enforcement and to a
lack of political will on the part of national
Governments. Just this week, the report to the Security
Council of the Panel of Experts on sanctions against
Liberia confirmed that the Government of Charles
Taylor continues, in flagrant abuse of the Security
Council's arms embargo, to procure weapons-
including machine guns, missile launchers, mines and
small arms - through black-market, illegal arms deals.
That continued influx of weapons threatens the
tentative stability that has been achieved in Sierra
Leone.

The Panel's report notes that, in many cases of
illegal imports to Liberia, the end-user certificates used
as cover for weapons diverted to Liberia were all from
member States of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). It is crucial that ECOWAS
members themselves take the necessary steps to
effectively enforce their own moratorium on the
import, export and manufacture of light weapons. It is
disappointing that only half of the member States have
created such moratoriums.

The crisis in Cote d'Ivoire is an example of the
bleeding of weapons between military forces and
civilian populations, which is exacerbating divisions
within society. The United States urges the parties in
Cote d'Ivoire to negotiate a peaceful solution to the
current crisis. Yet the responsibility to control small
arms cannot be placed on a single State alone.
C6te d'Ivoire's neighbouring States - some of which
are also unstable because of their own inability to
control the flow of small arms - are contributing to
instability by allowing the illicit trade and passage of
small arms across their borders. The view of the United
States is that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration provisions are an important element of
negotiated peace settlements, such as we have seen in
Sierra Leone, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in Angola.

The United States has a history of demonstrated
commitment to finding practical and effective ways of
curbing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, such as our own strict export/import controls
on small arms and the significant financial support we
have given to other States. We look forward to working
with other States in continuing to fulfil the
enforcement of all small-arms embargoes created by
the Security Council.

