Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): Allow me first of all to thank Under-
Secretary-General Holmes for his briefing on the
humanitarian situation in the Sudan and Chad. We are
especially grateful to him for visiting the region, which
of course has enabled him to have first-hand
information. We would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Chad for his important
statement.

With regard to Chad, we are especially concerned
about the precarious state of the overall security
situation in the country, especially the ongoing acts of
violence and killings of humanitarian staff, in
particular in the East. Acts of banditry, clashes between
communities, the militarization of camps and forced
recruitment, especially of children, call for action by
the Security Council and the international community
as a whole. The end of the mandate of the European
Union military operation in the Republic of Chad and
in the Central African Republic in March 2009 is
further reason for that. We hope that the new United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad (MINURCAT II) will be in a position to meet the
many expectations we all have for it.

The effective deployment at the beginning of
November of the integrated security detachment in four
areas in eastern Chad and the training of gendarmes
and police by MINURCAT are encouraging steps in
making camps for refugees and displaced persons safer.
We hope those initiatives will be extended to other
sites.

We commend the Government of Chad for its
efforts to combat banditry, for that is the only way we
can promote the return of refugees and displaced
persons in the long-term, as well as the success of
development policies. We encourage the Government
to continue its efforts in that regard.

Given the many challenges faced by the people of
Chad, we encourage donors to make additional efforts,
especially by responding to the appeal launched at
Geneva on 19 November 2008 by the Under-Secretary-
General, which was reiterated this afternoon by
Mr. Holmes.

With regard to the Sudan, despite the signing of a
ceasefire agreement between the authorities and rebel
groups and the staffing increase in the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), there is still a great deal to be done, in
particular in the humanitarian area. We urge the
Government and the rebel forces to do their utmost to
ensure the protection of civilians and the freedom of
movement for humanitarian staff. In that regard, we
commend the constructive spirit in which Mr. Holmes
engaged the Sudanese authorities during his visit.

The ongoing deterioration in the humanitarian
and security situation in camps for refugees and
internally displaced persons in Darfur, the eastern part
of Chad and the north-east of the Central African
Republic requires intensified efforts by the entire
international community, especially by the Security
Council. MINURCAT and UNAMID should further
coordinate their efforts to strengthen their presence in
the camps and regions bordering Chad and the Sudan.

Lastly, we welcome the normalization of
diplomatic relations between Chad and the Sudan. We
hope that that will contribute to improving the
humanitarian situation and, in general, establish peace
and security in the subregion. We also hope that similar
significant progress will be achieved, especially before
the next meeting of the contact group on the
implementation of the Dakar agreements.

I cannot conclude without thanking humanitarian
personnel for their daily efforts on behalf of civilians,
who risk their lives every day under difficult
conditions.

