Mr. Kubis: With a deep feeling of sorrow, Ijoin the
Security Council in strongly condemning the terrorist
attack that took place yesterday in Nice. I express my
deepest sympathies and condolences to the families
of the victims and to the Government and the people
of France.

The recent strategic victories against the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Fallujah and
Qayyarah and the progress made in cutting off ISIL
forces in Hawjia have once again proved that Iraqis
are capable of defeating Da'esh, with support from
the international community. Following the liberation
of Fallujah, Prime Minister Al Abadi sent senior
delegations to provide briefings on Iraq's progress
against Da'esh to a number of States, notably to the
members of the Gulf Cooperation Council, with
an invitation to join forces in the fight against this
increasingly global threat to international peace and
security. The need for cooperation and mutual support
has never been more apparent. As you mentioned,
Mr. President, hundreds of civilians were recently
killed in a spate of attacks attributed to ISIL in Iraq,
Turkey, Bangladesh and Saudi Arabia.

Progress against Da'esh has now put liberation of
Mosul firmly on the agenda. As preparations continue,
with increased focus and acceleration, a point of
importance for us is that Prime Minister Al Abadi has
prioritized United Nations-supported humanitarian
operations and has requested the international
community to urgently provide the necessary
financing. Together with planning the military aspects,
the Government and the local actors need to accelerate
political planning for the day after the liberation, while
addressing issues of governance, law and order and
political management of Mosul and the rest of Ninewah
governorate. I note the increased coordination between
Baghdad and Erbil and encourage continued efforts
to that end. Also, any international assistance must
be fully coordinated with the Government of Iraq and
must respect the principle of the sovereignty of Iraq.
On 28 June, the Federal Supreme Court ruled
that the parliamentary sessions of 14 and 26 April
were nullified. That decision means that the situation
reverts to the pre-14 April status quo, with Speaker
Al-Jubouri maintaining his position, while the five
ministerial appointments of the 26 April session need
to be revisited. The Parliament returned from recess
and held plenary sessions on 12 and 13 July.

Also today, tens of thousands supporters of
Muqtada al-Sadr demonstrated in Baghdad in support of
reforms and security and against corruption. In the past
weeks, protests against the Government also emerged
in response to the deteriorated security situation in
Baghdad in the wake of terrorist attacks - notably
in Karrada on 3 July, which victimized hundreds of
civilians, a barbaric act that all of us condemned in
strongest possible terms. Of concern are repeated calls,
supported by many politicians, to conduct retaliatory
executions of those convicted of terrorist acts.

The need for Iraqi political and community
leaders, in particular the Council of Representatives,
to prioritize reconciliation based on a single vision and
coordinated approach remains a matter of considerable
urgency to ensure that the post-Da'esh phase in Iraq's
history be more stable, secure and prosperous than in
the past. Sustainable peace and security can be achieved
only with a historic compromise that puts an end to the
divisive policies of intolerance, inequality and political
and social injustice.

I continue to call on the Government to also take
specific steps to promote women's rights and their
participation in politics and national reconciliation
processes as part of the reform process, as well as to
support the victims of conflict-based sexual violence
more effectively.

In the Fallujah operation, the Government gave
unprecedented priority to protecting the lives and
dignity of civilians. The military assisted civilians
in identifying safe escape routes and facilitated the
extraction of civilians from war zones. A week into
the operation, the Prime Minister announced that the
battle would be slowed to better ensure the safety of
civilians trapped inside the city and used by ISIL as
human shields. That made a difference. Nearly 90,000
civilians took the decision to leave, and have made it
to safety under some of the most difficult and perilous
conditions imaginable. That is also a political statement.

Notwithstanding all of that, since the announcement
of the Falluj ah military operation, on 22 May, the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has
received credible reports of human rights violations and
crimes, including torture and killings, disappearances
and other allegations of mistreatment of those detained,
committed by elements of the popular mobilization
forces and the Iraqi security forces operating in the
Fallujah area, notably during the initial phases of
the operation. For example, UNAMI has registered
statements supporting claims that 95 men remain
unaccounted for after they were intercepted by forces
affiliated to popular mobilization forces while leaving
their homes in Al-Sejar area on 25 May, while another
643, men including boys, remain missing since 5 June
after they were intercepted by mobilization-affiliated
forces while leaving Saqlawiyah.

On 6 June, Prime Minister Al Abadi announced
the setting up of a committee to investigate violations
and crimes. In my meeting with Mr. Al Abadi last
Monday, I reiterated the message delivered to the Prime
Minister by the Secretary-General in his telephone call
on 26 June, namely, that it was imperative that the
committee took swift action to identify the whereabouts
of the missing men and boys and to secure their safe
release or transfer to lawful Government authorities.
The authorities must hold accountable any individual
who may have been responsible for any violations
that have been committed. Also, those lessons from
Fallujah shall be taken into account while planning
liberation of Mosul.

A newly published UNICEF report reveals that the
number of children in danger of death, injury, sexual
violence, abduction or recruitment into armed groups
in Iraq increased by 1.3 million in 18 months. I urge
the Government of Iraq to establish as soon as possible
a high-level inter-ministerial committee to ensure
coordination and dialogue between the Government of
Iraq and the United Nations on all issues with regard to
grave violations of children's rights.

The retaking of Fallujah should not cast doubt on
the remaining ability of ISIL to conduct devastating
attacks in different areas of the country, despite its
consistent losses of manpower, command structure,
morale, local support and territory. While the Dae'sh's
governance project in Iraq is collapsing, the group has
increasingly resorted to brutal insurgency tactics using
suicide bombers. The pattern of reinvigorated urban
terrorism with a sectarian focus, notably the attacks
against civilian targets and infrastructure in Baghdad, is
indicative of that trend. Luckily, so far, they have failed
in their efforts to re-ignite sectarian confrontation.
Providing and guaranteeing law and order and security
to all citizens of Iraq is a top responsibility of the
respective State organs and institutions and must remain
their prerogative. With the progress in fighting Da'esh,
reforming Iraqi security institutions and ensuring that
the State has full control of all armed groups becomes
a priority.

The humanitarian situation has deteriorated further
since the start of the military operation for Fallujah,
with 640,000 persons currently displaced persons
in Anbar governorate alone. Nationwide, more than
10 million Iraqis require some form of humanitarian
assistance, including 3.4 million people who have been
displaced since the rise of ISIL in 2014. Although the
humanitarian appeal for 2016 requested $861 million,
as I brief the Council today it is only funded at
38 per cent. A reallocation of existing resources is
under way, but more funding is urgently needed, not
only for the current emergency response but also for
the anticipated requirements arising from the Mosul
liberation campaign, where the humanitarian effort
could cost as much as $1 billion. The Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs estimates
that the Mosul operation will be the largest and most
sensitive humanitarian crisis in the world in 2016, and
it is vital that resources are made available now to make
timely preparations possible.

The impact of underfunding on the crisis in Iraq
is significant. The patience of host communities is
disappearing and the distrust in the Government is
growing. Prospects for stability and reconciliation
after ISIL are put at risk. The United Nations efforts
to help stabilize areas newly liberated from ISIL are
expanding. That includes Ramadi, and will also soon
include Fallujah. Stabilization efforts can only expand
further after the threat of improvised explosive devices
and the explosive remnants of war has been addressed.
The United Nations Mine Action Service is working in
Iraq with partners to address explosive contamination.
It also urgently requires financing in the amount of a
minimum of $300 million over the next three years.

With regard to the Kuwaiti file, I would like
to welcome the new dynamics, determination and
political will to achieve results that the Iraqi Ministry
of Defence has shown since taking over the technical
overview of the missing Kuwaiti persons dossier. New
momentum was also evident in the efforts of the Iraqi
Ministry for Foreign Affairs to locate missing Kuwaiti
property. Thousands of Kuwaiti books are being
prepared for official handover to the Government of
Kuwait. During his recent visit to Kuwait on 26 June,
the Secretary-General, in his meeting with the Amir
of the State of Kuwait, commended Kuwait for its
consistent support for Iraq, while he reconfirmed the
United Nations continuing resolve to see progress on
the file. The Government of Iraq, in turn, has to abide
by its international obligations and strive to achieve
concrete results on this very important matter.

The world must recognize that Iraq requires more,
not less, international support at this critical juncture.
The pledging conference organized in support of Iraq
to be held in Washington, DC, on 20 July is a sign of
the international community's continued commitment
to a stable and peaceful Iraq and its recognition of
the sacrifices that Iraq and its people bear in fighting
the Da'esh terrorist group. While the international
community is ready to offer assistance, Iraqis must
implement substantive reforms, in particular economic,
institutional and anti-corruption reforms that will put
their country on the road to recovery and improve the
lives of Iraqis. People demand genuine change.

