The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Norway.

First of all, I would like to express Norway's
support for the Arta peace process, which continues to
be the most viable basis for peace and national
reconciliation in Somalia. The objective of the Arta
process, however, has not yet been fully achieved.
Norway urges the Transitional National Government,
other de facto authorities, as well as all political and
traditional leaders in Somalia, to continuously make
every effort to complete, without preconditions, the
peace and reconciliation process. This should be done
through dialogue and involvement of all parties in a
spirit of mutual accommodation and tolerance, with a
View to establishing an all-inclusive Government in
Somalia, based on devolution of power.

Norway is encouraged by the attention and
importance that the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) heads of State gave to the need
for national reconciliation in Somalia at the Khartoum
summit in January this year. We fully support the
decision taken by the IGAD Foreign Ministers
committee on Somalia to convene a national
reconciliation conference in the second half of April
this year. We believe that this new and constructive
joint involvement by Ethiopia, Djibouti and Kenya
might be a significant step forward towards
rehabilitation and restoration of peace and stability in
Somalia.

Despite this cautious optimism, I must say that
Norway is deeply concerned about the recent fighting
in Mogadishu and in the Gedo region. These acts of
violence are serious obstacles to the peace process in
Somalia. It is in this context of vital importance that all
States and other actors comply scrupulously with the
arms embargo established by resolution 733 (1992).
Revitalizing the arms embargo through the
establishment of a monitoring mechanism should be a
priority to this end.

Norway is deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Somalia, in particular in the
Gedo and Bari regions. I would like in particular to
draw attention to the urgent need for international
assistance in covering food and water shortfalls, and to
further underline the fact that longer-term intervention
will be required to build sustainable solutions.

Norway notes with satisfaction that the United
Nations, the Red Cross and the Red Crescent
movements, as well as other non-governmental
organizations, continue to provide humanitarian and
development assistance to all areas of Somalia. We call
upon all parties in Somalia to respect fully the security
and safety of the personnel of the United Nations, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and other
non-governmental organizations, and to guarantee their
complete freedom of movement and access throughout
Somalia.

Support from the international community to
contribute to improving the economic, humanitarian,
political and security situation in Somalia is of the
utmost importance. This will not only benefit the
people of Somalia, but will also contribute to peaceful
development at the regional level in the Horn of Africa
and reinforce the global effort to counter international
terrorism.

I would like to take this opportunity to encourage
all Member States to respond urgently and generously
to the United Nations Consolidated Inter-Agency
Appeal for 2002.

While acknowledging the conclusions of the
recent security assessment, and thus recognizing that a
peace-building mission for Somalia cannot yet be
launched, Norway encourages the Secretary-General to
make greater efforts to ensure that the peace dividend
aspect of targeted assistance is fully exploited. The
further expansion of United Nations programmes,
through humanitarian and development projects, as
well as specific peace-building activities, should be a
priority.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Transitional National Government of
Somalia.

