Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): My delegation
joins others in commending Sweden for convening this
important debate in such a timely fashion. It offers an
important and early opportunity for Member States to
engage with Secretary-General Guterres in his areas
of priority, namely, conflict prevention and sustaining
peace. In that regard, we thank the Secretary-
General for outlining his vision, to which we listened
very carefully.

Malaysia aligns itself with the statements made
by the representatives of Thailand, Venezuela and
Finland on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and
the Group of Friends of Mediation, respectively.

Malaysia reaffirms its support for the principle
that conflict prevention should lie at the heart of the
Security Council's work and activities. Effectively
addressing the myriad challenges to international peace
and security today requires significant shifts in the
way in which the Council and the United Nations as a
whole work. We also welcome the increased emphasis
on partnerships across and beyond the United Nations
system that seek to ensure that possible responses are
more comprehensive, credible and sustainable.

Moving forward, the Security Council must
work more holistically with the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office and
the Peacebuilding Fund, and break through the silos
that hamper the Organization's work. Predictable
funding is also important for sustaining peace. We
would encourage non-traditional donors and other
partners to consider making voluntary contributions
to the Peacebuilding Fund with the goal of ensuring
predictable and sustainable funding for future
peacebuilding efforts. In the light of the renewed focus
on the primacy of politics, the Security Council should
take more proactive steps aimed at acting preventively,
including by empowering its President to conduct low-
key, quiet-diplomacy dialogues with representatives of
the countries on its agenda.

Throughout Malaysia's recently concluded term
on the Council, we saw that approach deployed, and
we believe that its more frequent use would benefit
the Council. At the very least, it would provide an
avenue for direct engagement with the countries
concerned. Timely action and proactive measures
are essential, if the Council is to effectively pursue
the conflict prevention agenda. At the same time, we
should not lose sight of the broader strategic objectives
of addressing the root causes of conflict, which may
include poverty, inequality, human rights violations
and even environmental destruction.

Malaysia believes that the Security Council remains
uniquely and centrally placed to take steps to implement
the conflict-prevention agenda. As elaborated on by
previous speakers, the Charter provides the necessary
tools; what is required is the political will and leadership
on the part of the Council to utilize and implement
them, working, of course, in close coordination and
cooperation with the Secretariat, Member States and
other partners and stakeholders.

In concluding, Malaysia renews its commitment
to work with and support the Secretary-General in the
discharge of his role and mandate, and we also pledge
to continue supporting the work of the Council.

