Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I am honoured to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. I should like to express my
appreciation for your wise guidance of the work of the
Council. I should also like to express my deep
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of the
People's Republic of China for his skilful guidance of
the Council's work during the month of April.

The League of Arab States welcomes the Darfur
peace agreement. The League expresses its sincere
appreciation to President Sassou Nguesso of the
Congo, President Obasanjo of Nigeria and Mr. Salim
Ahmed Salim, Special Envoy and chief mediator of the
African Union, for their efforts to achieve the
agreement. The League calls upon the factions that
have not yet done so to promptly sign the agreement
and to commit themselves to it in order to ensure
lasting and comprehensive peace and stability in
Darfur.

The critical situation in the province of Darfur
today makes it necessary to ensure that there is
concrete implementation of the agreement on the
ground and that all parties comply fully with its
provisions in good faith so that it can have a quick
impact in terms of improving the security and
humanitarian situation in Darfur. All the parties must
also cooperate actively with the African Union Mission
in the Sudan in its efforts to fulfil its mandate.

The humanitarian situation in Darfur urgently
requires additional support to meet the humanitarian
requirements of those most in need. In that connection,
the League of Arab States urges United Nations
Member States, regional and international
organizations and the international community as a
whole to provide the support necessary to help resolve
this humanitarian crisis.

Together with the African Union, the League of
Arab States has played a role in leading the efforts to
resolve the crisis in Darfur - efforts that culminated in
the peace agreement. The League of Arab States is
fully confident that the Darfur peace agreement
represents a unique opportunity to put an end to the
acts of violence, to achieve stability and to launch
reconstruction and sustainable development processes
in the province of Darfur.

There can be no doubt that the Darfur peace
agreement is a historic opportunity for the parties to
achieve a rational vision for the future on the basis of
the sovereignty and independence of the Sudan.

