Major General Khalid: As the Force
Commander of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), I feel honoured to have been mandated to
share in this forum my thoughts and experiences on the
role of the military component in early peacebuilding. I
will deal with the subject by first underlining the
peacebuilding process so as to ascertain the space
available for application of the military instrument.
Then I will outline its role in early peacebuilding and
how it can be achieved. At the end, I will highlight
certain areas that I feel would need attention before
mandating the deployment of the military component.

Post-conflict societies are characterized by
non-existent or very weak security mechanisms -
armies in shambles, disorganized paramilitary forces
under little or no control, abundant arms and
ammunition in private and Government possession, and
lack of trust in and legitimacy of Government control
over police and military forces. Against such a
backdrop, peacekeeping troops attempt to support the
transition of wartime security tasks and the political
and economic system by providing a peaceful and
secure environment for a sustainable and durable peace
process.

Since the cold war era, the concept of
peacekeeping has been entirely transformed. The
military component, apart from providing a safe and
secure environment and monitoring ceasefires between
opposing parties, carries out a host of other activities
that fall under the purview of peacebuilding. That
entails all actions to identify and support structures that
will tend to strengthen peace in order to avoid a relapse
into conflict.

Let me add that the peacebuilding process is
multidimensional, intricate and specialized in nature. It
is not necessarily the domain of the military but rather
is the specialized job of experts in this field. It involves
the process of and activities in resolving violent
conflicts and establishing sustainable peace. It focuses
on national capacity-building, which takes place in
collaboration with political, operational and tactical
fronts at national and subnational levels.

Normally, the military component is first to be
deployed in any conflict-ridden area, as other set-ups
take more time due to certain procedural delays and the
non-conducive environment.

The military component, by virtue of its
organizational strength, can absorb and facilitate other
components, besides undertaking a variety of roles to
minimize the miseries of the inhabitants of a conflict
zone. It also facilitates a jump start to the
peacebuilding process before other United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations arrive
and get established.

Likely roles of the military component in the
early peacebuilding process may include providing a
safe and secure environment, combating organized
crime, policing tasks and support to police in cases of
mass unrest, engineering tasks to restore infrastructure
to facilitate humanitarian relief efforts and initiate
certain quick-impact projects, medical outreach and
epidemic control, handling and management of
refugees, assisting security sector reform and capacity-
building of national armed forces and police, and a
broad range of logistics and other support to United
Nations agencies and other partners engaged in
peacebuilding activities, including transport, airlift and
communications. In most phases, the military can
provide a secure and conducive environment in which
to recommence the political process through elections
or referendums or perhaps both.
For such a comprehensive process to proceed, an
enabling environment must be created. This is where
the role of the military component, as an enabler in the
early stages of the peacebuilding process, can play out.

Providing a security umbrella to various organs
and functionaries of the international body is the most
important function of the military. That is achieved
through observer missions for the implementation and
enforcement of peace agreements with a view to help
build confidence in the early phase, brought about
through good offices and impartial monitoring of
commitments endorsed by the parties. The
commitments may include ceasefires, border
engagements, agreed divisions of power or assets,
peace negotiations, peace or ceasefire enforcement, and
restoration of law and order. They may also include
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration as per
agreed terms, demining activities, unexploded
ordnance disposal, removal of explosives and booby
traps for the safety of peacekeepers and the local
population and other United Nations agencies, and
escort, patrol and security tasks, thereby enhancing
peacebuilders' freedom of movement and operations.

This is in brief the context and the role where, I
believe, the military component fits in. However, if
military intervention is contemplated, the need for a
post-intervention strategy is also of paramount
importance. The objective of such a strategy must be to
help ensure that the conditions that prompted military
intervention do not repeat themselves or simply
resurface.

Before employing military instruments to resolve
problems in the post-conflict scenario, certain essential
aspects must be kept in mind in order to accrue the
desired dividends.

First, a comprehensive approach is the only way
in which military interventions as peacebuilders can
achieve success. The military must not be used as a
substitute for political engagement in the context of a
peacebuilding problem.

Secondly, correlation of ends and means is
extremely important. If the military is to be deployed,
it should be deployed with adequate strength at the
early stages and drawn down thereafter, not vice versa.

Last but not least, the military presence tends to
create a culture of dependence among the host
population, which can hinder national reconstruction
and human resource development. Such tendencies
must be guarded against, and capacity-building in the
host country must remain a priority.

To conclude, I would say that the role of military
components in the early stages of the peacebuilding
process is inescapable and crucial. The military
components play two main roles in the early
peacebuilding process.

First, the military component provides a secure
and safe environment for other internal and external
actors to operate. Secondly, the military makes its
resources available for the attainment of the mission's
overall objective, over and above its security functions,
during the stabilization, transition and consolidation
phases of the peacebuilding process. Being the first
component to be deployed, the military component
starts the peacebuilding, directly or indirectly, right
from Day One and provides a launchpad from which
other peacebuilding forces will be unleashed for
systematic initiation of a comprehensive process.

