Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): We welcome the new
High Representative, Mr. Schwarz-Schilling, and thank
him for his presentation on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and for his outline of the approach he
intends to take. We also extend a warm welcome to
Mr. Terzic, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thank him for his
comprehensive and clear statement.

Greece fully associates itself with the statement
to be made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Austria on behalf of the European Union.

Since the last time the Council had the
opportunity to discuss the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, a number of developments have occurred
that could rightly be considered crucial for the country;
they more or less frame and determine the future
course of events. I am referring, of course, to the
launching of negotiations last November on a
stabilization and association agreement with the
European Union and to the 18 March 2006 agreement
on constitutional reform.

The High Representative was right to highlight
the fact that we are now in a new and critical phase.
The new approach that he intends to follow is well
suited to the new times and the new circumstances. The
overall goal remains to help Bosnia and Herzegovina
develop a stable democratic system and a sustainable
and dynamic economy on its way towards integration
into the Euro-Atlantic family. Ownership of the process
by the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, together
with the sustained assistance and support of the
international community, is the key to success.

The year 2006 will see the completion of the next
phase of Bosnia's transition. We hope that the
necessary legislative action will be taken to implement
the constitutional amendments in time for the October
elections and that the constitutional process will
continue until all outstanding issues are resolved. In
the coming days and weeks, Bosnian parliamentarians
will have to show leadership and Vision and assume the
responsibility of taking the constitutional process
forward by approving the package of measures to
reform the constitution.

The next milestone in the country's history will
be the holding of elections next October. For the first
time, the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina will be
voting to elect leaders that will be called upon to take
full responsibility for governing. The upcoming
elections will, it is to be hoped, signal the beginning of
a new Bosnian State that is functional and increasingly
self-sustaining.

We fully agree with the High Representative that
if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to offer a better future to
its people, it needs prosperity and education. We
therefore welcome his intention to place those two
areas at the core of his work. For our part, we will
continue to support and contribute to the economic
recovery of the country, both through the European
Union and from a regional perspective. Furthermore,
we share the belief that if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to
embrace its new future, it has to have the courage to
overcome the past by teaching a new generation to
embrace a shared identity and turn away from past
hatred and prejudice. Division of the educational
system along ethnic lines cannot and does not belong
in the new Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Of course, there remains a significant legacy
from the past, and Bosnia and Herzegovina must
continue to struggle to overcome it by dealing with it
decisively and effectively. More specifically, a clean
break with the past requires, above all, the completion
of the chapter of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). That can be
achieved only by transferring to The Hague the
remaining fugitives, particularly Karadzic and Mladic.
Nothing less than that can guarantee the advancement
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's membership in the
Partnership for Peace. The international community
will continue to stand firm on this issue and expects
that the progress in cooperation with the ICTY
witnessed during 2005 will continue this year.

We welcome the High Representative's recent
decision to resolve the issue of the status of officials
removed from public positions. That is a solution that
takes account of more recent developments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and that takes a flexible and
pragmatic approach to resolving that outstanding issue.

With regard to the other outstanding issue,
decertified police officers, we believe that a solution
must be found. Such a solution should be constructive
and to the benefit of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that
context, we stand ready to support any real and
pragmatic solution that will resolve the issue once and
for all. We welcome the High Representative's
commitment to address this problem expeditiously, and
we hope that he will be able to contribute substantially
to its solution.

Finally, notwithstanding the impressive progress
achieved so far, the new High Representative has his
work cut out for him. His is the last mile, but it will not
be an easy one to cover. In that regard, we pledge to
him our full support and wish him the best of luck.

