Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I shall introduce
the special report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic (8/2016/565),
which is based largely on the recommendations of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
elaborated in close cooperation with the authorities of
the Central African Republic and partners. The report
presents recommendations regarding capacity, as the
Council has requested, such that the Mission will have
the required configuration and capacity to fulfil its tasks
in a post-transitional environment, while incorporating
peacebuilding objectives.

As the Council recalls, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) was
established in April 2014 at a time of great difficulties
in the country. We must acknowledge that considerable
progress has been made since then, particularly with the
support of the Economic Community of Central African
States, countries of the region and the deployment of
international forces, including MINUSCA.

Earlier this year, after nearly two years of political
transition, voters in the Central African Republic
took to the ballot box in a peaceful and democratic
environment. As I stated at the time, the Central
African Republic provided a good example in a region
of the world where few elections take place without a
predetermined outcome, preparations are sometimes
chaotic and the outcome is contested. However, in
the Central African Republic elections took place in a
perfectly proper manner and those who lost conceded
defeat. It was therefore an exemplary election process
and that must be highlighted. The election of President
Faustin Archange Touadera - who is often called a man
of the people ~ and the creation of a new Government
launched a period of heightened expectations of lasting
and positive change.

While we acknowledge the gains achieved during
the positive transition, the strategic review that has been
undertaken confirms that the Central African Republic
still faces many serious challenges. The security
situation remains fragile and, despite everything, can
be reversed. State capacity is very low and sometimes
non-existent. Many areas of the country are affected by
persistent division, exclusion and marginalization. The
people continue to suffer a very low level of economic
development. There is almost no access to basic services
and there are no representative, professional or inclusive
security services to ensure minimally acceptable
conditions. Moreover, armed groups maintain control
over vast areas of the national territory and pose a
significant threat to civilians. Their capacity to stire
unrest and impede economic development and freedom
of movement remains very much a reality.

Against that background, the strategic review
makes a number of recommendations. The absolute
priority, as always, is the protection of civilians and
facilitating the creation of a secure environment to
ensure both the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
under proper conditions. These remain MINUSCA's
absolute priorities.

In parallel and to prevent a relapse into conflict,
the review recommends that the strategic goal for
the coming two to three years be to support the
sustainable reduction of the presence of armed groups.
By focusing on that objective and prioritizing the
activities necessary to achieve that goal, it is clear that
MINUSCA could contribute to creating a more secure
environment for civilians; assisting in the development
of Government structures that are responsive to public
opinion and able to deliver the basic services the people
expect; and creating an inclusive political environment
favourable to the protection of human rights, efforts to
combat impunity and the expansion of the rule of law,
with a view to strengthening reconciliation and social
and economic development.

It is this need for visibility that has prompted the
Secretary-General to recommend that the Security
Council extend MINUSCA'S mandate by 18 months at
the authorized level, with no change in terms of military
and police personnel.

The report presents a flexible, three-pronged
approach to implement the strategic objective, in the
context of the process under consideration and in line
with requirements. The Mission will focus as a priority
on addressing the presence of armed groups through
a comprehensive approach, supporting the ongoing
dialogue with the armed groups that has been initiated
by President Touadera, based on his established
agenda, and taking specific steps in support of the
national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation programme, the programme to
reduce intercommunal violence, and the coordination
of international support for security sector reform.
Special importance will be attached to cooperation
with the European Union training mission that is
currently being put together to train the armed forces
of the Central African Republic. Moreover, we must
actively participate in the reform and training of the
police and gendarmerie, in full compliance with the
United Nations Human Rights Due Diligence Policy.

Furthermore, the strategic review recommends
and President Touadera requests the continuation of
the urgent temporary measures mandate, which the
country's current situation clearly requires. We must
pursue the operationalization of the Special Criminal
Court. Many people have been arrested and imprisonned,
but it is important now that they be tried. I believe that
will send the best message to the people of the Central
African Republic that the issue of impunity, which has
been a persistent source of the resurgence of crises over
the years, is finally settled. Enough is enough - it is
over. There will be no more impunity. That is one of
the strongest message that the international community
can send to the troublemakers. Furthermore, we will
obviously continue to deploy additional capabilities
and new technologies within the framework of existing
resources and military personnel, and to strenthgen
the military component to facilitate greater flexibility
and mobility.

MINUSCA cannot carry do all this by itself. What
we do is to support the efforts of the Government
and in partnership with our Central African friends,
as well as with the principal actors in the region and
the world. That is where we will have to exercise
our best judgement in discerning the comparative
advantages offered by all involved. That is critical. In
that context, I welcome the efforts of the Government
of the Central African Republic to develop with us
what I have called a compact or framework of mutual
accountability, which should be endorsed by the
national and international partners as a platform for the
coordination of international efforts on the basis of a
set of mutually agreed priorities that will continue to
be developed so as to advance the humanitarian agenda
and reconstruction, in view of the international donors
and investors conference, which will be a crucial event,
to take place in Brussels in November.

In the context of recent events, unfortunately, over
the past several weeks there have been indications
of less than positive developments. For example, on
19 June, six Central African police officers were
detained for six days by a local self-defence group in
PKS/ Bangui. There have been concerning reports of
renewed efforts to unite ex-Seleka elements under the
leadership of Nourredine Adam. Ali Darassa has been
active in Bambari. Seasonal transhumance movements
have provoked friction and clashes. In short, I shall not
go into detail, but a number of people have been killed
and some 35,000 people displaced in recent days. In
fact, the leaders whose names I have mentioned are
trying to test the Central African Government and the
United Nations, and it is therefore now more important
than ever to show that we are proactive and will react.

Alarmingly, there have been reports of the abusive
treatment of Muslims in the capital. In Berberati and
elsewhere, people have been prevented from returning
to their homes by the anti-Balaka, and the humanitarian
situation remains worrisome. Of a population of a
little less than 5 million, a large part continues to be
affected by the consequences of the conflict and a lack
of access to social services. Half of the population is
in a situation of relative food insecurity and in need of
humanitarian assistance to survive. I recall that 20 per
cent of the population is displaced and that two-thirds
of the total population of the country have no access to
basic medical care.

All of this creates a complex situation. In May, a
total of 26 security incidents affected the operations
of governmental and non-governmental organizations,
which is a very clear warning. On 24 June, a Senegalese
policeman was killed in circumstances on which we are
trying to shed all possible light. It was unacceptable. I
personally gave instructions to MINUSCA, in liaison
with the Central African Government, to find out what
happened, who is responsible and to make arrests if
necessary. All of this is regrettable and worrisome.

We must not paint too bleak a picture, but we are
nevertheless reminded that the situation in the Central
African Republic remains fragile. Outstanding progress
has been made over the past two years, but we must not
risk having those gains reversed. It is therefore more
important than ever that the authorities remain firmly
committed to inclusive and transparent governance and
to addressing the root causes of the crisis.

I believe that there are also positive signs. The
President has assembled his Cabinet by including
representatives from each of the prefectures of the
country. He has also extended a hand to the armed
groups, but that hand must be grasped and the gesture
must be reciprocated. I believe that the President very
clearly intends to break with the past. Once again,
inclusivity and reconciliation are very important. We
must recognize that there is no quick fix. The problems
are too profound for that to be realistic, given the
fleeting nature of the attention that the international
community focused on the Central African Republic in
the past. Intense attention lasted for a relatively brief
period, and then we moved on to other things.

I believe that it would be a serious mistake to repeat
that. We must make it clear to the current leadership
that our efforts must be aimed at continuity and long-
term results. As I have said on several occasions in
Bangui, MINUSCA must be the final United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the country. We do not have
the luxury of making a mistake. We must maintain
our commitment, ensure that it works, and avoid any
reason to return as we have done repeatedly in the
past, after three, five or seven years. That would be
a collective and catastrophic failure and the loss of a
major opportunity for the Central African people, who
are in need of a solution. Once again, I believe that
long-term commitment to maintaining political resolve
is absolutely essential.

