Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): My delegation endorses
the statement that will be made by the representative of
the Azerbaijan Republic on behalf of Georgia, Ukraine,
Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan and the Republic of Moldova.

 

I also wish to join previous speakers in expressing our
appreciation to the delegation of Canada for organizing
today's open debate and for its tireless efforts to bring it to
a successful conclusion.

We also thank President Kellenberger of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) for his
excellent presentation.

My delegation had an opportunity to state its position
on these issues on several occasions, and I will limit my
remarks to those points that we feel particularly pertinent in
the context of today's stage of our deliberations.

One can hardly find any other topic on the agenda of
the Security Council that has attracted such genuine and
vivid attention on the part of the members of this body, and
of the international community as a whole, for the past
several years. Its consideration passed through several
distinct stages, gaining each time more and more
momentum and thus bringing the Council closer to more
substantive results. In 1999 alone we witnessed several
interesting debates on this issue, not to mention discussions
on a number of related topics throughout the year.
Preparation by the Secretary-General of his
momentous report containing a body of recommendations
set an important agenda and the basis for further work by
the Council, as well as by other United Nations bodies. Last
month the Council provoked an unusually keen debate, with
participation of the wider United Nations membership, on
humanitarian aspects of its work. That debate brought to the
surface several difficult but important questions regarding
the role of the Security Council and other United Nations
organs in considering humanitarian issues, as well as the
limits on the Council and other international actors in
taking action for humanitarian purposes.

The draft resolution we are going to adopt today
provides answers to many of those questions. It also
represents a major milestone in the work of the Security
Council and reflects a growing consensus among the
members of the international community as to the ways and
means to ensure protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
The draft resolution effectively reaffirms that the Council
can and will act in situations where deliberate targeting of
civilians and systematic, flagrant and widespread violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law
constitute a threat to international peace and security. Other
provisions of the resolution define areas where the Council
action is essential and establish standards for such action.

I would like to mention another important feature of
the approach adopted by the Security Council in
considering the recommendations presented in the
Secretary-General's report. By confining itself to the
recommendations related to the physical protection of
civilians and deciding not to embark upon other matters,
the Council left important issues for consideration by the
wider United Nations membership and thus set a clear
precedent for its future work in this area. The Council
took this decision consciously, with due regard for many
concerns that had been voiced by non-members of the
Council in this regard and in consideration of the need to
improve its working methods and increase coordination
with other United Nations bodies. My delegation
considers this particularly important, especially in view of
the fact that the Council requested the Secretary-General
to submit his next report on the subject in March 2001.

Prevention of conflicts is an important part, probably
the key part, of the overall strategy aimed at protection of
civilians. Prevention, containment and elimination of
conflicts constitute the main task of this body. Apart from
the need to focus on the economic and social causes of
conflicts, which is the major task of the whole
Organization, we believe there is also an obvious need to
elaborate a framework document to define clear-cut
principles and criteria, as well as effective mechanisms
for the authorization by the Council of enforcement
measures to prevent armed conflicts within States at their
earliest stage.

We think that such a universally accepted document
could substantially enhance the capacity of the Security
Council for early action to avert the potential outbreak of
internal armed conflicts. Such regulation could definitely
create better conditions for unanimity among the members
of the Security Council, especially the permanent ones, in
a decision-making process. We would also like to
emphasize that any such preventive action by the Council
should be based on the Charter of the United Nations and
principles of international law, including the principles of
the political independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States. It is important that the draft resolution
to be adopted make explicit references to these norms and
principles.

A number of important recommendations by the
Secretary-General relating to the legal aspects of
enhancing the protection of civilians were left outside the
scope of the draft resolution. We would like to comment
on some of these.

 

First of all, Ukraine fully subscribes to the
recommendation contained in the report regarding the need
to accelerate ratification of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. While recognizing that the
text of this document may not be perfect in all respects and
that further work is needed to finalize the necessary legal
framework, we view such a court as the only viable
democratic mechanism of a universal character to enforce
respect for international humanitarian law. By signing the
Rome Statute several months ago, my country took its first
step towards participation in this instrument. Recently,
extensive work was undertaken in Ukraine to elaborate and
eventually adopt the necessary implementing legislation that
will lead to the ratification of the Statute.

In this regard, Mr. President, I wish to point out that
the efforts of your country and your personal commitment
serve as a valuable example and strengthen our
determination to pursue this cause. I would also like to
commend the elaboration of the Crimes Against Humanity
Act, which makes Canada the first country to have
developed comprehensive legislation to implement the
Rome Statute.

Let me also emphasize the importance my country
attaches to the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel. Its entry into force last
year represents significant progress in strengthening the
regime of protection of people in the service of the United
Nations operating in conflict zones under the mandate of
the Security Council or General Assembly. At the same
time, we recognize that the Convention is far from adequate
for ensuring the same level of protection to categories of
United Nations and associated personnel engaged in
operations other than those specifically authorized by the
Security Council or the General Assembly. We wish once
again to put on record our support for the elaboration and
adoption of an additional protocol to extend the scope of
legal protection for United Nations and associated
personnel.

We regret the fact that during the last decade children
have appeared among combatants. The recent finalization
of a draft optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the minimum age for children in armed
conflict represents a significant contribution to the
protection of the rights of this most vulnerable group. We
hope that its eventual adoption by the General Assembly
will be followed by rapid ratification by States and
subsequent effective implementation in their national
legislation.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Ukraine's support
for the draft resolution before us today. By adopting it,
the Council takes a significant step forward in developing
its policies and practices aimed at the effective protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We look forward to the
next report of the Secretary-General, which, we hope, will
enable us to make further progress in this direction.

