Mr. Gillerman (Israel): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your very able
stewardship of the Council this month and to thank you
for your principled leadership. We are also grateful to
the Secretary-General for honouring us with his
presence at the opening of this meeting and for his
commitment to resolving this issue. I also wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing.

On this note, I just want to make clear that Israel
never has acted, and does not act, against so-called
alleged militants but against internationally declared
and recognized terrorists. I certainly hope the term
"alleged militants" is not the United Nations' new
definition of terrorism.

The struggle of the moderates against the
extremists, which is raging around the world, is the
defining challenge of our day. Across the globe, forces
of extremism seek to transform resolvable political
conflicts into endless religious wars, using all means of
Violence at their disposal. They fight not for their own
rights, but to deprive others of their rights. In our
region, Iran - a notorious State sponsor of
terrorism- uses proxies such as Hezbollah in
Lebanon and Hamas among the Palestinians to draw
the moderates into a cosmic battle, where victory is not
about achievement but about total annihilation.

The very ideology of the extremists makes a
dialogue with them impossible. That is why Israel,
along with other, like-minded States, understands that
dealing with extremists is indeed a zero-sum equation.
In contrast, negotiations with the moderates, as Israel
is doing with a moderate Palestinian Authority
leadership that renounces terrorism and violence, can
yield great benefit for both parties. I sincerely want to
believe that my esteemed Palestinian colleague does
represent the moderates, in spite of the very distorted
picture he felt compelled to draw today.

As we have seen, the extremists will do
everything to break the coalition of moderates and
destroy all prospects for peace. During the last month
alone, Hamas fired more than 300 rockets at Israel, at
least 23 of them Iranian-made Grad missiles that hit the
city of Ashkelon, a quaint coastal city with a
population of 120,000. The rocket attacks marked an
escalation of Violence not just in number, but also in
weaponry. Grad rockets - smuggled into the Gaza
Strip from Iran during the breach of the Gaza border
this January - have greater range and larger warheads,
and they fragment on impact. Hamas' new weapon of
choice means that a quarter of a million Israeli
civilians now live in constant danger of rocket fire. We
can all thank Iran for adding another weapon to the
Hamas arsenal, in addition to its already heinous
suicide attacks and deadly Qassam rockets.

Hamas and its terrorist-State backers bear sole
responsibility for the escalation of violence. The
Secretary-General rightfully told the Council at the
meeting held earlier this month, "I condemn
Palestinian rocket attacks and call for the immediate
cessation of such acts of terrorism, which serve no
purpose, endanger Israeli civilians and bring misery to
the Palestinian people" (S/PV.5847, p. 3). Indeed, it is
terrorism - plain and simple.

As Hamas unleashed its terrorism on the civilians
of Ashkelon, it continued to wreak havoc and daily
terror on the people of Sderot - a small but resilient
city of 23,000 people where children no longer run
around on playgrounds; they now run to bomb shelters.
Such is the reality in Sderot, where 15 seconds is all
you have to find safety before a Qassam rocket comes
crashing down on you.

Though some wish to refer to the apparent lull in
Hamas rocket attacks, I must warn that the perceived
quiet is only on the surface. The bombs keep ticking,
albeit quietly. The rockets out of Gaza have not
stopped. Hamas is using this time to smuggle in and
produce more rockets. Building rockets is not quiet. It
is a silent promise - a promise of what is to come
next: more terror and more violence, more extremism
and more bloodshed.

In fact, we have seen the great lengths that the
extremists are willing to go to in order to kill and maim
Israelis. Just over two weeks ago, a Palestinian terrorist
infiltrated the Mercaz HaRaV rabbinical seminary in
Jerusalem and ruthlessly gunned down eight young
men, who were studying the Bible in the upstairs
library. Eleven others were injured, many of whom
remain in serious condition. The terrorist chose his
target carefully; Mercaz HaRaV is one of Israel's most
revered institutions of Zionism and Jewish learning,
and it is situated in the heart of Jerusalem, steps away
from the seat of the Israeli Government and our most
cherished democratic institutions.

As medical and rescue teams rushed to the scene,
as the Israeli public heard the news of this appalling
massacre, and as mothers and fathers were called to
retrieve the remains of their slaughtered sons, the
extremists in Gaza rejoiced at the spilling of Israeli
blood. I am sure that many in this Council watched
with horror and disgust as Hamas terrorists joyfully
fired their rifles into the air and passed out candy to
children in celebration. If anyone doubted what the
extremists stand for, the reaction in Gaza to the murder
of eight Israeli boys sets the record straight. It was also
a stark reminder that those were the same people who
danced on the rooftops after 9/11.

That is why it was so sad and disturbing that the
Council could not condemn the terrorist attack,
particularly in spite of your own very valiant efforts,
Mr. President, and those of many other distinguished
ambassadors on the Council. The Security Council has
a longstanding practice of condemning terrorism, no
matter the victims, no matter the location, no matter
the perpetrator and no matter the motivation. Yet the
Council could not unanimously condemn that terrorist
attack and intentional killing of civilians, for the
Council was blocked by a politicized opposition, by
one Member State in particular.

The hypocrisy and cynicism displayed by that
State, with its long history of terror, does not bode well
for this Council and draws sad and alarming
conclusions as to the screening process States undergo
before attaining a seat on this august body. It was
indeed a sad moment for this Council, but also one that
should be a wake-up call to us all.

Lately, a particularly worrisome trend has
become apparent when it comes to the discourse
concerning our region. Some have a penchant for
equating the lawful actions of States in defence of their
citizens with the Violence of terrorists whose goal is to
endanger those very civilians. The misguided tendency
to accept the status quo of terrorism, as expressed even
by some United Nations officials in their statements
and reports, is simply unacceptable. Such parity, which
is often in the name of an ill-conceived balance,
undermines the credibility of moderate States and their
strength to bolster one another and isolate the
extremists.
Israel goes to great lengths to ensure the safety
and well-being of all civilian populations -
Palestinians and Israelis alike. Whereas Israel makes
all efforts to protect civilians in accordance with
international law, Hamas indiscriminately fires rockets
into Israeli civilian areas. Whereas Israel ensures that
medicine and fuel enter the Gaza Strip to reach
hospitals and needy civilians, Hamas hijacks those
trucks and diverts them to its bomb-making factories
and terrorist camps. Whereas Israel allows
humanitarian convoys into Gaza - more than 1,600
trucks and over 20,000 tons of aid in recent weeks
alone - Hamas cynically fires on those same crossing
points, so it can fabricate a pretext for inciting the
Palestinian public against Israel.

Moreover, the cruelty of Hamas continues to be
seen in its holding of Gilad Shalit, who was abducted
by that terrorist organization in June 2006 and begins
today his twenty-second month in captivity. All the
while, Hamas has refused to provide details of his
condition or well-being. We continue to hope and pray
for his safe return home.

Surely, no similarities can be drawn between
Israel and Hamas. The immeasurable difference
between the moderates and the extremists can be seen
in both their rhetoric in this hall and their actions on
the ground. In that context, I can only hope that my
Palestinian colleague's poignant outcry against the
deliberate killing of children, describing it as sinking
into the abyss, was really directed at the Hamas
terrorists he again somehow failed to mention by name.
Let us be very clear: while for Israel every dead
Palestinian child is a horrible mistake and a tragedy,
for the terrorists, every dead Israeli child is a victory
and a cause for celebration.

Allow me to briefly turn to the situation along
our northern border. As you know, resolution 1701
(2006) changed the reality on the ground following the
2006 second Lebanon war and constituted an important
achievement for this Council. Hence, the international
community must ensure that the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) remains a priority issue, and my
delegation supports the Council taking the appropriate
action to show its resolve.
In that context, I wish to draw attention to three
main areas: first, stemming the illegal flow of weapons
through the porous Syrian-Lebanese border; secondly,
preventing the rearming of Hizbullah, which has

already adapted its weaponry and tactics so as to take
into account the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) presence south of the Litani River,
as its spokesmen openly declare; and thirdly, the
unconditional release of our boys, the Israeli soldiers
Udi Goldwasser and Eldad Regev, kidnapped on
12 July 2006 by Hizbullah. The Council, in adopting
resolution 1701 (2006), committed itself to seeing to
their release, and I call on members to keep their word.

To be sure, the new and improved UNIFIL on the
ground is doing important work, and, among the
positives on the ground, Israel welcomes the trilateral
meetings between the Israel Defense Forces, the
Lebanese Army and UNIFIL, as well as efforts to
demarcate the Blue Line.

However, as I began my statement referring to the
dangers of extremism, here too it must be emphasized
that Hizbullah poses an extremist threat to the region.
Indeed, Hizbullah and Hamas share the same strategies
and tactics and are funded and supported by the same
ominous backers, Syria and Iran. The relationship
between Iran, Syria, Hamas and Hizbullah are
continually reinforced for us, as we recently saw in the
expressions of sympathy and support made by those
leaders, again just yesterday, regarding the arch-
terrorist Imad Mughnieh.

Listen to the words of the terrorist leaders
themselves, such as the Hamas commander in Gaza
who recently told The Sunday Times newspaper that
Hamas has "sent seven 'courses' of our fighters to
Iran". According to the commander, a further 650
Hamas fighters have trained in Syria under instructors
who learned their trade, techniques and ways in Iran.
Sixty-two are in Syria right now. He said Hamas was
modelling itself on Hizbullah. Clearly, Syria and Iran
both play host to and support global and local terrorist
organizations. The international community must press
to end that support.

Israel understands it must work with the
moderate, legitimate Palestinian Authority leadership
to show the people of the region that the path of
moderation will bring tangible benefit to all. That is
why suspending the ongoing dialogue and talks
between Israel and the Palestinians would be a grave
mistake. The extremists have no real solutions to
anybody's problems. All they want is to see our failure.
Moderation must be seen as the only answer and
legitimate alternative to extremism.
Israel knows it cannot accomplish this alone. It
needs the support of like-minded moderate leaders in
the region who understand the threat posed by the
extremists - not just to us, but to them and the
world - and are willing to do what it takes. This is a
goal that all the moderates share. If we begin to show
divisions and weaknesses, the extremists will take
advantage of the indecision and hesitation.

The international community needs to strengthen
the bilateral process between the two parties and to
show a collective resolve to support the negotiations
that will bring lasting security, stability and peace to all
people of our region. That is the mandate of the
international community. That is its calling; that is its
duty.

This collective resolve must be shown, first and
foremost, by this Council. We in Israel are committed
to showing it each and every day, in partnership with
the moderates around us, until moderation, modernity
and common sense prevail.

