Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency. Your extensive experience in the United
Nations, your personal communications skills and your
substantive knowledge of the issues thus all become
available to the Council, for which we are most grateful to
you.

I had the opportunity, at our last meeting, to comment
on the outstanding presidency of Ambassador Albright. I
also wish to thank the Ambassador of Burundi for his
presence here, for his profound remarks and for the kind
words he addressed to me.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his report.
The report indicates that, although the situation in Burundi
has recently been somewhat calmer than it was in
December and at the beginning of January, the Secretary-
General continues to believe that the trend is a negative one
and that the security situation in the country remains
unpredictable and, in his words, "desperately serious".
(S/1996/116, para. 36)

On the basis of the Secretary-General's report, the
Security Council is today in the process of adopting a draft
resolution that basically targets those aspects that the
international community can foster, so that Burundi can
move away from the path of violence.

The main objective is political dialogue. We have all
known all along that promoting dialogue is no easy task in
this situation; rather, it is much more demanding and
difficult than other types of preventive action. That is why
the Security Council is appealing to all the parties in
Burundi to embark on serious negotiations towards that
objective.

It was encouraging to hear from the Secretary-
General that his Special Representative and former
President Nyerere are working resolutely to promote
dialogue, a fact confirmed by the most recent conference
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU). An
experienced and respected former Head of State of an
African country such as Julius Nyerere can bring to bear
considerable influence for dialogue between the leaders of
neighbouring Burundi, as can former President Carter,
with his well-known commitment to peace. The OAU is
playing a regional role of fundamental importance, and
the European Union is also providing significant support.
In this connection, the Security Council is lending its
strongest support to all those who are facilitating the
internal political process in Burundi.

The draft resolution reaffirms support for the
Convention on Governance and for the institutions set up
under it, and states our interest in assisting the parties in
their implementation of the agreements reached though
political dialogue. It tells the Government of Burundi that
we hope that it will take the initiative to promote dialogue
and that we are prepared to support it in that endeavour.
We want this challenge to be met by all the members of
the Government, and by the opposition, the military
forces and even the extremist factions.

Our objective is dialogue and national reconciliation
in Burundi. If the humanitarian situation becomes critical,
endangering the political process and the lives of the
people of Burundi, other preventive measures will have to
be considered, as long as they are always subordinate to
the higher objective of national reconciliation. We hope
that the planned Regional Conference for Peace, Security
and Development in the Great Lakes Region will be a
success in this respect.

We take note also of the Secretary-General's
repeated assertion as to how dangerous the situation in
Burundi is. For this reason, the Security Council is asking
the Secretary-General to continue his consultations with
the countries concerned and with the Organization of
African Unity on a contingency plan - a plan that, if
necessary, could serve to support the dialogue that we
hope will become a reality in Burundi, or that could
provide a rapid humanitarian response if the situation
deteriorates - a possibility that we hope will not come

 

to pass. This capacity for a rapid humanitarian response is
essential so that in future we will not have a humanitarian
crisis in Burundi to deplore.

The Council also decides to remain cognizant of such
recommendations as the Secretary-General may make in
light of the development of events in Burundi, and
reaffirms its decision to respond to any eventuality, taking
into account all possible options. In this scenario - which
we hope will not come to pass - we would take care that
any measure that may be considered would be selective, so
as not to adversely affect the population of Burundi, which
has already suffered so much.

Many representatives have already referred to the
work of the Caucus of the Non-Aligned Movement. I too
wish to thank the members of the Caucus and its technical
team for their help in producing the draft resolution. As
coordinator of the Caucus in February, my delegation
worked closely with the non-aligned countries and with the
other members of the Council, as well as with delegations
which are not members, including the Ambassador of
Burundi himself, with whom we have met, jointly and
severally, on many occasions.

We can say from first-hand experience that the draft
resolution which we are in the process of adopting today -
and which Chile resolutely supports - was the result of a
serious process of consultation in which all members of the
Council and delegations outside the Council gave their all,
with the sole purpose of finding a way to enable the people
of Burundi to look towards a future of peace and
development.

We can affirm with certainty that the Security Council
will be following the situation in Burundi very closely, and
will be very interested to see the report that the Secretary-
General has been requested to prepare in two months' time,
and also to hear any other relevant information before then,
if this proves necessary.
I shall conclude by pointing out that, as the draft
resolution makes clear, the destiny of Burundi is in the
hands of the people of Burundi, and, above all, of its
leaders, within and outside the Government. The
international community is ready and willing to support
political solutions, and is on the alert in case it needs to
respond to any grave deterioration in the humanitarian
situation.

