Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Let me join others in
thanking the Under- Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark
Lowcock, for the valuable and detailed briefing on
the humanitarian situation in Syria and, through him,
thanking all United Nations personnel for their great
job to help the Syrian people who are most in need.
We also thank Syria's neighbouring countries for their
assistance, as well as the co-penholders on this issue
for their work. I think it sets a very good example that
the 10 elected members agreed to share the pen on this
issue. I hope that the five permanent members will take
away the lesson that they can work with the elected
10 on penholding on other issues, like peacekeeping
and sanctions.

The conflict in Syria has been raging unabated
for more than eight years, during which more
than 500,000 Syrians have died - approximately
3 per cent of the population in just eight years. In
addition, 6.2 million people - 34 per cent of the
population - have been internally displaced, and
11.7 million Syrians - 61 per cent - are in dire need
of humanitarian assistance. If we add the destruction of
physical and school infrastructure - schools, hospitals
and factories - and the millions disabled as a result of
the war and the millions of refugees in foreign lands, we
can ask ourselves if this was worth it. Was this worth
it? If we look at the destruction in just one region - in
Iraq, Yemen and Libya - we can ask ourselves whether
the Security Council can find a better way of resolving
those conflicts. After all, they all must end through
political negotiations, with people sitting around a
table. So, why destroy such a huge region on the scale
of destruction that we saw during the Second World
War in Europe and Asia? We hope to never again see
any region suffer this amount of destruction. We hope
that this is the last lesson for the Security Council. We
do not need the destruction of other regions. I hope that
it does not happen in Africa, or anywhere else. I think
that the Middle East is a good lesson that we need to
find better ways of resolving conflicts.

As this is my delegation's first intervention on this
matter, I wish to commend the United Nations and its
agencies for all they have done to bring reliefto the people
of Syria, particularly with regard to the coordination of
cross-border deliveries of essential goods, such as food
and medical aid. My delegation would like to reiterate the
Secretary-General's statement, in his December report
(S/2018/1104), that without cross-border deliveries,
the United Nations would be unable to reach people
in need who are inaccessible through other means. In
that regard, we call on Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), under the leadership of
Mr. Lowcock, to continue its good work in coordinating
the humanitarian assistance programme in Syria, and
in particular in helping women, the frail and children.

We also request that OCHA continue to work with
the Government of Syria on multiple levels in order
to facilitate the early provision of authorization and
facilitation letters with all the necessary guarantees
for the convoys to reach areas where humanitarian
assistance is needed most, without any obstruction,
as outlined in resolution 2449 (2018), adopted by the
Council in December. In that context, we would like
to thank Russia and Turkey for their cooperation, and
the coalition partners for offering the protection that
Mr. Lowcock mentioned early in his briefing today. We
also welcome the financial contributions made to the
current humanitarian response plan.

In South Africa's view, the humanitarian crisis in
Syria is greatly influenced by the political situation in
the country and that the dire humanitarian situation
cannot be improved without progress being made on
the political front. In that context, let me reiterate our
support for the implementation of resolution 2254
(2015) and the road map for the political future of Syria.
We would like to welcome the appointment of Mr. Geir
Pedersen as the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General. We are pleased to note that he has already
begun his work in earnest by engaging with all relevant
role-players. We look forward to hearing from him in
February on the political process.

South Africa would like to urge all parties,
together with the Security Council, to work towards
the speedy establishment and convening of an inclusive
and balanced constitutional committee. That would
represent progress in the political dialogue and be a
step in the right direction for a sustainable, negotiated
political settlement to the situation in Syria. We
underscore our view that the only sustainable solution
to the situation in Syria is a negotiated political solution
through an inclusive Syrian-led dialogue aimed at
achieving a transition reflecting the will of the Syrian
people and with a guarantee of protection for all Syrians.

Lastly, South Africa rejects in all respects any call
for regime change and external military interference
or any action contrary to the Charter of the United
Nations. South Africa continues to maintain that
democracy is an unassailable right of the Syrian people
and therefore remains convinced that, in a complex and
diverse society such as Syria's, there can be no military
solution to the conflict. Political negotiations are the
only way.

