Mr. Gambari: I am grateful for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council soon after my most recent
visit to Myanmar, from 3 to 8 November, which was
undertaken on behalf of the Secretary-General in the
context of his good offices mandate.

At the outset, I wish to thank the Government of
Myanmar for having brought forward my visit to the
first week of November. As members of the Council
know, this mission followed closely my visit at the
2

height of the recent crisis in late September to early
October. The main focus of my mission was thus to
follow up on and facilitate, where possible, the
implementation of immediate and medium- to long-
term recommendations made during my previous visit
to address the serious concerns arising from the crisis.

As was the case last time, the authorities
organized my programme in such a way that most of
my meetings were held in Nay Pyi Taw, the new
capital, except for the afternoon of the last day, which
was spent in Yangon. Although it was not possible this
time to meet with Senior General Than Shwe,
arrangements were made for me to meet with the new
Prime Minister, General Thein Sein, with whom I left a
letter from the Secretary-General, which was addressed
to the Senior General. In addition to the Prime
Minister, I met with all the relevant members of the
Government, including the Ministers of Foreign
Affairs, Information, Culture and Labour, both as
members of the Authoritative Team of the State Peace
and Development Council and as members of the
newly established Constitutional Drafting Committee. I
also held separate meetings with the Minister of
Labour in his capacity as the newly appointed Minister
for Relations with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, as well as
with the Foreign Minister, the Planning Minister and
the Minister for Religious Affairs.

I met also with the new Secretary-l of the State
Peace and Development Council, Lieutenant General
Thiha Thura Tin Aung Myint 00. Although I regret that
it was not possible to meet with all the interlocutors
that I requested to meet, such as representatives of the
88 Generation Students, Members of Parliament
elected in 1990, monks and detainees, the Government
organized for me to meet with civil society groups,
including the Union Solidarity and Development
Association, the Women's Federation of Myanmar, the
Myanmar Chamber of Commerce and the National Red
Cross Society, as well as with political parties,
including the National League for Democracy (NLD),
the National Union Party and the National Pao' People
Party. The Government also invited the diplomatic
corps to meet me in Nay Pyi Taw. In Yangon, I was
received by the Sayadaws of the State Sangha Maha
Committee, and I was able to meet with the United
Nations country team, on United Nations premises, as
well as with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi herself.

As members of the Council are aware, my visit to
Myanmar followed a statement from the President of
07-59587
the General Assembly on 5 October and the adoption of
a Security Council presidential statement on 11 October
(S/PRST/2007/37), both of which expressed strong
support for the Secretary-General's good offices role
and for my own efforts on his behalf, and called on the
Government of Myanmar to continue to cooperate with
the United Nations.

It is also important to remind ourselves of the
initial positive steps taken by the Government since my
last visit. At our suggestion, the Government already
lifted the curfews put in place during the
demonstrations, withdrew all visible military presence
from the streets, and, by its own account, released over
2,700 persons detained in the course of the
demonstrations, including some 700 monks, as well as
political detainees, including prominent activists and
some 50 members of the NLD, Aung San Suu Kyi's
party. Importantly, the Government appointed on
8 October Labour Minister Major-General Aung Kyi as
Minister for Relations with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi,
and a first meeting between them took place on
25 October. The Government also appointed a
54-member Constitutional Drafting Committee that has
yet to be convened as a whole. Finally, the Government
agreed to receive the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the Human Rights Situation in
Myanmar, Mr. Paolo Pinheiro, who is currently in the
country, and the Government also agreed in principle
to receive a delegation from the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).

At the same time, however, serious concerns
remain about ongoing reports of human rights abuses
and about whether the Government is willing to move
forward in an expeditious manner in a new direction. I
am therefore pleased that I was able to have frank and
extensive discussions with all of my counterparts on
Myanmar's efforts to meet international concerns and
expectations in the wake of the recent demonstrations.
One of those discussions actually took place and was
broadcast live on the national television.

On the downside, the Government has yet to
provide assurances that it will lift the restrictions on
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. I have stressed to the
Government that the best way to make real their
commitment to dialogue with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi
is to release her without delay, so that she can become
a full partner in the dialogue that we all envisage.
07-59587

A date has yet to be announced for the
commencement of the substantive dialogue. It is
important to note, however, that the parties are still in
the initial stage of discussions, which include
consultations between Aung San Suu Kyi and the
Central Executive Committee of her National League
for Democracy party, which, again, took place last
week.

Finally, the Government has yet to provide an
indication of the proposed timeframe for the next steps
in its political road map following the completion of
the National Convention on 3 September. While the
Government has assured me that it intends to proceed
with the drafting of a constitution and the holding of a
referendum and elections, I stressed that the more
clarity there is about the timing of those steps, the
more credible the process will be.

Although my mission did not produce all the
results that I had hoped for, I am in a position to report
a number of positive outcomes, which I would like to
highlight here. For the first time since she was last put
under house arrest in May 2003, Daw Aung San Suu
Kyi was allowed on 8 November to pronounce herself
publicly, through me, on her commitment in the
interest of the nation to work with the Government
through meaningful and time-bound dialogue, and on
the role of the United Nations in that regard. Secondly,
immediately following her statement on 9 November,
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi was allowed for the first time
in four years to meet with the Central Executive
Committee of the her NLD party and, for the second
time, with the Minister for Relations, Aung Kyi.

Thirdly, the Prime Minister reiterated his
Government's full confidence in and support for the
Secretary-General's good offices and invited me to
return to Myanmar - in his words, "again and again
and again" - including to meet with the Constitutional
Drafting Committee, once it is convened, to discuss
ways of broadening the constitutional process. The
Government also agreed in principle to the
establishment of a small liaison capacity in Yangon in
support of the good offices mission.

Fourthly, the Government further assured me that
it will release more detainees and that no more arrests
will be carried out. In that connection, it has agreed in
principle to allow access to detainees by the ICRC. In
the meantime, it has also agreed to an early visit by
Special Rapporteur Pinheiro who - as I mentioned
3
earlier - is currently in Myanmar, after four years of
being denied access to the country. Fifthly, the
Government further agreed in principle to consider the
possibility of establishing a broad-based poverty
alleviation commission. While stressing the need to
respect its sovereignty in all matters, the Government
signalled its openness to studying a concept paper for
the proposed commission, and we are preparing such a
policy paper.

Finally, an agreement was reached on an interim
arrangement for the United Nations Country Team in
Myanmar. In response to the Government's
announcement the day before my visit that it would not
want the current United Nations Resident Coordinator
for Myanmar, Mr. Charles Petrie, to continue his
services beyond his current term, the Secretary-General
made clear his disappointment at the Government's
decision and expressed his full confidence in the work
of the United Nations Country Team and its leadership,
which I also conveyed directly to the authorities. The
Government has, however, agreed that as of
5 December, an Acting Resident Coordinator would
take over pending the appointment of a new Resident
Coordinator. The Planning Minister also reaffirmed the
Government's policy of full cooperation with the
United Nations Country Team.

I would also like to report some of the views and
concerns expressed by the Government. In the course
of my discussions, I was again assured that the recent
demonstrations were instigated by a minority of
elements opposed to the Government and supported
largely from outside, that the demonstrations were
limited to Yangon and Mandalay while the rest of the
country had remained calm and that the Government's
seven-step road map, including the National
Convention, enjoyed the support of the majority of the
people of Myanmar as demonstrated in popular rallies
held around the country. In that regard, I was assured
that, while some opposition groups did not participate
in the National Convention, the constitutional
referendum and elections would provide such groups
with the opportunity to express their views.

The Government also considers that, while
Myanmar is expected to meet international demands
and concerns, Myanmar also expects the international
community to recognize positive steps it may be taking
in terms of cooperating with the United Nations. It was
explained to me, for example, that Security Council
action and punitive measures adopted by some Member

States vis-a-vis Myanmar run contrary to the
Government's expectations in that regard.

At the request of the Secretary-General, my visit
to Myanmar was preceded by a new round of
consultations in key regional capitals from 15 to
27 October, ahead of the upcoming Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and East Asia
Summits from 19 to 21 November. I would like to
share some of the main conclusions that emerged from
the high-level consultations I had with leaders in
China, Japan, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore
and Thailand, prior to visiting Myanmar. First, all the
countries I visited expressed strong support for the
Secretary-General's good offices process and pledged
to translate such support by actively encouraging the
leadership in Myanmar to continue to cooperate
concretely with the United Nations so that the good
offices role would produce tangible results. Secondly,
all of the countries I visited support the United Nations
good offices as the central track for the international
community's approach to Myanmar and stress the need
for any regional or other initiatives to be in support of
the United Nations good offices role.

Thirdly, while all the countries I visited consider
that sanctions against Myanmar are counterproductive,
they accept that the international community should
mobilize to help address Myanmar's humanitarian and
socio-economic problems, commensurate with actual
progress in the areas of concern to the international
community.

On balance, the positive outcomes of this latest
mission show that the Government of Myanmar, while
stressing its sovereignty and independence, can be
responsive to the concerns of the international
community. Although high expectations continue to be
borne out of the recent crisis, the situation today is
qualitatively different from what it was a few weeks
ago. Based on specific recommendations made through
the Secretary-General's good offices, a process is now
in motion that will hopefully lead to a substantive
dialogue with concrete outcomes within an agreed
timeframe between the leadership of Myanmar's State
Peace and Development Council and Daw Aung San
Suu Kyi. In order to succeed, such a dialogue would
require flexibility on all sides, but I am convinced that
it is the only way forward for Myanmar. Sustained
engagement by the United Nations through its good
offices, with the support of the international
community, will be needed in order to ensure that the
process of dialogue that has been initiated will not be
reversed. But we are far from the point of the
irreversibility of this process at this time. And that is
why it is important for the international community to
carefully consider the concerns of the Government but
to also listen to the views of Aung San Suu Kyi and
other relevant parties now that they are able to speak
for themselves.

From the perspective of the United Nations, it is
clear from the recent events in Myanmar and from my
latest consultations that the principles guiding our good
offices role have become even more relevant as we
move forward, and permit me, Sir, to reaffirm them
here. First, the good offices role of the Secretary-
General is not an event, but a process that will require
time, patience and persistence. Secondly, given the
complexity of the situation, the good offices cannot be
a one-issue process - however important an issue may
be - but rather needs to follow a comprehensive
approach to address the multidimensional challenges
facing Myanmar. Thirdly, the good offices process is
not, however, an end by itself. It must yield tangible
results and build on progress made each time there are
missions to Myanmar. Fourthly, all those who can help,
both inside and outside Myanmar, need to be
encouraged to contribute to a solution to Myanmar's
challenges. In this regard, the United Nations is
grateful for the support of the domestic political forces
in Myanmar, as well as the continued support of
ASEAN and Myanmar's neighbours.

The Secretary-General has also made clear that a
return to the status quo that existed before the crisis
would be both unacceptable and unsustainable. In
today's world, no country can afford to stay outside the
irreversible trend towards stability, prosperity and
democracy. It is the responsibility of every
Government - including Myanmar's - to listen to its
own people, to respond to legitimate popular demand
and to respect in full the human rights of its citizens.

In the case of Myanmar, that implies starting
without delay a dialogue between the Government and
the opposition as a necessary part of any national
reconciliation process, and addressing the humanitarian
and socio-economic factors that underlie popular
grievances.

The United Nations, meanwhile, is fully
committed to working with the Government and the
people of Myanmar to build on the current positive

momentum in order to move Myanmar closer to the
shared goals of national reconciliation, democracy,
prosperity and full respect for human rights.

