Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Said Djinnit, for his very informative briefing.
Allow me to express our gratitude for his dedication,
commitment and the quality of his work during his
tenure. We also welcome the nomination of the new
Special Envoy, Mr. Huang Xia, and wish him every
success in the discharge of his responsibilities in that
important post.

Six years after the signing ofthe Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region, Poland welcomes progress
made in the fulfilment of several commitments, such
as improving cooperation on the repatriation of foreign
combatants, raising the profile of the women and peace
and security agenda in the region, as well as greater
economic cooperation.

Nevertheless, achieving stabilization in the entire
region will require reliable and inclusive electoral
processes, the restoration of the rule of law, respect
for human rights and good governance. Despite some
positive developments in that regard, violence, human
rights abuses, violations of international humanitarian
law and further displacement of people still impact
countries of the Great Lakes region. Poland is also
concerned about the increasing tensions between the
signatories to the agreement, especially given the recent
attacks at the borders of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda - tensions that
are fuelled by the threat posed by armed groups and the
illicit exploitation of natural resources. Poland believes
that countering illegal cross-border activities is an
integral part of responding to challenges in the region,
as it is an essential condition for curbing the activities
of armed groups and the successful submission of the
combatants to the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes.

We also stress that the reform and efficiency of
the justice and penal systems are key elements without
which efforts to achieve stability in the region will
not succeed. We commend the work of the Great
Lakes Judicial Cooperation Network and encourage
all the signatories to further coordinate their efforts
on that matter. In that regard, Poland welcomes the
announcement of the high-level conference on justice
and good governance to be held in Nairobi in May.

The root causes of the situation in the region
lie also in the weakness of State institutions. That
highlights the importance of building the capabilities
of national security services so that they can both take
on the responsibility for protecting civilians and also
safeguard their civil rights and freedoms. In addition,
all efforts aimed at improving the situation and provide
urgent humanitarian aid to the region need to be
complemented by long-term development programmes
for all conflict areas.

Poland considers the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework to be an essential mechanism for achieving
peace in the region. We call on all signatories to
promptly and in good faith fulfil their respective
commitments under the agreement. Poland welcomes
the outcome of the ninth high-level meeting of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism, held in Kampala in
October of last year, and calls on all the signatories to
fully implement the decisions reached there. Building
trust among the leaders and the peoples of the region
is necessary. We therefore encourage the signatories
to take all the necessary steps to reinforce cooperation
and foster good-neighbourly relations.

We appreciate all the efforts made by the Special
Envoy. We encourage his Office to further engage
in preventive diplomacy and the promotion of good
practices in the region. Moreover, Poland strongly
believes that one of the key elements of effective
United Nations support for the implementation of the
Framework is the close cooperation of the Office of the
Special Envoy with the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, mainly through actively coordinating their
strategies and information-sharing. We welcome the role
that the African Union, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African
Development Community have played in strengthening
the implementation of the Framework. We therefore
encourage the Special Envoy to focus his good offices
on supporting those efforts.

In conclusion, the regional dimension of the Great
Lakes crisis must not be overlooked. New regional
developments create a unique opportunity to effectively
address the challenges facing the region, but that will
require a strong political commitment on the part of
all parties.

