Mr. Ruzieka (Slovakia): Mr. President, allow me to
use this occasion to congratulate you on your excellent
work and to wish you success in your future endeavours.
Let me also congratulate you and your country on
a successful presidency of this eminent body. We
appreciate the initiative taken to organize this debate
on inclusive development for peace and development,
and for the comprehensive and inclusive presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/3, which is in line with a
principle Slovakia very strongly and firmly adheres
to. I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon; the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
and Permanent Representative of Brazil, Ambassador
Antonio de Aguiar Patriota; and Nobel Peace Prize
Laureate Ms. Leymah Gbowee for their briefings.

Slovakia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by Ambassador Thomas Mayr-Harting on behalf of the
European Union, but let me also make a few remarks in
my national capacity.

Slovakia firmly supports a complex discussion
leading to the establishment of strong links among
peace, security, development and human rights - the
main pillars on which the work of our Organization
rests. The comprehensive approach to international
security, which takes into account all dimensions of
our work, was recently highlighted by the Secretary-
General during his briefing on the priorities for 2015.
In many United Nations documents, we can read that
the consequences of violence on various dimensions of
sustainable development are significant and long-term,
and occur on both the macro and individual levels.
Violence causes death, debilitating injuries, disease,
distress and displacement, destroys jobs and physical
and social capital, damages the environment, prevents
educational attainment for generations and discourages
investment. The number of indirect victims of armed
conflicts is often much larger than the number of direct
deaths.

Sustainable peace and development therefore cannot
be achieved without considering the needs of everyone:
children, boys and girls, women, disabled victims of
violence, refugees and displaced persons. All relevant
stakeholders, including civil society, should participate
at all levels and contribute to the transformation
of societies from war to stability, development and
democratic governance. Just a few days ago, we held
the successful Barbershop Conference. I would like to
congratulate Iceland, Sweden and Suriname on their
splendid initiative. When we discussed full inclusivity
as a necessary prerequisite to reach sustainable peace,
we could not do so without addressing the inclusion
of women in all post-conflict processes. Often after
conflicts, they are left solely responsible for supporting
their family. They face disruptions in social systems,
food distribution, health care and educational services.
Often they must assume leadership in those areas.
Without their participation, the restoration of stability
is not possible.

The participation of women and full inclusivity are
core principles of security sector reform (SSR), which
forms an integral part of that peacebuilding effort
and which Slovakia proudly advocates. Moreover, it
is clearly stated among the United Nations principles
of SSR that the United Nations approach to security
sector reform must be gender-sensitive throughout
its planning, design, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation processes.

It goes without saying that there is a nexus
among peace, security and development. Sustainable
development is possible only in an environment of
peace and security, while peace and security can be
sustained only in an environment where people enjoy
development opportunities and have realistic hopes and
avenues to escape poverty. As part of the development
agenda, peace, the rule of law and governance are
about ensuring an inclusive approach and building
institutions that ensure violence reduction, safety,
participation, accountability, equitable social service
delivery and access to justice for all, especially for
the poor and most vulnerable. Peace, rule-of-law and
governance issues are all closely interlinked. In all of
the aforementioned processes, not a single member of
society must be excluded.

The evil of potential conflicts is hidden in
exclusion. On the other hand, inclusion improves the
prospects for sustainable peace. In order to highlight
the importance of inclusive development for the
maintenance of international peace and security, we
would like to encourage Member States to also bring
the issues discussed today to the attention of the high-
level meeting of the Group of Friends of Security Sector
Reform to be held on 12 February, organizedjointly by
the co-chairs of the Group, Slovakia and South Africa.

In regard to secure implementation of peace
agreements, Slovakia fully supports the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission and Peacebuilding Fund,
as well as the Secretary-General's initiative to review
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. We are
pleased that this review shall be undertaken along with
the strategic review of United Nations peacekeeping.
We look forward to the findings of both panels, in
particular on how the linkages between both areas can
also be further strengthened in regard to the issues the
Council is discussing.

In conclusion, let me assure you, Mr. President,
that Slovakia will spare no efforts in contributing to
the implementation of the commitments contained in
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/3, adopted today.

