Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank the delegation of Brazil
for its decision to convene this important debate
focused on the interdependence between international
security and development in the search for sustainable
peace in the world. I should also like to express my
thanks to the Secretary-General for his important
briefing this morning; Mr. Eugene-Richard Gasana,
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission, for his
valuable contribution to this debate; and Ms. Sarah
Cliffe of the World Bank, for her clear and
substantiated statement.

Chile associates itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Thailand
on behalf of the Human Security Network, to which we
belong.

The long experience of the United Nations in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts shows us that the
issue of development - or, rather, the lack thereof -
is at the source of many of the conflicts that have been
on the agenda of the Security Council. Security
imposed by peacekeeping operations carries no
guarantee that security will be sustained or that conflict
will not eventually re-emerge. In order to avoid that
there is a need for several factors to come together:
security, the strengthening of the rule of law, respect
for and promotion of human rights, the empowerment
of women and the establishment of conditions that
foster development. That is the only way to achieve
sustainable peace.

In that regard, the issue of development and a
country's social conditions - whether with regard to
the levels of unemployment, hunger or poverty - and
the way we address those challenges are issues that
should be taken into account and assessed by the
Council when it authorizes mandates for peacekeeping
operations. We agree with today's presidential
statement that

"reconstruction, economic revitalization and
capacity-building constitute crucial elements for
the long-term development of post-conflict
societies and in generating sustainable peace".
(S/PRST/2011/4)

That is especially true in today's world, where the
vast majority of crises that affect international peace
and security have to do with internal conflicts and civil
wars. In such cases, underdevelopment, poverty,
unemployment and social marginalization pose
underlying challenges to a State's governance, stability
and unity. The Council cannot ignore those aspects in
adopting informed decisions in the search for
sustainable peace.

In that connection, it seems to us essential to
point out that adequately addressing the
interrelationship between security and development
entails an effort in coordination and coherence of the
actions of each United Nations body. This is not about
bringing development issues to the Security Council,
as the Council's work can take up the perspectives on
development that can be provided by the Economic and
Social Council, the General Assembly, the World Bank,
the United Nations Development Programme and other
relevant bodies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations and pertinent regional entities.

In the 2005 Summit Outcome, heads of State and
Government recognized the need to establish the
Peacebuilding Commission in order to help post-
conflict States by providing a comprehensive
perspective. With regard to the recommendations of the
co-facilitators of the 2010 Peacebuilding Commission
review process, which have been approved in various

Security Council and General Assembly resolutions,
with a view to establishing and maintaining an
informal and fluid dialogue between the Council and
the Commission, my country believes that one concrete
proposal could be to incorporate that dialogue into the
Council's Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations. We know well that both peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are two sides of the same coin. We are
pleased that the presidential statement recognizes the
need for coordination and dialogue with the
Commission.

Finally, I wish to highlight two emblematic cases.

The first is Africa, which so many times has been
an object of concern for this Council, and of sustained
attention from Brazil. As recognized in the report of
the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development (S/1998/318), this is a region where the
interrelationship between development and security is
undeniable, and the Council must continue and deepen
its efforts to include the factors of economic and social
development that impact peace and security in the
region.

Likewise, the case of Haiti is especially close to
us - a sister nation confronting pressing challenges in
its path to peace, political stability and economic and
social development. In this case, my country also
believes that, without neglecting the tasks of security,
in a gradual and sustained manner, this Council is in an
excellent position to help the United Nations system
create appropriate conditions for the country's
sustained and sustainable development, with full
independence in the context of democracy and political
stability and with strict adherence to the principle of
national ownership that is suitable to the corresponding
mandates so that, with an integrated focus, the required
national capacities can be generated.

