Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): We would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Miyet for his very
informative, comprehensive and encouraging briefing.
Since the adoption of Security Council resolution 1247
(1999), the progress achieved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in furthering the implementation of the
Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement has in fact been
substantive. We think that a significant contribution to
the overall success reached so far by the international
community has been made through the strenuous
efforts of the United Nations system organizations,
headed and coordinated by the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). My delegation
feels that UNMIBH and the International Police Task
Force (IPTF), as its core component, continue to play a
crucial role in the implementation of the civilian
aspects of the Peace Agreement, in particular in
establishing the mechanisms for the rule of law.

Ukraine commends the activities carried out by
UNMIBH in the fields of police restructuring and
reform, building common institutions, establishing a
judicial system and ensuring respect for human rights.
We acknowledge the professionalism of the IPTF,
which carried out the mandate in difficult conditions of
reduced authorized strength, mainly because of the
additional requirements for Kosovo.

At the same time, we think that much has yet to
be done in the field of police minority recruitment in
both entities, as well as in providing security to the
minority returnees. We also believe that more attention
should be paid to accelerating the process of cross-
border refugee return to Bosnia and Herzegovina and
its neighbouring countries. In our view, one of the
major tasks today is to ensure that the leaders and the
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina are totally
committed to the implementation of the Peace
Agreement in full, while realizing that the future of
their country is mainly their responsibility. In this
regard, we share certain misgivings expressed at the
latest meeting of the Peace Implementation Council in
Brussels on the current insufficient level of
commitment demonstrated by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities to the peace process.

It is obvious that there is still a long way to go to
make the process of peace, reconciliation, stability and
democracy in Bosnia and Herzegovina irreversible. In
this regard, we believe that the Security Council should
continue to give its solid support to the activities of
UNMIBH and strongly encourage the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities to demonstrate their firm
commitment to the implementation of the Peace
Agreement in full cooperation with UNMIBH.

I would like to reiterate Ukraine's determination,
as a contributor to the IPTF, to continue its
participation. In conclusion, let me wish further
success to all the staff of the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in pursuit of our common
strategy aimed at restoring lasting peace and stability
in that part of the Balkans.

