Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French):
Mr. President and Minister, I welcome your participation
in today's debate. I welcome also the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal
Republic of Somalia, and I thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for his briefing.

For over a year, undeniable progress has been made
in Somalia, with the recovering by the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National
Security Forces of territories held by Al-Shabaab; the
completion of the transition, which marked a political
turning point with the election of President Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud; and even the hope of economic
recovery. These developments are undoubtedly positive.
Nonetheless, they remain fragile and reversible.

At the security level, progress seems to have reached
a plateau. Al-Shabaab has proved to be resilient. It still
controls significant areas and has demonstrated, through
deadly actions, its ability to conduct destabilization
operations in the liberated territories. In addition, as
underscored by the Secretary-General, AMISOM. no
longer seems able to recover new territories.

At the political level, the Government is facing
difficulties in establishing the regional administrations.
The current tensions in the south, especially in
Kismaayo, are the result of various factors: clan
rivalries, foreign influences and problems related to
the sharing of resources. This crisis has the potential
to destabilize southern Somalia and undermine months
of progress.

Faced with these challenges, the Council must
continue its support for AMISOM. and its troops, whose
sacrifices are immense. The Council must also continue
its support for the Somali authorities, whose duties are
just as important. We cannot lose this opportunity to
pull Somalia out of the vicious circle in which it has
been caught for more than 20 years.

The military effort must be carefully considered in
three stages. In the immediate future, we must ensure
that the Ethiopian withdrawal from western Somalia
takes place in coordination with AMISOM. We must
avoid creating a security vacuum, which would allow
Al-Shabaab to regain its foothold in the liberated areas.
The Ugandan and Burundian contingents must be
deployed, in accordance with agreements reached with
Ethiopia, as soon as possible.

In the medium term, we must think about a strategy
for taking back the Somali territory that remains under
the control of Al-Shabaab. We must also think about
how to strengthen AMISOM. to enable it to expand
its area of control. In that context, we must take into
account existing budgetary constraints. It should
be recalled that, since 2007, the European Union
and its member States have been the main financial
contributors to this operation, the costs of which have
significantly increased since the beginning of 2012.
New contributors are now essential in order for the
effort to be continued.

In the long term, our strategic priority must be to
strengthen the capacity of the Somali forces, which is
the only response that could sustainably stabilize the
country. To that end, we encourage Member States to
strengthen their cooperation with the Somali forces,
following the example of the training undertaken by
the European Union. We also expect the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) to provide
all necessary support to the Somali Government to
coordinate international assistance in the area of
security.

In the absence of a political solution in connection
with regional administration, our military efforts
will be insufficient. A negotiated political solution
must be found to the current crisis in Kismaayo. To
that end, France supports the mediation role of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
in accordance with the terms of the communique
adopted at the summit of the IGAD Heads of State and
Government, held in Addis Ababa on 24 May. We call on
all parties to exercise restraint and work towards national
reconciliation. Neighbouring States should also play a
constructive role in helping the Somali Government.
UNSOM. may, for its part, contribute through its good-
offices mandate. In any event, it is essential that the
Security Council redouble its monitoring of that issue
given its potential for destabilization.

In that regard, my delegation is gratified by the
message sent by the draft presidential statement that we
will adopt at the end of this debate.

