Mr. Fall (spoke in French): Allow me, first of all,
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council and to express my great
pleasure at being in the Chamber once again, to
introduce the latest report (S/2008/733) of the
Secretary-General the situation in the Central African
Republic. My statement will focus on major
developments since July 2008 in the political, socio-
economic, humanitarian, security and human rights
areas. I shall also provide an overview of
peacebuilding issues and the activities of the United
Nations country team during the past six months.

Following a great deal of procrastination among
the various parties, we are at last in a position today to
give the Council good news: the upcoming holding of
the inclusive political dialogue in the Central African
Republic. The road to that event has been long and
arduous; however, events accelerated significantly in
recent weeks. The work of the political dialogue will
begin on 5 December and will last for two weeks,
through 20 December. That result has been made
possible through the concerted efforts of the
international community, which helped to remove the
final obstacles and to get the parties concerned to agree
to the holding of that long-awaited forum.

Taking advantage of the general amnesty law
recently promulgated by President Bozize, all key
players in the political life of the Central African
Republic are expected in Bangui to participate in the
political dialogue, which the people of the country
08-62886
want to be an inclusive process. In that regard,
arrangements have been made, with the assistance of
the regional force, the Mission de consolidation de la
paix en Centrafique, to provide security for all
participants. At the moment, we expect about 40
participants from abroad, including former President
Ange Felix Patasse, who has lived in exile in Lome
since the coup d'etat of 15 March 2003; Mr. Jean-
Jacques Demafouth, former Minister for Defence and
Chairman of the Armee populaire pour la restauration
de la Democratie, who has lived in exile since 2002; as
well as others, such as Messrs. Mekassoua,
N'Goupande, Miskine and Massi.

I should like to pay special tribute here to the
tireless efforts of President El Hadj Omar Bongo
Ondimba, whose personal involvement has been
decisive in achieving these results. I should also like to
acknowledge the perseverance of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, who has continuously encouraged the
highest officials of the Central African Republic to take
the decisive step towards political dialogue. I should
also like in particular to note the efforts of President
Abdou Diouf, Secretary-General of the International
Organization of la Francophonie, which provided
assistance in carrying out our mandate to facilitate the
process. I would also like to welcome the multifaceted
support and guidance of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
and the Community of Sahelo-Saharan States.

Today we are on the eve of a political forum that
will consider the recommendations of the Dialogue
Preparatory Committee dealing with pivotal questions
posing the greatest challenges facing the Central
African Republic, namely, political and governance
issues, armed groups and the security situation and
socio-economic development.

As I said at the beginning of my statement, the
period under consideration was marked above all by
sustained efforts to finalize preparations for the
holding of the inclusive political dialogue. The major
impediment pertained to the issue of the general
amnesty law promulgated by the head of State of the
Central African Republic on 13 October 2008. This law
provided amnesty for all offences committed by
various individuals in the Central African Republic,
except for crimes falling within the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court. However, the Armee
populaire pour la restauration de la Democratie and the
Union des forces vives de la nation (UFVN), which
include the great majority of the opposition parties,
08-62886

have expressed serious reservations regarding this law,
which they consider to be unrealistic, limiting and not
in keeping with what had been recommended by the
Preparatory Committee and the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. In recent months, therefore, attention was
focused on how to break the deadlock caused by the
general amnesty law.

In that regard, the Follow-up Committee to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement of 21 June has
already held three meetings in Libreville to assess
progress made in the implementation of the provisions
of the Agreement and to consider disputed points
resulting from differing interpretations of the Peace
Agreement.

During the third meeting, held in Libreville on
19 November 2008, a framework document was
adopted to promote the process of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of elements of
political-military groups. I should like to emphasize the
commitment of France, as demonstrated by its financial
contribution to the DDR process and to invite the
international community to provide financial support
for this operation.

On 26 October, the Government of the Central
African Republic announced the release of 12 prisoners
of the rebel groups ARPD, the Mouvement de
liberation du peuple centrafricain (MLPC) and the
Union des forces democratiques pour le rassemblement
(UFDR), in accordance with the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement of 21 June. The release of prisoners was a
significant gesture, demonstrating the commitment of
the Central African Republic Government to the
implementation of the Libreville Agreement.

To avoid the disputes which arose repeatedly
whenever basic texts were adopted, we offered
facilitation between the Government and the opposition
in order to ease the remaining difficulties. These
contacts made it possible to reach consensus on the
composition of the Dialogue Preparatory Committee
and to receive proposals for the names of four
individuals who could chair the political dialogue. The
final choice was the former President of Burundi,
Mr. Pierre Buyoya, who will assume the chairmanship
of the inclusive political dialogue. President Buyoya is
expected in Bangui this evening or tomorrow. At this
stage, we can say that we are beginning the final phase
before the actual holding of the inclusive political
dialogue.
3
It is significant that the uncertainty in the
political process over the past six months has had an
overall negative impact on the security situation, in
particular in the north-west provinces of the country.
Several clashes have been reported between APRD
elements and Government forces in several locations.
This has led both parties to accuse each other of
ceasefire violations. Aside from several isolated
clashes in a few zones in north-western Vakaga,
involving dissident groups of the UFDR, and the recent
ambush of dissident rebels of Miskine's Front
democratique du peuple centrafricain (FDPC) on
11 November, which cost the lives of about a dozen
Government soldiers, the ceasefire between
Government forces and the UFDR and FDPC has, in
general, been respected.

In the socio-economic sphere, the country is
continuing to face multifaceted challenges. Social
tension linked to salary arrears remains a source of
major concern despite recent efforts by the
Government to pay off those arrears. Trade union
leaders have issued an ultimatum that these would be
strikes at the beginning of next year if the remaining
four months of arrears are not paid by then.

In the economic sector, relative progress has been
noted in the mining sector with the withdrawal, by the
Ministry of Mines, of the permits of several companies
which appear not to have honoured their contractual
obligations. Nevertheless, a great deal still remains to
be done to clean up this sector and ensure transparency
in the exploitation of natural resources.

In the human rights field, the situation over the
past six months continues to be of concern. Several
cases of summary or extrajudicial executions have
been noted in the conflict zones. Despite the signing of
the Libreville Agreement, APRD elements in the field
continue to carry out atrocities in areas under their
control, including extrajudicial executions, pillaging,
racketeering and forced enlistment of young villagers
into self-defence groups or as informants.

Clashes between the APRD and the Forces
armees centrafricaines (FACA) have resulted in
massive displacement of people and have exacerbated
insecurity. Reports of alleged atrocities perpetuated by
highway bandits known as zaraguinas, poachers and
dissident rebel groups, as well as reported cases of
extrajudicial executions, continue to be a source of
concern.
We also wish to point out that the national
defence and security forces are also accused of human
rights abuses. Within the framework of its mandate, the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the
Central African Republic (BONUCA) recently issued
its first report on human rights in the Central African
Republic.

On the operational level, the country team
continues to make commendable efforts in the
humanitarian sectors, in combating HIV/AIDS and in
mobilizing resources to build up operational capacity
given the country's colossal needs.

In the period under review, the United Nations
has continued to work closely with the authorities of
the Central African Republic to establish structures and
mechanisms within the framework of the Peacebuilding
Fund to consider the immediate needs of the Central
African Republic in priority areas. These include the
security sector reform, good governance and the rule of
law, in addition to the revitalization of communities
affected by the conflict.

With $10 million allocated by the Fund, the
National Steering Committee has approved 11 of the
26 projects submitted to it by the technical committee
established to this end. In the meantime, the
Peacebuilding Commission is continuing to work on a
strategic framework designed to serve as a basis for its
commitment to the Central African Republic. To this
end, it held its second meeting of the Central African
Republic configuration on 8 October 2008 in New York
and undertook its second visit to the Central African
Republic, from 30 October to 6 November 2008.
During that visit, it organized several meetings with
key development partners and with United Nations
agencies to discuss peacebuilding priorities and other
related issues.

A mission was dispatched, led with
professionalism and dedication by Ambassador Grauls
of Belgium - whom I welcome, and who will be
joining us later for the opening of the dialogue. We
look forward to welcoming him to Bangui once again.

The three priorities identified by the mission are
security sector reform, good governance and the rule of
law, and the establishment of development poles. In
our View, those three pillars can foster a climate of
stability for relaunching economic activities and for
combating the extreme poverty in which people are
languishing.
08-62886
Regarding a review of the United Nations
presence in the Central African Republic, the
Secretary-General, after consultations with national
and international partners, intends to prepare and
submit to the Security Council proposals for an
integrated mission in the Central African Republic to
ensure consistent and coordinated action.

We are thus at a turning point when the Central
African Republic must shoulder its responsibilities in
facilitating the commitment of the international
community to aid it in implementing the priorities set
out by the Peacebuilding Commission. To provide the
best possible opportunity for the proper
implementation of these transformational objectives,
peace and security are essential. The actual holding of
the political dialogue will without doubt serve as a
catalyst to ease the atmosphere, and to promote a
relaunching of economic activities and the successful
holding of the general elections planned for 2010.

Now that a genuine window of opportunity is
opening up for this country, all efforts must now be
focused on the holding of this major political forum,
which the Central African Republic desires. The
international community must also assist the peace
process by providing substantial support to the DDR
programme provided for in the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. The stability of the country is at stake here,
and it is this that will allow for the advent of peace and
sustainable development in the Central African
Republic.

