Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency for
January 1996, and to thank Ambassador Lavrov for the
excellent job he did as President last month - the last
month of our own tenure on the Council. Also, I wish to
congratulate new Council members: Chile, Egypt, Guinea-
Bissau, the Republic of Korea and especially Poland,
which has assumed the seat reserved for our regional

group.

One may wonder how the interests of the Czech
Republic are specially affected by the situation in far-
away Liberia, such that we would be granted the privilege
of participating in the discussion under rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure. We feel that
Article 44 of the Charter provides us with grounds to
participate, inasmuch as the employment of contingents of
the Czech armed forces is involved. In fact, the Czech
Republic is the only European country that actually
participates in the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL). These remarks of ours would thus

 

have been addressed to the troop-contributors meeting, but
we are grateful to the Council for having provided this
opportunity to actually get them on record, and it is an
honour to speak in the presence of the Foreign Minister of
Liberia.

We find the Secretary-General's report alarming.
Hopes concerning the peace process in Liberia have flowed
and ebbed, but they definitely crested with the signing of
the accord in Abuja. All along, the Security Council has
warned at various times when deciding on the UNOMIL
mandate that, if significant improvement is not attained, this
time might be the last time the mandate is extended. We do
not consider the fighting in Tubmanburg and the casualties
suffered by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) to
constitute such an improvement, to state the obvious. We
salute ECOMOG and the memory of its fallen comrades
and extend our deepest sympathy to their families.

We strongly condemn the attacks by ULIMO-J. Such
outbreaks severely stretch the willingness of disinterested
countries to continue assisting Liberia. In the light of these
events, the Czech Republic has very seriously reflected on
the future of UNOMIL and on the purpose served by
exposing its own participants to the attendant dangers. In
our final evaluation, though, we feel that the conflagration
caused by ULIMO-J has not spread into other areas of the
country. At this moment at least, we do not see a pandemic
civil war erupting again. The important thing now is to
intensify pressure on Liberia's factions to meet their
commitments, to provide security guarantees to ECOMOG
and to UNOMIL, and to proceed with disarmament and
demobilization. In turn, the factions will need concrete help
as their members reintegrate into civilian life.

Upon careful consideration, my authorities have
reached the conclusion that withdrawing our support from
UNOMIL, modest though it is, would at this time be
unfortunate. We therefore support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that UNOMIL's mandate be extended by
several months, and we will continue participating in the
Mission. However, as many Members have stated many
times - and the Permanent Representative of Ethiopia,
who has just addressed the Council, was just the most
recent in this long line - the primary responsibility for the
future of Liberia lies with the Liberians themselves,
including ULIMO-J. In the event of future serious threats
to the security of UNOMIL, of ECOMOG or indeed of the
Liberian people, my country will be prepared to seriously
re-evaluate our continuing support for UNOMIL.

