Ms. Wallstriim (Sweden): First of all, my thoughts
are with the British people, and especially with the
victims of the horrific attack at Westminster, the heart
of British democracy. We are angered by this callous
and cowardly attack. However, we are also confident
that the legendary resilience and spirit of Londoners
will shine through. There can be no surrender to fear.
We stand united against the threat of terrorism in all its
forms, wherever and by whomever it is committed.

Let me thank you, Mr. President, and the United
Kingdom presidency for convening today's meeting,
as we embark upon the next step towards a peaceful
and prosperous Somalia. I want to congratulate the
people of Somalia on their successful completion
of parliamentary and presidential elections. I am
encouraged by the positive results, especially the
increased representation of young people and the fact
that the number of women in Parliament has almost
doubled. I am equally encouraged by the fact that
women make up 23 per cent of the newly appointed
Cabinet. That is important for the future.

There is now an opportunity to put renewed energy
into the continued peace- and State-building process
in Somalia. I would like to briefly highlight three
aspects that I believe should be addressed in order to
maintain a positive path, with continued support from
the international community and the Council.

First, with the process of creating federal
member states concluded, the focus should now shift
towards clarifying the arrangements between them
and the central Government. For that to be fruitful,
the constructive relations already established must
be further strengthened. The establishment of local
governance and the delivery of basic social services
to all Somalis must be given priority. Furthermore,
the constitutional review should be resumed as soon
as possible, as part of resolving outstanding political
issues, with a view to being concluded before 2020.
Secondly, preparations for the 2020 elections need to
start at the earliest possible moment, and a clear road
map towards one person, one vote must be developed,
incorporating lessons learned from the newly concluded
electoral process, as we have already heard.

One priority is making sure that ordinary Somalis
benefit from our collective peacebuilding and
development efforts. In order for those efforts to be
successful, an improvement of the security situation in
Somalia is still crucial. I welcome the efforts already
made by the Somali Government and its partners in
that regard. We should especially commend the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for its vital work.
It is critical that we ensure that it has the necessary
support, including more predictable and sustainable
funding. On that note, I welcome the African Union's
plans to strengthen self-financing, not least in the area
of peace and security. At the same time, continuing
the discussion on access to assessed United Nations
contributions is important.

We must also make sure that AMISOM's drawdown
is consistent with a corresponding build-up and
takeover by Somalia's own security forces. Strong
United Nations leadership in Somalia, well-coordinated
support and a comprehensive approach to security, as
adopted by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia, will be necessary. The high-level conference
in London in May will hopefully allow us to identify a
clear path to sustainable security-sector reform.

Lastly, I want to express my deep concern with
regard to the severe situation caused by the drought in
Somalia and the region. It is devastating that in 2017
people all over the world are still dying of starvation.
The international community, including Sweden, is
responding, and there seems to be a strong and united
determination to prevent a repeat of the catastrophic
famine that took place only six years ago. However, the
worst of the drought has likely not yet been reached,
and it is crucial that we continue to scale up both
funding and delivery. The strong leadership taken by
the new Government in addressing the issue will help
ourjoint effort. The regional challenges of the drought,
which are exacerbated by refugee flows and ongoing
conflict, must also be addressed. I encourage Somalia's
neighbours and other countries in the region to further
strengthen cross-border and regional cooperation
in order to address those complex and interlinked
challenges comprehensively.

In conclusion, maintaining a positive trajectory
will require hard work by the Somali Government, and
we wish the President of Somalia all the best. It will
also require dedicated and long-term support from the
international community. Sweden remains committed
to continuing its strong partnership with Somalia, with
the goal of ensuring sustainable peace and development
for all Somalis.

