The President (spoke in French): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Holmes for his additional
comments. I thank him for his presence before the
Security Council today.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the full and effective
implementation of its resolutions on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and
recalls previous statements on the issue made by
its President.

"The Security Council remains committed
to addressing the impact of armed conflict on
civilians. The Council expresses its deepest
concern that civilians continue to account for the
majority of victims of acts of violence committed
by parties to armed conflicts, including as a result
of deliberate targeting, indiscriminate and
excessive use of force, use of civilians as human
shields and of sexual and gender-based violence,
as well as all other acts that violate applicable
international law. The Security Council condemns
all violations of international law, including
international humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law, committed against civilians in
situations of armed conflict. The Council
demands that all relevant parties immediately put
an end to such practices. The Council reaffirms in
this regard that parties to armed conflict bear the
primary responsibility to take all feasible steps to
ensure the protection of affected civilians and to
meet their basic needs, including by giving
attention to the specific needs of women and
children.

"The Security Council recalls the
obligations of all States to ensure respect for
international humanitarian law, including the four
Geneva conventions, and once again emphasizes
the responsibility of States to comply with their
obligations to end impunity and to prosecute
those responsible for war crimes, genocide,
crimes against humanity or other serious
violations of international humanitarian law.

"The Security Council recognizes the needs
of civilians under foreign occupation and stresses
further, in this regard, the responsibilities of the
occupying Power.

"The Security Council condemns terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, however and
by whomever committed.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of safe and unhindered access of
humanitarian personnel, and of the timely, safe
and unhindered passage of essential relief goods,
to provide assistance to civilians in armed
conflict in accordance with applicable
international law. The Council stresses the
importance of upholding and respecting the
humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence.

"Recalling that on 15 March 2002 the
Security Council first adopted the aide-memoire
annexed in the statement by its President
(S/PRST/2002/6) as a means to facilitate its
consideration of issues pertaining to protection of
civilians and recalling further that in the
statements by its President of 20 December 2002
(S/PRST/2002/41) and 15 December 2003
(S/PRST/2003/27), the Security Council
expressed its willingness to update the aide-
memoire regularly in order to reflect emerging
trends in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, the Security Council adopts the updated
aide-memoire contained in the annex to this
presidential statement.

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance of the aide-memoire as a practical
tool that provides a basis for improved analysis
and diagnosis of key protection issues,
particularly during deliberations on peacekeeping
mandates, and stresses the need to implement the
approaches set out therein on a more regular and
consistent basis, taking into account the particular
circumstances of each conflict situation, and
undertakes to remain actively seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/l.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.05 pm.
