Mr. Sharma (India): Let me thank the delegation of
Namibia for providing an opportunity to all Member
States to share their views on this important issue through
an open debate. We are honoured, Mr. Minister, that you
are chairing this meeting.

The activism of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
together with Ms. Graga Machel's landmark study, has
raised awareness of the extent and nature of the grave
problem of children in armed conflict and deserves our
appreciation. We support the Special Representative's
humanitarian diplomacy.

Innocents have been massacred in the past to prove
a tyrannical point or in the flush of Victory, at the sack of
a city or fort. However, as Ms. Machel noted, in most
tribal warfare, fought between adults in accordance with
strict codes, the killing of children was taboo. Those
taboos have been eroded in the course of this century,
which has pretensions to enlightenment, by the concept of
total war, in which no distinction is made between
civilians and soldiers or between adults and children, and
by the cynical exploitation and creation of conflict
situations by elements free of conscience. Children and
women died in concentration camps in Europe and
outside Europe, and they were the ones who were killed
in the largest numbers in indiscriminate air raids in the
Second World War. The unprotected are of course the
most vulnerable. The abiding image which a generation
retains of the mindless sweep of war is of a little girl
running in terror, set on fire by napalm. Those that wield
the most power should be most aware that the systems of
war that have been practised this century, and the means
developed to fight such wars, have made it inevitable that
in conflicts everywhere traditional restraints would be
weakened or abandoned, and the impact on children of
armed conflicts would increase.

Our discussion takes place near the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the General Assembly Declaration on the
Protection of Women and Children in Emergency and
Armed Conflict, and as we are moving towards the end-
of-decade review of the goals of the World Summit for
Children. At least in the impact of armed conflict on

 

children, these goals have not been met. The statistics are
numbing: over 2 million killed; over a million orphaned;
more than 6 million seriously injured or permanently
disabled; 12 million made homeless; and 10 million left
with serious psychological trauma. Add to these the number
of young girls subjected to the horror and pain of sexual
Violence. All this has been in the past decade alone. And
sadly, the tragedy continues. There is a special tragic
poignancy in the inability not only to give protection to
children, who personify innocence, trust and our hope for
the future, but in the merciless betrayal and exploitation of
that innocence.

Faced with this, there are a few points of action on
which we must agree, and try to implement. First, children
must not be recruited for warfare; democratic Governments
do not recruit them. In some States, voluntary enlistment is
permitted below the age of 18, but not deployment; and the
recruits are trained to serve their country according to the
laws of war while in service, and thereafter voluntarily to
make the transition to civilian life. This is not the case with
the real culprits, the non-State actors - armed rebels,
insurgent outfits and terrorist organizations - which recruit
children, often forcibly, because they are malleable and
strangers to danger, and are therefore convenient
instruments for mindless Violence. What must be addressed
is the recruitment and use of children by terrorists and
insurgents.

This is indeed the crux of the problem. Terrorists and
others of that ilk have no interest in humanitarian law, or
in international standards and local norms of behaviour. The
Council is apparently as impotent as any other body when
it comes to holding these malign forces accountable.
Regrettably, international cooperation on the global menace
of terrorism either does not exist or is inadequate. The
Council has certainly not addressed this problem, though it
is perhaps the most insidious and serious threat to the
security of all States, particularly open democracies.
Nevertheless, while the global problem awaits the urgent
attention it needs, the Council must consider ways to stop
terrorists and warlords from using children in armed
conflict. Frequently these groups have State sponsors,
without whose support they would not be able to survive.
Suitable Council action against this phenomenon would be
appropriate.

Let me say that, while in principle we support the
humanitarian diplomacy of the Special Representative
aimed at the better protection of children in armed conflict,
great care must be taken to ensure that nothing in this work
inadvertently lends legitimacy to terrorists, criminals and
others who use violence to destabilize or challenge
democratically elected Governments. While it may be
necessary for him to intercede with them, this should not
confer upon them the status or respectability of a
negotiating partner, particularly as they seek to undermine
Governments through force.

A further point that should be borne in mind relates
to the problem of access to populations in distress. It has
been recommended from time to time, including by the
Special Representative, that the international community
needs to insist on this access. We understand the reasons
given for this demand. However, this is a complex
problem, to which there are no simple answers. The
Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of
Human Rights adopted, late last week, a resolution
expressing its firmest conviction that the so-called duty
and right to carry out "humanitarian intervention", in
particular by means of the threat or use of force, is
juridically totally unfounded under current general
international law and consequently cannot be considered
a justification for violations of the principles of jns
cogens enshrined in Article 2 of the Charter of the United
Nations. This is a particularly important point, and one
that we need to bear in mind.

Secondly, children must not be indoctrinated or
trained to fight. To our regret, we see around us,
including in our region, some schools and seminaries
being misused to instil in young and impressionable
minds negative passions of hatred and intolerance. These
youngsters are then sent to Afghanistan and elsewhere as
cannon-fodder. Those who survive have skills for nothing
else. Stopping educational institutions from being misused
would be a check on the recruitment of children - whose
lives are blighted or extinguished before they can
flower - as mercenaries.

Thirdly, trafficking in small arms and light weapons,
which often provokes and always sustains conflicts, must
be brought under control. In her study, Ms. Machel noted
that because modern small arms are indeed small and
light, they are easily handled by children. The
overwhelming majority of the 300,000 children under 16
who are combatants in armed conflict fight with weapons
smuggled in to their controllers. The General Assembly
has considered for a number of years how to tackle this
fundamental problem; it needs to urgently consider how
to stop the flow of illegal arms.

The vast numbers of children affected and
traumatized by armed conflict cast a long shadow over

 

future generations. But, more quietly, though inexorably,
the economic and social marginalization of the poorest
nations is driving hundreds of millions more into the kind
of childhood that could well make them part of tomorrow's
problems rather than of tomorrow's solutions. Four years
ago, the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)'s The
State of the World 's Children report put it very well:

"For many millions of families in the poorest villages
and urban slums of the developing world, the daily
consequences of these economic forces, over which
they have no control, is that they are unable to put
enough food on the table, unable to maintain a home
fit to live in, unable to dress and present themselves
decently, unable to protect health and strength, unable
to keep their children in school. Through such
processes, millions have become destitute and
desperate."

We need to address this broader picture, the destitution
and desperation that claim even more lives than armed
conflict and that often pave the way for a fresh cycle of
violence. This, unfortunately, does not attract the attention
of the international media, nor can it be an issue on the
mandate of the Security Council, but in our discussions
here we need to make sure that our focus is not distorted
and that we do not lose sight of the larger emergency
which faces us and which constitutes a global challenge.

We are happy that UNICEF has always promoted
these broad concerns. Within that framework, it has
undertaken an intensive follow-up to Graca Machel's study.
Its work in ending the use of child soldiers, limiting the
impact of sanctions on children and providing better
protection and security for children and women in conflict
situations deserves our recognition. We specially commend
its leadership in bringing humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan, an effort to which India has contributed. As
Ms. Machel noted, very little has been reported about the
conflicts in Afghanistan and Angola. We also recognize the
outstanding work carried out by the World Food
Programme (WFP), in difficult circumstances and often at
great risk to its staff.

The recommendations that Executive Director Carol
Bellamy made to the Security Council on 12 February this
year merit urgent consideration. We believe that the
Council should concentrate on those items which are both
"doable" and within its mandate, focusing on those of its
actions which, in a conflict or after it, could affect the
interests of children. The most important of these, of
course, are sanctions, which, as the Executive Director of
UNICEF urged, should not be imposed without
obligatory, immediate and enforceable humanitarian
exemptions. UNICEF's report on the situation of children
in Iraq, where the gains made over several years have
been undone under a Security Council sanctions regime,
is a case in point. The extreme impact on child
malnutrition and on child and maternal mortality and
illiteracy in countries subjected to comprehensive
sanctions must be addressed. This is something within the
competence of the Security Council and would go a long
way towards alleviating the suffering of children, many of
whom have spent their entire childhood in situations of
conflict.

The Council should also ensure that the
peacekeeping operations it mandates promote the welfare
of children. We are pleased that the Special
Representative is coordinating his work with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. We also note
that the Secretary-General has recently issued a bulletin
on the observance of international humanitarian law by
United Nations peacekeepers. This is a welcome
development, since there have been recent incidents in
which some contingents have been accused of ill-treating
children in the host populations where they were deployed
as peacekeeping forces.

We also agree that the needs of children should be
at the centre of post-conflict peace-building. We recognize
the need for special efforts to undo the damage to the
psyche of children who have participated in or are victims
of armed conflict. Even during a conflict, such actions as
"days of tranquillity" to provide for the immunization of
children may bring some relief. Action by the
international community on these points would be led by
the United Nations funds and programmes, the United
Nations agencies or by the Bretton Woods institutions, as
mandated by their respective governing bodies.

While the Security Council can play an important
role in protecting the interests of children in the decisions
it takes on peacekeeping operations, situations of armed
conflict and the sanctions that it imposes, the problem has
far wider ramifications and thus goes beyond the
Council's mandate. It is the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council which are the right forums
for a comprehensive examination of this global problem
and we trust that they will continue to address the many
issues involved.
 

