Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We extend our customary gratitude to Under-
Secretary-General Nakamitsu for the briefing she
just delivered.

As a country that loves peace, dialogue and
brotherhood among the nations and the peoples that
make up this planet, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
cannot but express its concern about the course of
events that have motivated us to hold this meeting here
and now. We sense that we are moving dangerously, and
not for the first time in our recent history, towards a
new arms race.

Facilitated by this Organization, of which we are
all Members, peaceful dispute resolution, dialogue and
diplomacy - especially preventive diplomacy - are
the mechanisms that have enabled three quarters of
a century of relative world peace. The events taking
place in various parts of the world threaten to destroy
that achievement.
The rapid scientific advances that humankind has
achieved in the past century have turned out to be, as
aptly described, a double-edged sword. On the one
hand, technology facilitates the development, well-
being and progress of many societies and people, but on
the other hand, when knowledge is put at the service of
the military and weapons industry, the same technology
that enabled that progress threatens to wipe out our way
of life.

We therefore regret that so much money continues
to be invested in the arms industry, when those
resources could be used to make progress in many other
areas where poverty and inequality reign. It is precisely
those factors * poverty and inequality - that are the
root causes of most of the conflicts that lead countries
to arm themselves more and more, with increasingly
sophisticated weapons.

My country believes that the members of the
Security Council, in particular the permanent members,
bear a great responsibility, and their behaviour in
the theatre of international relations must reflect that
status. We are now well into the twenty-first century,
and geopolitics cannot be seen as a zero-sum game
based on who has more missiles, better missiles and
missiles with greater range.

The recent collapse of the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty is a regrettable fact that makes the
world a less safe place. Equatorial Guinea believes that
the United States and the Russian Federation must trust
and cooperate with one another, not for their safety alone
but for that of the entire planet. Both countries, even
if only as permanent members, must lead by example,
making greater use of soft power in their diplomacy,
especially in a context in which, unlike the Cold War,
more actors have emerged with short-, medium- and
intercontinental-range nuclear capabilities.

The international community and the allies of both
countries must work to create the necessary conditions
and establish confidence-building measures so that
Washington and Moscow can renegotiate this Treaty
and, taking advantage of the opportunity that this
challenge represents, delve deeper into disarmament
issues, both at the bilateral and multilateral levels.

