Mr. Serry: Developments in the region remain
profoundly troubling, and the Security Council was
briefed yesterday by the Secretary-General on the
situation in Syria. As those events have already been
well covered this month, my briefing today will
continue to focus on efforts for renewed peace prospects
in the Middle East, which should not be neglected, even
against the background of turmoil elsewhere in the
neighbourhood.

The resumption on 29 July of direct negotiations
with the agreed objective of achieving a peaceful,
comprehensive settlement on all final status issues
within a nine-month time frame has been widely
welcomed. As indicated by Under-Secretary-General
Feltman in his horizon briefing on 4 September, the
Secretary-General returned from the region encouraged
by what he deemed to be a demonstrable seriousness by
both President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu
to resume direct talks, despite skepticism from their
domestic bases, as the only viable path through which a
two-State solution may still be achieved.

In a sign of support for the bold decision taken
by the leaders, regional and international partners
pursued their diplomatic engagement with the parties.
United States Secretary of State Kerry, credited for
the renewed momentum, met with President Abbas on
8 September in London and Prime Minister Netanyahu
on 15 September in Jerusalem. He also continued
his regular consultations with members of the Arab
League Peace Initiative Follow-up Committee in Paris,
as the region's engagement on a solution is vital. On
26 August, Foreign Minister Fahmy visited Ramallah,
signalling Egypt's commitment to a comprehensive
peaceful settlement to the conflict. The Quartet has
lent its full backing to that political initiative, and
principals and envoys are scheduled to meet next week.

The negotiating teams have been engaged in
several rounds of talks, and we encourage both sides to
accelerate and intensify their discussions. It is perhaps
understandable that the skeptics continue to question
the substance of the talks. However, at this stage, public
comments would be counterproductive, and the parties'
commitment to not revealing the contents of their
sensitive negotiations should be respected as a signal of
their resolve to overcome the deep divisions that exist
on key issues. There are formidable challenges ahead
and they cannot be underestimated.

The international community has long supported
the vision of a two-State solution and now has a
responsibility to give efforts towards that end a chance.
But the onus to sustain an enabling environment lies
with the parties. Both should refrain from actions that
risk undermining the prospects of negotiations. And
we urge them to act responsibly and with restraint.
Concurrently, any substantial political initiative
must yield early dividends in the immediate period
ahead, with tangible improvements to security and
socioeconomic conditions for Israelis and Palestinians
alike.

In that context, we welcome the decision taken on
8 September by the Israeli Government to increase the
number of work permits for West Bank Palestinians
by 5,000 to a total of 50,000. Noteworthy too is
the agreement between the Israeli and Palestinian
agriculture ministries to revive some of the joint
committees first formed in the 1990s under the Oslo
Accords. We look forward to further such steps that
would increase Palestinian and Israeli economic
cooperation, ease restrictions on access and movement
of Palestinians, and lead to tangible improvements on
the ground in both the West Bank and Gaza. In that
regard, we hope ongoing discussions will soon produce
results.

The foregoing are issues we shall also address in
next week's ministerial meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC), which comes at a
more hopeful time. The meeting is expected to discuss
a Palestinian economic initiative, developed in close
consultation with Quartet Representative Blair and
United States experts, that should mutually reinforce
and complement the political track. The United Nations
report to the AHLC highlights steps towards expanding
Palestinian economic activity, including in Area C, to
improve the lives of Palestinians and increase revenue
through taxation for the Palestinian Authority. In the
short to medium terms, donors must continue to provide
timely and predictable direct budget support.

However, as also highlighted in the reports of the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, all
socioeconomic trends indicate that the status quo is not
sustainable absent real political progress, pointing to
dire consequences for Israelis and Palestinians alike.
We sincerely hope that the resumption of negotiations
marks the beginning of closing the gap, renewing hope
for a final status agreement in which Palestinians can
realize their rightful aspirations for an independent
and viable Palestinian State, and Israelis can meet their
legitimate security needs and become a full partner
in the development of a stable and prosperous Middle
East. Another opportunity may not present itself soon.

Stability in the West Bank is all the more critical as
talks are ongoing, and parties should exert all efforts to
avoid violence. Israeli security forces carried out some
282 operations, during which five Palestinians died in
Jenin and Qalandia refugee camps on 20 and 26 August,
respectively. We strongly deplore those losses of life,
including of one employee of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. Additional clashes took place in early September
in the vicinity of refugee camps, as well as at Al-Quds
University in Abu Dis. Demonstrations, including
against the barrier, also continued, resulting in 32
Palestinian injuries. A total of 169 Palestinians were
injured by Israeli forces during this period, including
26 children and six women, while 339 Palestinians were
arrested. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) reported
tens of instances of rock and firebomb throwing by
Palestinians at Israeli forces, during which five Israeli
soldiers were injured.

Israeli security forces announced on 1 September
the arrest of two Palestinians of East Jerusalem
suspected of planning an explosive attack at a popular
mall in West Jerusalem during the Jewish holidays.
Their indictment suggests that the terrorist attack was
at an advanced stage. The IDF also announced the
arrest of a total of 24 Palestinian terror suspects on
2 and 4 September, and the confiscation of weapons,
explosives and military equipment. Palestinian security
forces, continuing to work to maintain security in the
West Bank, defused a total of 23 unexploded devices.

Settlement activity continued in the West Bank
and in East Jerusalem. The construction of settlements
is counterproductive and against international law.
Clashes between Palestinians and settlers also
continued, and reports of settler attacks against
Palestinian farmers, including arson of olive trees near
Nablus on 11 September, are particularly worrisome as
we enter the olive-picking season.

We are monitoring with concern increased tensions
in the Old City of Jerusalem, which resulted in clashes
with Palestinian worshippers, injuries, arrests and
restrictions imposed on Palestinian access to the
Haram al-Sharif/Temple Mount compound. Incitement,
provocation and violent actions must cease and the
sanctity of holy sites of all faiths must be respected.

A total of 33 residential structures were demolished,
including of the Bedouin community of Tel al-Adassa
in East Jerusalem, leading to the displacement of
176 Palestinians, including 78 children. The ongoing
practice of demolishing Palestinian structures that
do not have an Israeli-issued permit only highlights
the need for Israel to address the urgent housing and
development needs of Palestinian communities in Area
C and East Jerusalem. Palestinians require access to
a fair planning and zoning regime so as not to resort
to the building of structures without an Israeli permit,
which leads to demolitions. We urge Israel to find a
sustainable solution for the Tel al-Adassa Bedouins,
most of whom have crossed the barrier into Area C in
search of new grazing lands for their herds.

The calm in Gaza was mostly sustained. Two
rockets exploded at their launching sites and seven
rockets dropped short, landing inside of Gaza and
putting its population at risk. Three Palestinian
civilians were reportedly injured by Israeli fire on
20 and 30 August while approaching the border area in
the north of Gaza. Israeli forces conducted five limited
incursions into Gaza, and three improvised explosive
devices were detonated during their patrols in the
border area. The Israeli navy reportedly fired warning
shots at the vicinity of Palestinian fishing boats on
several occasions, citing security concerns. There
were also reports of the Egyptian navy intercepting
Palestinian fishing boats in Egyptian territorial waters.
Allegedly, five fishermen were arrested, two of whom
were injured.
Earlier this month, I met with the Egyptian
leadership in Cairo, who ascribed great importance to
progress in the peace process. The situation in Gaza
was central to our discussions. Egypt has intensified
military operations in northern Sinai, which included
the continued closing of smuggling tunnels. Here, let me
condemn the attacks in Rafah on 11 and 16 September,
when six Egyptian security personnel were reported
killed and 20 injured. Egyptian authorities have today
announced that Rafah will be reopened for special
cases.

While we fully recognize Egypt's legitimate
security concerns and the need to effectively counter
illegal activities in the Sinai and around Gaza,
including smuggling via tunnels, we are particularly
attentive to the potential humanitarian impact on Gaza.
As a result of shortages of fuel, the Gaza power plant
shut one of three generating turbines. The deficit of
around 40 per cent of required electricity in Gaza could
adversely impact other essential services, including
water, sanitation and health. We continue to work
with all concerned parties to ease the humanitarian
pressures on Gaza and further increase access through
legal crossings into Gaza, in particular of construction
materials, fully taking into account legitimate security
concerns and previous agreements.

The Gaza Strip remains a high priority for the
United Nations, and we welcome the approval of
another package of United Nations construction works
involving what are still classified as dual-use materials.
United Nations construction work in Gaza includes
almost 3,000 housing units, 67 schools, eight health
clinics, 31 water- and 10 electricity-related structures,
and road habilitation, totaling some $450 million.

On 27 August, a military court in Gaza sentenced
two men to death, one on charges of collaborating with
Israel and the other for multiple homicides. No dates
for the executions were set. I recall High Commissioner
Navi Pillay's position on death sentences in Gaza, as
well as her concern about ill-treatment and torture
during interrogations of persons later sentenced to
death.

Turning to Lebanon, there was a further devastating
attack on 23 August, when two car bombs exploded
outside mosques in the city of Tripoli, killing at least
45 people and injuring more than 200 others. Three
Lebanese men and a Syrian were charged in connection
with the attack. The Secretary-General strongly
condemned the bombings and called for calm and unity
in Lebanon. The Lebanese army and security forces
intensified security measures across the country.
There was further cross-border fire from Syria
into Lebanon, which caused material damage but no
casualties. President Sleiman repeated his calls on all
Lebanese parties to disassociate themselves from the
conflict in Syria and to respect the Baabda Declaration.
Prime Minister-designate Tammam Salam continued
his consultations to form a new government.

On 22 August, four rockets were fired from the
area of Tyre in southern Lebanon towards Israel,
including two that landed in Israeli communities.
The Abdallah Azzam Brigade claimed responsibility
for the launch. The Lebanese authorities condemned
the attack and have now detained two suspects. The
Israel Defense Forces carried out a retaliatory strike
on 23 August in the area of Naameh, south of Beirut.
The Secretary-General urged all concerned to fully
adhere to resolution 1701 (2006), cooperate with the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and respect
the cessation of hostilities.

On the Golan, the security situation remains
volatile, with heavy clashes between the Syrian Arab
Armed Forces and armed members of the opposition
continuing inside the area of separation. The military
activities in the area of separation have the potential
to escalate the situation between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic and jeopardize the ceasefire.
On 12 September, during heavy clashes between the
Syrian Arab Armed Forces and armed members of the
opposition near United Nations observation post 54,
five artillery shells and one tank shell landed on the
Alpha side. There was no retaliation from the Israel
Defense Forces.

In conclusion, last week marked 20 years since the
signing of the Oslo accords. Twenty years of endless
negotiations, prolonged occupation, terror and conflict
have deeply affected perceptions and expectations
within both Israeli and Palestinian societies and
undermined the belief that peace is possible, even if the
majority still favours a two-State solution. We do not
underestimate the challenges ahead or the momentous
efforts required to sustain and successfully conclude
negotiations within the prescribed time frame.

And yet, 20 years of peace efforts have also
demonstrated that fair, reasonable and legitimate
solutions can be found for the key issues dividing the

parties. It is for the negotiators to identify and narrow
these gaps, and for their leaders to take decisions in
the best interest of their peoples. And the international
community, including key regional stakeholders, must
now show unity and resolve in assisting the parties
in moving forward. The Secretary~General therefore
looks forward to productive meetings of the AHLC
and the Quartet this month, as well as to a constructive

Words are critical in preparing the ground for
peace. Both leaders are soon to address the General
Assembly, and we sincerely hope that they will take
the opportunity to reach out to each other's people in
making the case for peace.

