Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): First, Mr. President, I
must congratulate Ambassador Li Zhaoxing, through you,
on the efficient manner in which he guided the
deliberations of our Council during the month of March.
He certainly deserves a day off to enjoy some sun in the
beautiful Caribbean.

The delegation of Botswana welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General, contained in document S/1995/222
of 22 March 1995, regarding the mandate of the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in the territory of
the former Yugoslavia. The report has proved most
useful, not only as a source of information on the latest
developments in the Balkans, but also as a guide in the
preparation of draft resolutions before us.

 

We mourn the deaths of the 152 peacekeepers who
have lost their lives in the former Yugoslavia. We bow our
heads in appreciation of the supreme price they have paid
in the service of the international community. The situation
in the former Yugoslavia would definitely be much worse
without the Blue Helmets and the sacrifices they have
made. The draft resolutions before us today are another
demonstration of the commitment and determination of the
United Nations to keep the peace in the area in very trying
circumstances indeed.
In Croatia, we welcome the statesmanship of President
Tudjman in rescinding his decision demanding the
withdrawal of the United Nations forces. The continued
presence of the United Nations forces in Croatia in one
form or another will contribute in no small measure to the
stabilization of the country and to the provision and
distribution of humanitarian assistance to those most in
need. The present draft resolution may not have given
President Tudjman everything he desired to have, but that
can be expected in any negotiation process. The people of
Croatia should be thankful for the presence of UNPROFOR
in their country during the past three years, for we wonder
whether Croatia would have been able to save itself, in the
prevailing circumstances in the Balkans, left to its own
devices.

We hope the United Nations Confidence Restoration
Operation in Croatia (UNCRO) will enjoy the unqualified
support and respect of all its intended beneficiaries. The
conclusion of the status of forces agreement at an early date
is a must, and would be most welcome.

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, we wish to thank the men
and women of UNPROFOR and the troop contributors for
a job well done in a very difficult situation. Their efforts
and sacrifices have been crucial in both the protection of
lives and the safeguarding of the rights of minorities, as
well as in the distribution of humanitarian assistance.

Botswana supports the proposed continued presence of
UNPROFOR in Bosnia and Herzegovina for a period of
eight months with the same mandate. The sudden
deterioration in the military situation in the troubled
Republic is a source of serious concern to my delegation.
It is most regrettable that the lull created by the cease-fire
agreement of December 1994 has somehow been used to
plan for new offensives. We find this most unfortunate
indeed. We would have wished the cease-fire period to be
used productively in soul-searching reflections on the
futility of war and the efficacy of diplomacy and patient
negotiations as instruments for seeking solutions to

 

differences between peoples. We are confident that these
reflections would have improved the prospects for a
peaceful resolution of the conflict in Bosnia.

The current offensive by Government forces, as well
as the shelling of civilian targets inside the safe areas by
the Bosnian Serbs must cease, if they have not ceased.
We call upon all sides to desist from violations of the
cease-fire which could lead to a prolongation of the war
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I wish to stress the
importance my Government attaches to a further
extension of both the cessation of hostilities agreement
and the cease-fire agreement.

The primary task of UNPROFOR as a preventive
peace-keeping mission in The Former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia has been a great success. This is one of the
first United Nations experiments in preventive action, and
it has shown positive results. This is a good lesson for the
United Nations. It is for this reason that Botswana
supports the extension of the United Nations presence
until 30 November 1995 and the change of UNPROFOR's
name to United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP).

The success represented by UNPROFOR in The
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia does not,
unfortunately, apply to the search for a solution to the
political situation in that country. We hope that the
Government of The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and the various ethnic groups therein will
soon find an amicable solution to their differences and
work together to bring peace and stability to their country.

We should also like to urge The Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to pursue, through
the joint border commission, and with the assistance of
UNPREDEP, the establishment of a clear international
border between the two countries within the period of the
extended mandate.

