Mr. Kamanzi (Rwanda): On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to take this opportunity to
extend to you, Mr. President, my sincere thanks for
convening this important meeting on peace and conflict
in Africa. I would also like to congratulate you on the
remarkable job done by the Security Council in the
course of the month of May, during your tenure.
Moreover, my delegation expresses its high
appreciation for the assessment and recommendations
made this morning by Ambassador Gambari. My
delegation also fully endorses the statement made by
the representative of the Congo on behalf of Central
African countries on the evolution of the pacification
process in the area.

These last months have witnessed the awful and
sad events that took place in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where numerous innocent
civilians were disgracefully massacred or forced into
displacement and subsequent misery. Those events
happened at a time when the Congolese had just agreed
upon a political framework for putting in place
transitional structures aimed at achieving long-lasting
peace and security for the people of the country and for
the neighbouring countries.

The magnitude of those events requires that the
international community provide unconditional support
to all the Congolese parties in this process towards
achieving durable peace. A substantial commitment
from the international community is indeed needed to
help the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to build trust among themselves and to strive for
national unity.

In this regard, the Government of Rwanda
appreciates Secretary-General Kofi Annan's
noteworthy initiative of carrying out consultations for
the deployment of a neutral multinational force, whose
main mission is to bring relief to the population of Ituri
and to prevent a further humanitarian catastrophe in the
region.

Those populations have indeed been suffering as
a result of the chaotic and unsafe situation favoured by
the absence of the appropriate dynamic in
implementing the Lusaka and Pretoria political
frameworks. The Government of Rwanda advocates
that the multinational force be a strong support for the
pacification process without interfering with the
Lusaka and Pretoria frameworks, which constitute a
pivotal reference for the restoration of durable peace
and security for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and for all the other countries in the Great Lakes
region.

The Government of Rwanda also welcomes the
forthcoming mission of the Security Council to Central
Africa, which is to take place in the course of June.
This is a crucial step in giving impetus to the
pacification process taking place in the countries of the
Great Lakes region, especially in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi. The mission
should seek to help the Congolese protagonists to
identify ways and means to overcome the outstanding
impediments to putting in place national and integrated
transitional structures. A strong appeal to the various
Congolese parties, especially the Government in place
in Kinshasa, to show more political will and openness
would be very valuable in rescuing the good results
achieved so far through the remarkable regional and
international peace initiatives undertaken for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

As far as Burundi is concerned, the Government
of Rwanda would like to express its wish to see the
Security Council mission contribute to strengthening
the mechanisms for the implementation of the Arusha
peace accords so as to achieve a speedy restoration of
peace all over the territory of Burundi.
Recommendations regarding the African mission in
Burundi should be made in the vein of consolidating its
efficiency on the ground for the utmost security and
good of the people of Burundi.

