The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

It has been just three weeks since the world was
horrified by pictures of poisoned children in Syria,
the result of deadly nerve agents dropped from the
sky. Those images of suffering and dying children
will never be forgotten. But there is a quieter, slower
kind of death occurring in Syria today. It is even more
deliberate, more labour-intensive and more widespread
then dropping chemical weapons from thousands
of feet in the air. The Syrian regime is engaged in a
purposeful strategy of siege and surrender. Civilians
stranded inside are literally kept as prisoners until
they die or kneel before the Government. They are
denied food. They are also denied lifesaving medical
supplies. That campaign of holding humanitarian
relief hostage to Al-Assad's political goals is not new,
but it is worsening. More humanitarian assistance is
being denied to besieged areas today than at this time
last year. More Syrian men, women and children are
suffering and dying because aid is not being allowed
through. That is what the Syrian dictator means when
he says that "the only option is victory".

Al-Assad will tighten the noose around the necks
of his own people until they give in. The Syrian
Government's slow strangulation of its people happens
so frequently and so similarly that it has almost
become textbook. First Government forces or their
allies surround a city, town or village. They cut off all
commercial routes in and out. Then the United Nations
requests access to bring relief to the people as food and
medical supplies vanish. The United Nations mission is
a humanitarian one: they do not care who the people are
or whether they are pro-Government or pro-opposition.
They just want to save human lives.

But the Syrian regime does not let them. They hide
behind bureaucracy and deny requests for humanitarian
access. That is permission the Government could easily
give if it actually wanted to do so. The few convoys
that manage to get approvals are often held up at
checkpoints. They are stopped by Al-Assad's soldiers,
or by rogue militias that the Al-Assad regime cannot,
or will not, control. The aid they carry does not reach
those who need it. And month after month we sit in the
Security Council and talk about these very issues, and
nothing changes.

Even more bone-chilling is the fact that convoys
that do get through are increasingly looted of medical
supplies - items that have no military purpose but
are essential to saving the lives of civilians who do not
bow to the regime. Syrian Government forces and pro-
Government militias remove baby formula, vaccines
and forceps from midwifery kits. They raid paediatric
kits of antibiotics, needles and gauze. They remove
dialysis equipment, family hygiene kits and burn kits
from trucks. There is no reason I can conceivably
think of for that to happen. Maybe my colleagues from
Russia and other allies of the Syrian regime can help
me out. What possible definition of humanitarian relief
does not include antibiotics and dialysis equipment?
What possible justification is there for preventing
malnourished women and their children from receiving
baby formula from the United Nations and its partners?

Of course there is no justification, but there is a
reason. With impunity, Syrian regime troops on the
ground work to prevent United Nations aid from going
to the men, women and children who need it. At the
same time, they operate black markets and they sell
many of the same products. Medical supplies that
desperate people should be getting for free are instead
sold at inflated prices or extorted through bribes at
checkpoints. This is a major business in Syria, and yet
another reason that the sieges have not been lifted.

People are profiting off the suffering and dying of
the Syrian people, and none of this is prevented or even
opposed by Russia. According to the United Nations
latest report, medical items that would have provided
36,000 lifesaving and life-sustaining treatment were
removed from humanitarian convoys in March. As we
speak, 450,000 people in the Damascus suburbs are
being slowly squeezed by the Syrian regime. Those
areas have been under siege since 2012, but recently
Government forces closed the last routes for even black
markets to get into the city. They have blocked all
humanitarian aid deliveries since last October.

The people in the Damascus, suburbs just like in
other besieged areas of Syria, are slowly dying. Cancer
patients are dying from lack of chemotherapy. Kidney
patients are dying from lack of dialysis. And children
are suffering most of all: nearly one third of all war-
related injuries are two children under the age of 15.
But because the Syrian military has bombed all the
hospitals in the area, they cannot receive professional
treatment for their injuries.
Those are the atrocities occurring in Syria every
day that do not make the headlines. A resident doctor in
one of the only cancer centres serving the besieged areas
summed up the condition of her patients tragically well
when she said, "death is coming at them from every
direction". When death surrounds you, words mean very
little. Al-Assad has proven he will act only to increase
the suffering of his people, not ease it. And so it falls to
others to do what basic human decency requires.

Russia must live up to its promise to deliver real
peace talks and a real political solution. The sieges of
the Syrian people must be lifted. The war profiteering
and the theft of medical supplies must be stopped.
Syrians in desperate need of humanitarian assistance
must receive it. Bashar Al-Assad clearly believes it is
necessary to starve hundreds of thousands of people in
order to remain in power.

When I asked the Council, as we talked about
everything that is happening here, I heard from each and
every member some word of desperation and of defeat
because we talk about this so much, and every time we
talk about it more people continue to die. I listened to
my Russian colleague, and he talked about task forces
and diplomacy and less criticism of the Syrian regime.
Where has that gotten us? It has not gotten us anywhere.
On the times where we could actually do something
as a Security Council, who is the one Member State
that continues to protect the regime that is keeping
humanitarian assistance from going through?

Many members have said that we need to put
pressure on the Syrian regime. That is actually not
the case. We need to put pressure on Russia, because
Russia continues to cover for the Syrian regime. Russia
continues to allow them to keep humanitarian aid
from the people that need it. Russia continues to cover
for a leader who uses chemical weapons against his
own people. Russia continues to veto. And Al-Assad
continues to do those things because they know that
Russia will continue to cover for them.

Sitting in this Chamber, I appreciate all the
comments that members have made. But all eyes and
all pressure now need to go to Russia, because they
are the ones that can stop this if they want to. Do not
listen to the distractions of what they are trying to say
while pointing to other conflicts. Do not listen to the
fact that they claim the reports now are wrong. First
it was the Security Council that was wrong; now it is
Mr. O'Brien's report that is wrong. But the images do
not lie. The humanitarian workers do not lie. The fact
that they cannot get the assistance they need - that is
not lying. What is is to continue to give Russia a pass
for allowing this terrible situation to occur.

I will continue to press the Security Council to act
to do something, regardless of whether the Russians
continue to veto it, because it is our voice that needs to be
heard. The Syrian people do not care about diplomacy.
They do not care about any sort of task force. They do
not care about any of the things we said today. They are
just trying to live their very last day.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

No surprise, the representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.

