The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

We thank Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Ging for
their briefings.

Throughout most of Syria, which is under the control
of its legitimate Government, civilian life continues to
be restored, including with Russia's active assistance.
The Syrian authorities are giving major attention to the
liberated areas around Damascus and in northern Homs
province, where residents are returning. The streets
in eastern Ghouta are being cleared of rubble and
residential buildings are being rebuilt. Funds have been
allocated for repairing medical facilities in Nashabiyah,
Harasta, Douma and Maliha. In Rastan and Talbiseh
work has been completed on high-voltage electricity
transmission lines and transformer sub-stations. It
has been announced that rail freight links have been
restored between Tartus and Homs provinces.

Nothing like that is happening in the areas of Syria
that have been occupied, in violation of its sovereignty,
by the so-called coalition, which is making up excuses
to remain on Syrian soil a little longer. Months have
elapsed since Raqqa was liberated from the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, but nothing has changed
for the better. The so-called liberators, after reducing
the city to rubble - medical facilities, bakeries,
everything - are doing nothing to improve things and
today have been trying to lecture us about morality. A
difficult situation has developed in the Rukban camp,
which is near the coalition's Al-Tanf military base, an
area closed to outsiders, and no progress is contemplated
with humanitarian deliveries. On top of that, there
are reports of a corrupt scheme there whereby armed
groups are charging people who want to leave the camp
a steep fee of as much as $500 per family.

It appears that there are delays in getting
international assistance to Syria with mine clearance,
including through the United Nations Mine Action
Service. Meanwhile, a unit from the Russian Armed
Forces' International Mine Action Centre has conducted
four operations in record time that are unique in
both scale and complexity, two in Palmyra's historic
architectural complex and in the residential part of the
city, and two in Aleppo and Deir ez-Zor, enabling tens
of thousands of Syrians to return to their homes. Many
priceless world heritage objects have been rescued. I
will not read out the statistics about the quantity of
explosive ordnance that our sappers have defused, but
they are significant.

There is no justification for the hysterics about
the so-called Law Number 10, whose aim, contrary to
what some have tried to suggest, is not to expropriate
property but to protect property rights violated during
the war. The Syrians are not avoiding contact with
United Nations experts on the issue but are clarifying
details and heeding advice.

The pressing issue is restoring areas damaged in the
hostilities, and that requires major help from the entire
international community with the active participation
of the United Nations. Helping Syria rebuild cannot
be conditional on any political demands. One way to
get started would be to start restoring Syria's health-
care sector and local pharmaceutical industry by
guaranteeing the possibility of buying medicines and
medical equipment from abroad.

The quality of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/617) on the review ofcross-border humanitarian
operations is disappointing. There is a gross error on
the very first page, where it claims that cross-border
humanitarian operations are provided for the areas
not controlled by the Syrian Government. Where
did that come from? Resolution 2165 (2014), which
established the mechanism, indicates that cross-border
humanitarian deliveries are to be delivered to residents
throughout the country in need of help.

In abstaining in the voting on resolution 2393 (2017),
we sent the clear message that we think it is essential to
work to end the mechanism. In a constructive approach,
we decided to give the United Nations and the other
interested parties time to prepare for the closure of
cross-border operations and to lay the ground for a
dialogue with the authorities in Damascus about new
ways to deliver aid to the entire Syrian population.
However, the United Nations has not made use of that
opportunity. The report fails to take into account the
military and political aspects of the situation on the
ground and does not address the core principles of
providing humanitarian assistance, including respect
for State sovereignty. It is strange that the authors of
the report found not a single flaw in the cross-border
operations. And yet they exist, as we well know. I would
once again like to urge the Secretariat to come up with
ways to provide a gradual and agreed-on withdrawal
from cross-border operations in the near future.

In the past few days a great deal has been said
about escalating tensions in south-western Syria.
Incidentally, I want to note that we, like others, are
not indifferent to Jordan and Israel's security issues.
We should point out that Jabhat Al-Nusra fighters
frequently organize attacks on Syrian military
personnel and obstruct the achievement of local
ceasefires with armed groups that want to lay down
their weapons and return to normal life. As we know,
the authorities are offering those opportunities within
the framework of Government amnesty. The cities of
Dar'a and Suwayda, as well as villages that have opted
for reconciliation, have been under fire from jihadists'
rocket and artillery shelling.

There are other sources of instability. The situation
around Fo'ah and Kafraya, which according to United
Nations classification is the only blocked area in Syria,
remains very tense, and terrorists have intensified their
shelling ofresidential areas ofAleppo. Rather than using
their influence to help achieve reconciliation, some
outside stakeholders, on the contrary, are encouraging
their clients to take offensive action, which can hardly
be seen as evidence of being disposed to cooperate
on de-escalation. We should point out that none of
the agreements on a cessation of hostilities provides
for pauses in the fight against terrorists. In Syria the
elimination of remnants of terrorist groups continues.
On the night of 17 and 18 June, massive air strikes were
launched simultaneously on positions of the Syrian
army and its allies near the village of Al-Hari, to the
south-east of the town of Abu Kamal in Deir ez-Zor
province. Dozens of people at the forefront of the fight
against terrorism were killed as a result. This is not the
first incident of this kind. What good does it do? Who
wants to give extremists a chance to to hold their heads
high and try to recover their lost positions?

IwantMr. De Mistura to know that Russia is working
for definitive progress towards a political settlement on
an agreed international basis under the auspices of the
United Nations. Mr. De Mistura recently took part in
the high-level consultations with representatives of the
Astana process guarantor countries, so he is well aware
of our firm commitment to an intra-Syrian dialogue.
We have been working consistently with the Syrian
parties to encourage them to implement joint efforts.
At this stage, that is primarily about implementing
the recommendations on establishing a constitutional
committee that were formulated at the Syrian National
Dialogue Congress in Sochi. The Syrian Government
has submitted its list of delegates. As we understand it,
the opposition camp, whose unity is still doubtful, is in
the process of considering this. Ultimately, of course,
it is the Syrians themselves who will have to agree
on all the necessary details, with the assistance of the
United Nations.

In a broader context, the first order of business is
to restore normality to the relations between Syria and
other States in the region that have been undermined
during the conflict, which would significantly improve
the situation in the Middle East.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

