Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): I
would like to begin by expressing gratitude for the further
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Tajikistan.

Since we last considered the situation in Tajikistan,
there has been significant progress in the implementation of
the General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and
National Accord. The parties have shown definite signs of
being determined to make the peace progress succeed, a
fact that deserves our full recognition. In this transitional
period they must persevere in good-faith fulfilment of the
peace agreements, in particular the ceasefire agreement.

We must place on record our concern that, in spite
of the significant progress in the political field, acts of
violence are still taking place in the country, affecting the
security situation and endangering the personnel of the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
(UNMOT). The creation of a joint Government-
Opposition security unit is a step in the right direction in
order to safeguard the security of UNMOT personnel. We
hope that the unit will become operational as soon as
possible, thus permitting UNMOT's mandate to be
implemented free from danger or interference.

The draft resolution that we are about to vote on
follows the Secretary-General's recommendation to
expand the UNMOT's mandate with a View to stepping
up the Mission's participation in promoting peace and
national reconciliation in Tajikistan. My delegation
supports this strengthened role for UNMOT. We believe
that the extension of its mandate until 15 May 1998 sends
a clear signal of the commitment of the United Nations,
and the Security Council in particular, to ensuring
stability in this part of Central Asia.

We would also like to thank the delegation of the
Russian Federation for preparing the draft resolution
which served as a basis for the one that we are about to
adopt.

In my delegation's view, responsibility for the
success of the peace process must be borne chiefly by the
parties. We therefore hope that they will continue to
cooperate actively with the efforts being carried out by
the United Nations through its Mission.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation's recognition of and support for the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Gerd Merrem, and his team. We urge him to continue
working to ensure the success of the peace process in
Tajikistan.

