Mr. Abu-Nimah (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic): At the outset, it is my pleasure to congratulate
you, Sir, on your leadership of the Council. I am
convinced that your wisdom, experience and diplomatic
skills will undoubtedly ensure the complete success of the
Council's work.

 

It is also my pleasure to thank your predecessor, the
representative of Gabon, for his successful work during his
tenure of the presidency last month.

The regrettable Lockerbie incident, which killed many
innocent civilians in 1988, continues to have repercussions
in the international community, as it awaits identification of
those responsible for the crime, and the meting out of the
most severe, firm and just punishment to them. My country,
Jordan, has always stood against terrorism, rejecting it in all
its forms and manifestations, condemning it clearly and
unequivocally. Jordan has cooperated with all international
efforts aimed at eliminating this hateful phenomenon of
human behaviour. We continue to accord the struggle
against terrorism top priority, for we have often been its
victims. Within the same framework, we support all
legislation and every effort aimed at protecting innocent
civilians, wherever they may be, as well as any
international legislation. We call on all international bodies
concerned to pursue every perpetrator of terrorist activities
against innocent people, regardless of whether such acts are
the work of individuals, groups or States, and to compel
them to assume the responsibility for their misdeeds. To us,
these are matters of principle that are not subject to
discussion or compromise. We reject terrorism and
participate in every effort to foil it, calling for the
punishment of all those who commit, encourage, abet or
provide cover for it.
This international Organization and this Council, one
of its most important organs, are founded on the principles
of full integrity and absolute justice. We believe that every
measure and resolution should be based on the principles of
justice. There is a well-known logical development for any
judicial process which begins with the investigation and
then proceeds to the identification of suspects and their
trial. When guilt is established, judgment is pronounced and
punishment meted out. That is how responsibility can be
defined and justice served.

I am not about to participate in the legal controversy
that has gone on for years concerning the ways and means
of bringing to trial the suspects in the Lockerbie case. I
should like, however, to affirm a few principles based on
the Judgments handed down by the International Court of
Justice at The Hague on 27 February confirming the
Court's competence to consider the Libyan complaint, as
well as on what I stated at the outset.

First, we call on the Council to respect the Judgments
rendered by the International Court of Justice in order to
strengthen the Court's role in the peaceful settlement of
disputes and conflicts on the basis of international law.
We also stress the importance of respecting and
implementing all Security Council resolutions fully and
precisely, as this is a matter of commitment and principle.

Secondly, we believe that the imposition of strict and
continuous economic sanctions on an entire people for
years goes to the very heart of justice and fundamental
human rights. It also causes great suffering for innocent
civilians who have nothing to do with the crime whose
perpetrators the Security Council rightly wishes to punish.

Thirdly, there is a feeling prevalent in our country
that the economic sanctions that are imposed on millions
of innocent people have not accomplished the purpose for
which they were imposed. In fact, they have been
completely counterproductive as they produce results
opposite to those intended by generating bitterness,
humiliation, a sense of injustice and despair among the
peoples subjected to them. Such sanctions also result in
a loss of confidence in this international Organization,
whereas we all wish to promote and foster the trust of all
peoples in it, in its justice and in its ability to protect
peoples' rights, equally and on the basis of fairness,
integrity and universal standards, not on the basis of
selectivity and double standards.

Fourthly, I wish to reaffirm once again the need to
pursue all the necessary legal and judicial means, under
due process of law and within the framework of the many
initiatives launched by the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the Organization
of African Unity and other organizations concerned with
solving the problem, with the identification of the
perpetrators of the Lockerbie crime and with having them
shoulder the responsibility for their act. I should like,
however, to affirm that justice requires that the sanctions
imposed on the Libyan people, who have suffered for
years from the consequences of the embargo, be lifted or
suspended, in order for the judicial process to run its
course, and a decision to them be declared. We say this
while sharing the grief of all the families of the victims,
expressing to them our full sympathy for and
understanding of their tragedy and their plight.

In conclusion, we are confident that this Council will
find the appropriate way to deal with the case - a way
that would secure justice, conform to the principles of the
Charter, put an end to the injustice suffered by innocent
people, attain justice for the victims of the tragedy, and
banish the shadow of violence and terrorism from the
world.

 

