The President: Before yielding back the floor to
Under-Secretary-General Sevan, I would like to make a
few comments in my national capacity.

First and foremost, I would like to thank the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office of the
Iraq Programme, Benon Sevan, for not only his useful
update but the outstanding work that he and his staff
have done both in New York and in the region over the
years in the implementation of the Programme. Their
efforts have been nothing short of outstanding. We
respect them for the excellent work that has been
carried out by the oil-for-food programme. As has been
the case throughout the life of the United Nations oil-
for-food programme, the Office of the Iraq
Programme's personnel continue to demonstrate
exceptional professionalism and thoroughness in their
work, despite the obstacles and challenges that they
face daily, and they deserve our commendation as well
as our gratitude for their unique efforts.

My United Kingdom colleague has already
described in some detail steps being taken by the
Coalition Provisional Authority and Iraqi ministry
officials in Baghdad and in northern Iraq to prepare for
the upcoming transition. I would only like to add a few
points.

First, I acknowledge the point raised by Mr.
Sevan that a considerable range of activities remain to
be undertaken by the United Nations, the Coalition
Provisional Authority and the relevant Iraqi authorities
to complete the transfer of remaining responsibilities
under the programme to the Coalition Provisional
Authority in line with the requirements of resolution
1483 (2003). I want to reassure Council members that
my Government continues to devote significant
resources to ensure a smooth transition from United
Nations to Coalition and Iraqi control after 21
November. Many highly skilled professionals from the
Department of State and other United States
Government agencies, as well as colleagues from our
own Mission here in New York, are in Baghdad, in
northern Iraq and in Amman, working to finalize
arrangements to ensure the humanitarian needs of the
people of Iraq and to ensure that those needs will
continue to be met as the oil-for-food programme
draws to a close.

A subject that has received considerable attention
in recent days and was, of course, the subject of
commentary around this table this afternoon has been
the ongoing efforts to renegotiate oil-for-food contracts
and to arrange for their delivery to Iraq. A number of
United Nations agencies have achieved good progress in
negotiating amendments to contracts previously
identified by the United Nations, the Coalition
Provisional Authority and Iraqi ministry representatives
as containing goods of immediate utility. I note that as of
27 October, the World Food Programme, for example,
has renegotiated more than 60 per cent of the contracts
assigned to it; the International Telecommunications
Union, 65.7 per cent; UNICEF, 76.2 per cent; and the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO), 64.8 per cent. They are also
achieving good results. We would urge that other United
Nations agencies devote all necessary resources to the
renegotiation effort to ensure that all contracts have been
amended prior to the 21 November termination of the
oil-for-food programme. I hope that other delegations
will join us in strongly encouraging completion of this
process.

It remains imperative that all parties concerned
keep focused on the renegotiation effort, as any delays
will only undermine the reconstruction. For its part, the
Coalition Provisional Authority will continue to honour
its commitment to support the fulfilment of all
prioritized contracts.

We are concerned by recent reports indicating
that there has been an unusual delay in the Banque
Nationale de Paris' issuance of amended letters of
credit, including, in some instances, delays of several
weeks. So we would urge that this situation be
remedied immediately to ensure that the renegotiation
process is completed on schedule.

Concerning funds in the United Nations escrow
accounts, I note in the statement recently provided by
the United Nations Comptroller's Office that as of 13
October, there were more than $3 billion of
unencumbered funds in the 13 and 59 per cent escrow
accounts. These are funds that belong to the people of
Iraq and we believe that they should be used as quickly
as possible to benefit them. In this regard, we would
urge the Secretary-General to transfer at least $1 billion
of these funds immediately to the Development Fund
for Iraq to underscore the United Nations ongoing
commitment to help the Iraqi people. Funds in the
other United Nations accounts, including unused
amounts in the 2.2 per cent account, should also be
transferred to the Development Fund for Iraq as soon
as possible. While we appreciate the information on the
escrow accounts recently provided by United Nations
Treasury officials, we urgently request that they furnish
the Council with more frequent and detailed updates.

It is equally important that all States fulfil their
obligations as defined under United Nations Security
Council resolution 1483 (2003), to freeze and transfer
to the Development Fund for Iraq all assets belonging
to the previous Iraqi regime. There are significant
funds currently outside Iraq, particularly in the region,
that should be returned at once to provide for the
immediate needs of the Iraqi people. We urge all States
to comply with their responsibilities in this regard.

Given the importance of this and related issues, I
recommend, as did my delegation during last
Thursday's formal meeting of the Iraq Sanctions
Committee, that chairman Pleuger convene weekly
committee meetings from now through the 21
November termination of the oil-for-food programme,
to ensure this situation remains closely monitored,
including through the prompt and thorough sharing of
information with all delegations as it becomes
available.

I now revert to my role as President of the
Council and would invite Under-Secretary-General
Sevan to answer any of the questions that might have
been raised or make any other comments he might wish
to make.

