Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
wish to congratulate you, Sir, for having organized this
important meeting on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. Furthermore, I
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, for the clarity
of his briefing and the enlightening information he
provided to the Council. Of course I thank the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.

As you are aware, Sir, the multiple crises in the
Middle East, more specifically the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, have for many years polarized the attention of
the international community. For many reasons, that
region of the world has become a strategic area and
now seems in large part to determine the future of
global security. It is unfortunate to note that despite the
many efforts made towards peace and stability in that
region, all types of frustrations and humiliations
continue to undermine the effectiveness of any
prospect for peace and development.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is no exception to
that sad assessment. Indeed, negotiations on the Israeli-
Palestinian peace process are again at a major impasse.
More than two years after the international donors
conference held in December 2007, the humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip remains very worrying,
particularly because of the blockade of Gaza. In
resolution 1860 (2009), adopted 8 January 2009, the
Security Council called for the lifting of that measure
in order to allow humanitarian aid and commercial
goods into Gaza without hindrance and to allow
individuals to move about freely.
We must also respond to Israel's legitimate
security concerns by taking drastic measures to prevent
the entry of illicit arms into Gaza and to halt the firing
of rockets on Israeli civilians.

Gabon hopes for the rapid resumption of Israeli-
Palestinian negotiations for a genuine and lasting peace
based on respect for the principles agreed by the
parties and on implementation of the rules of
international law. In other words, we support the vision
of a Palestinian State coexisting with the State of Israel
within secure and internationally recognized borders,
in conformity with the Road Map adopted in 2003 and
relevant Security Council resolutions.

To revitalize that perspective, my country invites
the Quartet to step up its efforts in order to lead the
Israeli and Palestinian leaders to resume dialogue in
good faith. We strongly back France's initiatives aimed
at achieving that goal and at promoting peace in the
region. We also support the efforts of the United States
and Russia directed at both parties with a view to a
durable negotiated settlement of the conflict.

The creation of a Palestinian State is an
unavoidable step to make the peace process successful.
To that end, the international community should
increase the aid afforded the Palestinian Authority to
assist it in its programme to strengthen the institutions
of a future State. We urge the United Nations to
continue to work for a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East, basing its efforts on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and 1850 (2008), as well as on existing
agreements and a number of peace initiatives.

My country also pays tribute to the good offices
of Egypt and all the other countries participating in the
Arab Peace Initiative with a view to a political
settlement of the conflict and a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. As the futures of
Israel and Palestine are closely intertwined, only frank,
ongoing, direct dialogue between the two parties will
make possible lasting solutions to the conflict.

