Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the 15 States members
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the initiative taken by your country, the Republic
of Korea, to organize this debate on the issue of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, whose
importance is clear to all. I would like to welcome
Mr. Kim Sung-hwan, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Trade of the Republic of Korea, who has come to New
York to preside over this important meeting.

I would also like to welcome the concept note
prepared by the Mission of the Republic of Korea
(S/2013/75, annex), as well as the excellent report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2012/376). I take this opportunity
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
courageous statement at the beginning of this debate,
which more than ever before confronts the international
community with its responsibilities with regard to the
violence and unacceptable threats to human life and
dignity in areas of conflict around the world.

The Secretary-General's report indicates that
civilians account for 90 per cent ofthe victims of armed
conflict, of whom women and children constitute
80 per cent. That regrettable reality is, unfortunately,
true of our subregion in West Africa as well, which has
seen several armed conflicts since 1990, including in
Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea Bissau, Cote d'Ivoire
and recently in Mali. Given those situations, in which
civilians have been massacred, the States members of
ECOWAS responded in 1991 by adopting the Declaration
of Political Principles in Abuja, which addresses the
basic human rights of the citizens of ECOWAS. That
was followed in 1999 by the adoption of the Protocol
relating to the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management, Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security
in the subregion, which institutionalized the ECOWAS
intervention framework by creating the ECOWAS
standby force. The Mechanism was complemented in
2001 by the supplementary Protocol on Democracy
and Good Governance and in 2008 by the ECOWAS
Strategic Framework for Conflict Prevention.

The legal framework and mechanisms for specific
action set up by ECOWAS, which make up our
collective subregional security system, have endowed
us with the instruments necessary to prevent conflict
and the appropriate means to establish peace. Those
ECOWAS structures have evolved within the larger
context of close cooperation with the United Nations,
pursuant to the relevant provisions of its Charter, and
remain essential tools for strengthening the protection
of civilians in our subregion.

Experience compels us to admit that armed conflict
in our subregion is, undoubtedly, linked to a series of
causes: first, the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons; secondly, a lack of democracy; and thirdly,
poverty. Violence and other human rights violations of
which civilians are the victims are the consequences of
those factors, and that is why I would like to not only
express the full support of ECOWAS for the principles
and efforts made by the United Nations in general and
the Security Council in particular, but also to underscore
the need to effectively strengthen cooperation between
the Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

In that regard, ECOWAS, of course, fully supports
the five main requirements identified in the report
of the Secretary-General to assure more effective
protection of civilians: first, respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law;
secondly, respect for the international rules on the
protection of civilians by non-State armed groups;
thirdly, the protection of civilians by United Nations
peacekeeping missions; fourthly, humanitarian access;
and, fifthly, the obligation to ensure accountability.

With respect to our subregion, we note that it was
on the basis of those five major principles that the
Security Council, in the context of the post-election
crisis in Cote d'Ivoire, adopted resolution 1975 (2011).
The Economic Community of West African States
rightly welcomes the exemplary action taken by the
United Nations in Cote d'Ivoire under that resolution,
which made it possible to spare an incalculable number
of human lives by bringing a swift end to the post-
election crisis in Cote d'Ivoire.

With respect to the recommendation in paragraph
76 ofthe Secretary-General's report, ECOWAS believes
that the terms used should be qualified somewhat,
taking into account the responsibilities of the States
Members of the United Nations within the framework
of cooperation in the fight against terrorism. Indeed, the
current crisis situation in Mali, of which the Security
Council is seized, is of great concern to ECOWAS,
as it raises the issue of the respect for the rules of
international law by non-State armed groups that have
clear links with terrorist organizations. The Economic
Community of West African States cannot deny the
pressing need for access to populations by humanitarian
actors, but it is also important that the physical integrity
and security of those actors be protected.

With respect to the obligation to ensure
accountability, ECOWAS supports that principle to
the extent that we believe it in many ways to be the
cornerstone of the fight against impunity. In that regard,
the protection of civilians in armed conflict would be
more effective if we strengthened cooperation between
the Security Council and the International Criminal
Court. Indeed, we agree that it is not possible to
improve respect for international humanitarian law and
international human rights law without strengthening
the means to ensure the accountability of those who are
responsible for such violations, including parties to a
conflict and people who have acted individually.

In conclusion, allow me to return to the causes
of armed conflict and to underscore that ECOWAS
remains convinced, with respect to our subregion,
that the fight against the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons must be the basis of any strategy to
sustainably protect civilians in situations of conflict.
It is that concern which led ECOWAS in 2006 to
transform the moratorium on small arms and light
weapons into a convention, which should be seen as a
legally binding instrument to regulate the transfer and
manufacture of small arms and light weapons in our
subregion. Moreover, ECOWAS expresses the wish that
the future arms trade treaty, whose final negotiating
session will resume in a few weeks, might incorporate
elements of the ECOWAS convention, which seeks to
strengthen the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
The Economic Community of West African States is
ready to contribute to such an objective.

