Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Like others, I
should like to extend a warm welcome to High
Representative Baroness Ashton and to thank her for
her comprehensive briefing on the role of the European
Union (EU) in the United Nations and its views on
some contemporary issues that are on the Security
Council's agenda. Clearly, given the limitations of
time, the wide canvas that the High Representative has
covered will prevent me from commenting on each of
the issues that are currently before the Council and on
which my delegation's views are, in any case,
reasonably well known.

The EU is the largest economy in the world in
terms of nominal gross domestic product. It is one of
the largest trading blocs; the largest exporter and
importer of goods and services; and the largest trading
partner of the leading economies of the world,
including India. It is also one of the biggest
development aid donors and the largest provider of
humanitarian assistance. With a membership of
27 countries and five candidate countries, the EU is
already an important voice in its region and beyond.
With the greater cohesiveness that the EU seeks in
foreign affairs and security policy, its role will only
become more significant in the world in the coming
years.

India therefore welcomes stronger cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union.
Indeed, Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter
provides for such cooperation between the
Organization and regional organizations. Article 54 of
the Charter enjoins the regional organizations to keep
the Security Council fully informed of their activities
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
In that spirit, we welcome today's briefing and
congratulate the European Union on its contributions to
global peace and security, in cooperation with the
United Nations. With the entry into force of the Lisbon
Treaty, India hopes that the European Union's foreign
policy will show greater coherence and effectiveness
under the leadership of High Representative Baroness
Ashton.

India's bilateral relations with the EU have
expanded significantly over the years. The EU is
India's largest trading partner, while India is the EU's
ninth largest trading partner. The relationship was
elevated to a strategic partnership in 2000. The most
recent summit-level meeting between India and the
EU- the eleventh since 2000 - took place in
Brussels on 10 December 2010. The summit reviewed
a whole spectrum of bilateral, regional and global
issues, and the leaders committed themselves to giving
new momentum to the key areas that already constitute
the bulk of our cooperation. There was also agreement
on the need to step up cooperation in the fight against
international terrorism, as reflected in the India-EU
joint declaration on international terrorism.

Given this strong bilateral partnership, we look
forward to the EU emerging as an even more important
voice in today's multipolar world, and attach great
value to the EU's activities in the United Nations and
its role in preventive diplomacy. We support the EU's
contributions to capacity- and institution-building in
African States and its support in the training of police
and security forces, electoral assistance, legislative and
judicial reform, and so on, which have all contributed
to international peace and security. India has also
made contributions in these areas and cooperated with
the EU and other countries in anti-piracy operations off
the coast of Somalia. We look forward to the further
deepening of such cooperation.

India supports the EU's aspirations to playing a
more significant role in the General Assembly. In this
context, we welcome the ongoing consultations among
Member States, and hope that a consensus will emerge
very soon.

