Mr. Mayoral (spoke in Spanish): This is the
briefing that it is my duty to present every 120 days in
conformity with paragraph 12 of Security Council
resolution 1526 (2004). Sadly, it seems that, too often,
when we brief the Council, we have to begin by
lamenting the losses caused by new heinous acts of
terrorism. Unfortunately, this time is no exception. The
attacks perpetrated in London on 7 July were a new
indication of the threats to peace and security caused
by terrorist acts.

There can be no doubt that the threat posed by
Al-Qaida is radically different from the threat it posed
when this sanctions regime was first imposed. It is
believed that Al-Qaida terrorism now comprises three
separate but interlinked groups: first is the old
leadership, whose names are known to everyone;
second are the fighters who were trained in camps in
Afghanistan and graduated as expert terrorists; and
third is a new and growing generation of followers
who, although they may never have left their countries
of residence, have embraced the core elements of the
Al-Qaida message. Given that the Committee is
devoting increasing attention to the third group, I wish
to encourage the Council to make clear to Member
States that the word "associated" must also cover such
groups so that the sanctions regime can be adapted to
the new threats.

The Council is currently considering a new draft
resolution aimed at intensifying the sanctions
measures. I believe that it provides the Council with an
opportunity to strengthen a number of elements and to
address some of the concerns expressed by Member
States.
I now turn to the activities of the Committee and
of its Analytical Support and Sanctions the Monitoring
Team. The Committee has met 10 times since I last
briefed the Council. Half of those meetings were
formal. The Council will recall that on 10 January, the
Committee heard a report by the United States
delegation and that at the time, I encouraged other
Member States to avail themselves of the same
opportunity. I am now pleased to report that since then,
we have heard very useful reports presented by the
delegations of the United Kingdom, the Netherlands
and Australia. The Committee has often stressed the
importance of such meetings. Once again, I would like
to encourage States to take the opportunity to share
national achievements and concerns related to the fight
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban. The Committee also
met with Mr. Gijs de Vries, European Union Counter-
Terrorism Coordinator, who explained the European
Union's competencies and activities in the area of
counter-terrorism.

During the reporting period, I made my first
Visits to selected countries. I was accompanied by
Minister Panga of Tanzania, First Counsellor
Andreades of Greece and Counsellor Hafrad of
Algeria. We had very useful and informative meetings
in Germany, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey and
with European Union institutions in Brussels. I was
pleased to note that in those places there is a wish to
contribute to the effective implementation of the
sanctions measures and to address with useful candour
certain concerns with respect to the quality of the
Committee's list of individuals and entities associated
with Al-Qaida and the Taliban and to due-process
guarantees.

I should also like to report that the Monitoring
Team has continued to provide essential support to the
work of the Committee. Here, I wish to thank
Mr. Richard Barrett and his Team for their highly
professional work. The Team's third report is now
being translated and should be available to all members
early next month. The Committee will consider it in
detail in the weeks to come. I believe that the report,
which contains a number of useful clarifications, will
be very valuable to all Security Council members and
to the broader United Nations membership. The Team
has also helped the Committee to prepare its
assessment of the implementation of measures, which
the Committee will submit to the Council.

Members of the Team recently travelled to,
among other places, the Sudan and Afghanistan to
assess the implementation of sanctions measures by
those countries. The Team has also continued to
coordinate its work with other relevant bodies,
including the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate,
in an exemplary manner.

One of the important recommendations in the
Team's second report was to increase cooperation
between the Committee and Interpol. As a direct result
of this recommendation, I have sought the Secretary-
General's assistance in formulating an agreement to
complement the existing cooperation agreement with
Interpol to broaden and deepen the cooperation. It is
my understanding that the Secretariat and Interpol are
now working on the development of such an
agreement, which will be a very positive step forward.

As to the future activities of the Committee, I
firmly believe that the new resolution to be adopted by
the Security Council this month will provide the
Committee with the new impetus to deal with some of
the most pressing issues on the Committee's agenda.
There are many issues that the Committee will have to
deal with in the next six months, including a new visit
by the Chairman to selected Member States, the
analysis of the third report of the Monitoring Team and
the updating of the Committee's guidelines.

I should like briefly to point to two aspects
where, in my opinion, Member States and the
Committee must strive for further improvement.

First, it has become clear that some Member
States have encountered difficulties or need assistance
in the implementation of the sanctions measures,
particularly with regard to the assets freeze. For
example, it emerges from the reports of some Member
States that there is apparently still a need to present
sufficient evidence to judicial authorities as a condition
of the freezing of assets. We wish to clarify that such
systems are not in conformity with Member States'
obligations under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter. For this reason, I urge States to ensure that
assets can be frozen as soon as the Committee adds the
name of an individual or an entity to the Committee's
list.

Secondly, many Member States have argued that
the Committee should further improve procedures for
listing and delisting names. The Committee will
continue to address such concerns. During my Visits to
selected States, and through reports to the Committee,
it has become very clear that more is expected from the
Committee in terms of the quality of information used
for identification. I urge Member States to continue to
provide additional information regarding individuals
already on the lists, as this will certainly improve the
application of sanctions.

In recent months the Committee has also received
a number of communications regarding the inclusion of
certain individuals and entities on its list. This is a very
positive development, and I wish to express here that
the Committee highly appreciates it. The Committee is
still considering some of these submissions and will
again strongly urge Member States to submit further
names.

I now come to our conclusions. There is, sadly,
every chance that Al-Qaida will continue to menace the
world for some time to come. The international
community must firmly oppose this threat and maintain
a system that puts pressure on Al-Qaida by creating an
environment hostile to it through effective application
implementation of sanctions on a global scale. In this
regard, I expect the forthcoming resolution to provide
the Committee with a strong mandate to pursue these
goals, while at the same time ensuring that due process
concerns are addressed in an appropriate manner.

