Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I must draw attention to a procedural flaw in
today's meeting, which of course has a serious political
subtext and is one of the reasons that we are today
seeing the end of the work of the United Nations
Mission in the Abkhaz-Russian border region.

We have been very patient for many years now
although, like today, it has been very difficult to be
patient while hearing very non-objective words, to put
it mildly, on the part of Georgia's representative. We
have, however, listened patiently. Throughout these
years, Abkhaz representatives have not been given an
opportunity to inform Council members of their
position during a conflict that has existed for many
years in the Abkhaz Georgian region, which culminated
in the tragic events ofAugust 2008.

I could, of course, be very critical of the
statement made by the Georgian representative, but I
will not do so. There simply is not enough time. But I
would agree on one thing, namely, that we have a
genuinely positive view of the work of those who have
worked in the United Nations Mission throughout the
years. The Georgian representative is wrong, however,
in saying that that work has been hindered by the
Russian military. I recall that all reports of the
Secretary-General give a positive assessment of
cooperation between the United Nations Mission and
peacekeepers of the Commonwealth of Independent
States, which mainly include Russian military
personnel, and of the contribution of our peacekeepers
in support of stability in the region, which was violated
by Georgia's aggression against South Ossetia.

I must also call attention to two or three
references with which I did not agree. Statements by
some of our colleagues have included erroneous
interpretations of our position, which we must correct.

In particular, the Permanent Representative of
France said that our proposed draft resolution on a
possible future mission of the United Nations in the
Abkhaz-Georgian border region included certain terms
that would be politically difficult for Western
colleagues to agree with. Let us say that is so. Many
such terms were included in the draft put forward by
our Western partners. But we are not discussing today
Why our efforts on a major resolution to establish a
new United Nations mission in the Abkhaz conflict
zone failed. We are talking about a draft technical
rollover resolution that was introduced by the Group of
Friends. Russia also proposed a draft for a possible
extension, although in principle we believed that it was
time for more substantive measures.

I shall now read from the short draft resolution
that we proposed. Under the draft, which refers to all
the relevant resolutions and takes into consideration
the 18 May 2009 report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/254), the Security Council would "decide to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Mission
under consideration in the report to a new deadline of
15 July". Thus, we were ready to include two
additional weeks.

What is politically unacceptable in that? Is it
Russia that has thrown a political spanner in our work
to extend the United Nations Mission, or those who
09-37028

hastened to submit today's draft, with its politicized
technical roll-over proposal, to the Council? I would
urge us not to give ourselves a big headache over this.

I have one final comment. Many, or at least some
of our colleagues referred to territorial integrity. That is
a very important principle, but there is one interesting
twist to it. I do not recall how many meetings of the
Council have been held following the events of August
2008, but have those who claim to support territorial
integrity condemned even once Georgia's aggression
against South Ossetia? No one raised that issue in the
statements that were made today. That omission is one
of the reasons why, unfortunately, our work on
developing a draft resolution that would have
mandated new, useful functions to the United Nations
in that region ended in failure. There has been a lack of
objective analysis. I do not even call for a self-critical
analysis, but merely for an objective analysis of what
happened and how the outcome of those events should
be viewed today.

