Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): First, on behalf
of my delegation, I would like to extend a warm
welcome to the Council for His Excellency Mr. Samura
Kamara, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone. I thank the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jens
Anders Toyberg-Frandzen, for his briefing on the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL) and his remarks on the remaining challenges
facing the country as UNPSIL concludes its mandate.
Since Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen has briefed the Council
for the last time as Head of UNIPSIL, I offer my
gratitude for his leadership in ensuring the successful
implementation and conclusion of its mandate. I
would also like to thank our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Canada, Guillermo Rishchynski,
Chair of the Sierra Leone configuration, for his briefing
and his personal dedication and commitment to the
cause.

Lithuania congratulates the Government of Sierra
Leone on the remarkable progress that has been
achieved in post-conflict recovery, peace consolidation
and democratic transition through the creation of a
culture of the rule of law, accountability and political
tolerance. As UNIPSIL completes its mandate, 1 would
like to commend the effectiveness with which the
United Nations, international financial institutions and
regional organizations have contributed over the past
15 years to the peacebuilding efforts in Sierra Leone.

Challenges remain, however. In order to further
consolidate peace, recovery and economic growth, more
must be done in the context ofpeacebuilding, reforming
the security sector, fighting corruption and furthering
robust, inclusive development. Lithuania takes
positive note of the security-sector reform programme
launched by UNIPSIL in January. We welcome Sierra
Leone's constitutional review process, conducted by
the Constitutional Review Committee. The country's
development partners will be playing an important role
in that process. For example, the European Union has
been engaged in the process, with a particular focus on
capacity-building, technical assistance to the Review
Committee and other key stakeholders, civic education
and communication and consensus-building activities.
Lithuania also welcomes the Government of Sierra
Leone's recent adoption of the Agenda. for Prosperity.
That prosperity should be built on successful reforms,
strong economic growth, and, as many speakers have
already noted, on combating corruption.

I would like to encourage Sierra Leone and United
Nations entities to continue supporting women's full and
equal participation in the country's political, economic
and social spheres. All political parties in Sierra
Leone should encourage and empower more women to
participate in politics and give them more opportunities
to seek election to Parliament and key positions in it. We
note the proposal to enact a gender empowerment bill
that would give statutory endorsement to a 30 per cent
quota for women's participation. Similarly, civil society
organizations led by women should be strengthened
politically and financially in order to enable them to
engage meaningfully in building the country's future.

Finally, a continued commitment on the part of the
United Nations to peace in Western Africa remains
essential. The engagement of the United Nations with
Sierra Leone will be transformed as the country team
takes over UNIPSIL's residual tasks. The country
team's leadership will play a critical role in Sierra
Leone's post-conflict development. Likewise, as is
stressed in the presidential statement to be adopted by
the Council, the United Nations Office for West Africa
will make its good offices available to the Government
of Sierra Leone. Once again, we congratulate the people
and Government of Sierra Leone on the progress they
have achieved. As the Security Council continues to
deal with pressing crises and conflicts, Sierra Leone's
story of recovery and progress is a much-needed and
inspiring tale of hope.

