Ms. Shilo (Israel) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
Madam President, to make my statement in Arabic.
I do not think this subject should have been debated,
but unfortunately there are many places in the world
Where innocent children have become victims of war
and terrorism. It is possible that some of the Missions
that have attacked Israel today might have forgotten
the meaning of terrorism or perhaps they have become
included under this term. There are those who do not
know that Hamas is a terrorist organization. Regrettably,
however, some regional and Arab leaders have opted
to ignore the evils of terrorism and have focused on
condemning the State of Israel. Hamas, this terrorist
organization, has indiscriminately launched thousands
of missiles targeting kindergartens, schools, hospitals
and medical centres. However, these missiles have been
ignored totally in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/409). Hamas has opened fire from densely
populated areas with one, and only one, aim - to kill
innocent civilians, including children.

The Missions that have accused and attacked
Israel know for a fact that Israel accords importance
to protecting the lives of all persons, regardless of
their ethnicity, nationality or race. Israel focuses on
protecting lives; this has its roots in our traditions and
our history. We have not targeted the Palestinians. On
the contrary, we are sorry for all the harm they suffered
during the conflict in Gaza in 2014. It is regrettable,
however, that Hamas is sacrificing its people, including
its children, in order to tarnish the image of the State
of Israel. The Palestinian Authority should have
condemned Hamas for endangering the lives of the
citizens. However, instead of doing that, it launched
accusations against Israel. Instead of bringing life back
to normal in Gaza, it has chosen terrorism.

Let us pray for a time of peace where the children
in Ashdod and Gaza can play in the streets without
fear. But this will not be achieved unless Hamas and
other armed groups give up war and adopt the option
of peace.

