I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and civil society representative Amany Qaddour for their briefings. Syria is today on the brink of an economic collapse that is likely to worsen the humanitarian crisis. The fallout from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak has only exacerbated the economic crisis and compounded the multiple problems facing the country. All economic conditions have reached alarming levels, ranging from food insecurity to hyperinflation and massive unemployment, along with the spread of the coronavirus getting increasingly out of control. The Syrian plight is further seen in deeply impoverished communities, crumbling State institutions and a deeply fractured society among aggrieved populations, militias and corrupt circles. It is unacceptable and intolerable that ordinary innocent Syrians continue to bear the brunt of the conflict, economic meltdown and impact of COVID-19. We should not let them suffer or die due to the lack of access to food and medicine or the lack of economic prospects. From the outset, Tunisia's consistent position has been to state that there is no viable alternative to a political settlement in line with resolution 2254 (2015) in order to end the human suffering and put Syria on a resolute and forward-looking trajectory of inclusive peace and sustainable development. Until a political solution is reached, principled life-saving aid must continue to be scaled up throughout Syria to meet the growing needs and grapple with the aggravated risks and vulnerabilities. Tunisia welcomes the results of the pledging conference for Syria and the region held at the end of last month in Brussels. We underline the importance of ensuring that financial needs be met, as per the United Nations humanitarian response plan and the COVID-19 response plan. The Security Council charted earlier this month the course for action in conflict situations, including that of Syria, especially as they are faced with the COVID-19 pandemic. In that regard, resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2533 (2020) have set out the framework for Syria through specific provisions on the general and immediate cessation of hostilities and a durable humanitarian truce to enable a United Nations-led, United Nations-coordinated effort for tackling the coronavirus, as well as on cross-border humanitarian relief into north-western Syria, respectively. Those key provisions cannot be overemphasized. However, I would like to underscore the additional following points in the light of the developments on the ground. First and foremost, there is an urgent need to enhance prevention, mitigation and response measures in order to deal adequately with the mounting spread of the coronavirus disease. We welcome the ongoing efforts of the United Nations country team and the World Health Organization in Syria, in collaboration with the Syrian Government and other relevant actors, pursuant to a needs-based, vulnerability- based approach for all Syria. As the Syrian medical infrastructure has been largely downgraded, underequipped or destroyed, it is essential that the safe, unhindered and sustained delivery of tests, treatments and medicine be ensured across Syria, using cross-line and cross-border modalities. Secondly, we remain concerned about the persistent low-intensity violence in the north-east, the north-west and the south of Syria. The recurring disruption of water and electricity systems in the north-east is particularly concerning amid growing tensions in this region. We recall that access to clean water and sanitation are key components of tackling COVID-19. We call on all parties to exercise self-restraint and to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure in line with their obligations under international humanitarian law and international human rights law. Last but not least, the dire economic situation in Syria warrants that humanitarian and non-humanitarian assistance go hand in hand to cope with the fragility, help achieve recovery and build the resilience of Syrians over the longer term. At this critical juncture, it is essential that the economic engagement and assistance of the international community be ensured, along with strengthened joint projects of the United Nations humanitarian and development agencies, not least in rehabilitating severely damaged hospitals, schools and water, electricity and sanitation supplies.
