Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We, too, thank Ambassador
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and Mr. Yury
Fedotov for their briefings. We also applaud the whole
UNAMA team, along with humanitarian aid workers,
for their valiant and tireless work.

Indonesia would like to highlight three points.

First, security incidents are worrisome and the
high number of civilian casualties is unacceptable. For
Afghanistan, one is already too many. Indonesia echoes
Afghans' calls for zero civilian casualties. That entails
full protection for humanitarianpersonnel too. Whatever
their political differences, all Afghan stakeholders
must ensure that no harm comes to the people, who
have already endured so much in demanding a peaceful
and prosperous homeland. Violence and attacks need
to stop. The attainment of peace should not be at the
expense of civilians.

We call for a ceasefire throughout Afghanistan. The
exploitation of the volatile situation by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and increasing attacks
are also of concern. The wedding hall attack in Kabul
in August was a gruesome reminder of danger posed
by ISIL and the imperative for everyone to be united
against the vile designs of ISIL and other terrorist
groups. Indonesia strongly condemns that attack. As
the co-penholder on Afghanistan, together with my
colleagues from Germany, Indonesia will play its role,
including by proactively proposing Security Council
press statements on such vile happenings, which the
international community must stand against resolutely.

Secondly, every effort must be made to advance a
credible peace process. We concur with the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/703), which places emphasis
on pursuing a negotiated settlement. In that connection,
we welcome the various ongoing efforts. Indonesia
hopes that all efforts will result in the immediate
start of Afghan-led and Afghan-owned inclusive
peace negotiations with the participation of women.
We also welcome Ambassador Raz's statement on the
role of women in Afghanistan. Indonesia continues
to feel strongly about the involvement of women in
peace negotiations, and we have explored initiatives
in that regard. The hard-earned gains in women rights
should not be reversed. The relevant entities, including
UNAMA, must remain cognizant of this. We also take
note of the formation of a 15-member team to represent
the Government in the negotiating processes, which
includes individuals from all walks of life.

Thirdly, free and fair presidential elections,
along with development, are critical. We welcome
the preparations for the upcoming presidential
election supported by UNAMA. The preliminary
registration figure of 9.6 million Afghans shows their
determination in a democratic process through which
they can shape their destiny. We call for a transparent,
credible, free and fair election, and we hope that such
an election can be held in a timely manner. We support
Special Representative Yamamoto's appeal and call for
peace during the elections and restraint in relation to
threatening civilians.

We also recognize the many challenges being
faced by the Afghan authorities in their nation-building
process. We support the Government's efforts to remain
vigilant in the fight against corruption, so as to ensure
that economic gains can be properly distributed in the
interests of the Afghan people.

Indonesia, on its part, is working tirelessly to
ensure the well-being of its Afghan brothers and
sisters. We are assisting in the Afghan peace process, in
capacity-building for Afghan public officials through
various programmes and, as the co-penholder, we are
supporting UNAMA's work. I would like to echo what
the Ambassador of Germany mentioned by saying that
we hope that we receive full support for the upcoming
mandate renewal draft resolution. The draft resolution
should focus on the most immediate political process
and security concerns in Afghanistan, with UNAMA's
mandate at its core. It could become a trajectory for the
Security Council to support the people of Afghanistan
at this critical time. We must not forget that the interests
of the Afghan people should come first.

