Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah Haq, for her briefing
and, more generally, for her work. I also thank
Mr. Zacarias da Costa, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Timor-Leste, for having made the trip
to take part in our debate today.

France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

Since our last meeting, held in February (6487th meeting), and the adoption of resolution 1969 (2011),
Timor-Leste has progressed on the way to stability and
return to the exercise of its full sovereignty. We are
impressed by the successful transfer, on 27 March, of
executive power from the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL). Another source of
satisfaction is the continuing low crime rate.

The political maturity shown by the leaders, the
successful holding of their debates and the
establishment of electoral bodies have given hope that
the presidential and legislative elections slated for

2012 will be conducted in a satisfactory manner and,
equally important, that the losing candidates will
accept the choices made at the polls. The presence of
international observers will help to bolster that
credibility, if necessary. The elections will be the
opportunity for the country to show that it has
definitely turned the page on the 2006 crisis.

On the economic front, the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/641) quite rightly highlights
the importance of the Strategic Development Plan for
2011-2030, which was recently approved by
Parliament.

The Security Council, in its resolution 1969
(2011), set the course for a responsible drawdown of
UNMIT personnel, in tandem with a reconfiguration of
its functions towards support and training. That will
enable it to maintain a credible presence during the
elections and ensure its rapid departure thereafter,
which would then create a space for a new kind of
United Nations presence.

We commend UNMIT and the Government of
Timor-Leste on the quality of their joint transition plan
to lay the groundwork for the Mission's departure. The
plan is a great help in identifying the areas of
cooperation that we wish to see taken up in the future.

The number of deployed UNMIT police officers
was reduced from 1,480 early in January to 1,195 by
the end of September. It is important that there be
enough officers during the election to serve as a
deterrent and to intervene if requested to do so by the
authorities. Therefore, while we must consider
developments in the situation on the ground, we must
also have a strategic view of the pace and location of
the planned adjustments, in particular during the
post-electoral period.

Finally, I have a few words about the United
Nations presence following the withdrawal of UNMIT.
The four models identified in the report of the
Secretary-General show that many approaches are
possible and that each has its own merits. What is
important is to begin a dialogue with the Timorese
authorities following the 2012 elections so as to
determine which of the models to choose.

