Mr. Sabarullah Khan (Sri Lanka): Let me take this
opportunity to congratulate Sweden on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, as well as to
join other speakers in commending the Foreign Minister
of Sweden and her delegation for convening today's
timely debate. We acknowledge with appreciation the
remarks of the Secretary-General earlier today on this
important topic, and we take this opportunity to wish
the Council a blessed and peaceful new year.

As we embark upon a new year, we do so mindful
of the fact that both as an international community and
as a multilateral organization, in terms of resources,
we have been served with a multitude of challenges.
However, those challenges are not insurmountable.
Together as one body, with one voice, with unwavering
resolve and, most important, with political will, we can
face the future and steer our world towards peace and
prosperity for all.

We welcome the incoming Secretary-General's
identification of a surge in diplomacy for peace as
one of his priorities.We appreciate his efforts to
further improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the
Secretariat in that area by establishing an executive
committee to support decision-making at the senior
level, while taking steps to enhance performance in the
peace and security pillar and to reconfigure the Office
of the Secretary-General so as to place more emphasis
on strategic integration across pillars.

On 21 September last year, Sri Lanka, together
with several other countries, co-hosted a successful
pledging conference to refinance the Secretary-
General's Peacebuilding Fund to support United Nations
peacebuilding efforts across the globe. Sri Lanka has
been working closely with the Peacebuilding Support
Office since January 2015, when the Government
prioritized reconciliation and development as twin
agendas to be pursued in guiding our nation towards
durable peace.

The challenges faced by the international community
arising from terrorism, violent conflict, human rights
abuse, poverty, disease and the destruction of cultures
must be faced by all the principal organs of the United
Nations working actively to set up a collective security
firewall, in accordance with their respective functions
under the Charter of the United Nations. In order to
face such phenomena, it is imperative that we work as
one United Nations.

The Security Council, including its permanent
members, has in its tool kit powerful instruments to
address matters of international peace and security, and
it must use those tools with circumspection and only
in the cause of humankind. At this time, when self-
absorption and self-importance have reared their heads,
the United Nations must fiercely promote its values of
commonality, humanity and the good of all.

To address the new threats, our peacekeeping
operations must also adapt and acquire specialized
capabilities. When possible, the countries receiving
peacekeepers should take ownership of the process.
We must focus on building national institutions,
strengthening national security structures and
addressing issues of restorative justice and
reconciliation, if peace is to be sustained. Establishing
the rule of law is fundamental to achieving durable
peace in the aftermath of conflict. It is also vital
that women be included at all levels of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. It is well known that women and
men experience conflict differently and, as a result,
understand peace differently.

Sri Lanka is a country that successfully eradicated
terrorism after suffering under its yoke for nearly
30 years. Today we have embarked on a journey of
reconciliation, restorative justice and inclusive and
lasting peace. Let our nation serve as a beacon of hope
to the world as we, the international community, face
the many challenges ahead.

