Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First,
let me thank you, Sir, for having taken the initiative of
asking the Council to reflect on this topic, which I
believe to be very important. I would also like to
welcome the presence of, and the statements made by,
Ambassador Marjatta Rasi, President of the Economic
and Social Council, and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Jan Egeland, which provided the
framework for today's debate.

Future efforts to ensure peace and security must,
in our view, focus increasingly on resolving problems
before they escalate and turn into actual conflicts or
crises. Various international agencies, non-
governmental organizations and Governments have
proposed approaches that would make such coherence
possible, but the truth is that the various kinds of
intervention - humanitarian assistance, rehabilitation,
development cooperation and post-conflict
reconstruction - continue to differ in terms of logic
and are sometimes contradictory in their methods.

Accordingly, the Council should focus on aspects
which, while essential to conflict resolution,
nonetheless appear somewhat limited in the broad
context of complex crises. The organs of the United
Nations focus on aspects that are important in the
context of long-term solutions, but lack the capacity
effectively to interact with the Security Council. That
is the institutional dilemma confronting the United
Nations and its Members, to which no appropriate
solution has yet emerged.

One aspect that is deserving of consideration is
the better use of inter-agency working groups in the
context of the Secretariat, which could be one way of
approaching the issue. I recall that the Brahimi report
proposed coordinated work in the areas of
peacekeeping operations, political affairs, development
cooperation and reconstruction. In terms of complex
crises, this would translate into the creation in the
Secretariat of a culture conducive to the establishment
of such inter-agency working groups. If an incident
were to occur, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Department of Political
Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Department of Economic and Social Affairs would
come together in the framework of such groups, so as
to address the conflict from multiple perspectives and
inform the Council on that basis. It would not be
important who presented the report, as long as it
provided the Council with a comprehensive View of the
situation so as to enable it to resolve it.

It seems to me that that, although this system
works well in the economic and social sector of the
United Nations, a major mechanism is still needed in
terms of the political and security sector of the
institution.

Today it is crucial to discuss new methods of
association - and that is my second point - that will
enable the United Nations system and its Member
States, together with non-governmental organizations,
to respond collectively to the challenges posed by
complex crises. Our delegation believes that it has been
an extraordinarily complex task for Governments,
United Nations bodies, development banks and non-
governmental organizations to follow joint
comprehensive strategies aimed at alleviating the
effects of conflicts, and to provide continuity in the
growing trend towards an integrated and holistic focus
that brings together a number of methods. Political
consensus must be generated in the long term on the
basis of political, diplomatic and economic efforts to
facilitate the peace process.

However, the greatest challenge may be
overcoming the lack of coordination among
participating agencies, Governments and organizations
in this process. The Ad Hoc Advisory Groups on
Guinea-Bissau and Burundi are excellent examples of
how this might be done. We also believe preventive
action to be the most effective way to prevent future
threats and to promote collective security.

The means of identifying preventive measures are
well known. We have listened this morning to eloquent
statements on what is needed to develop a genuinely
preventive policy, but it would appear that our search
for a way to implement such a policy is being thwarted.
One way to do so would be under Article 99 of the
Charter, which allows the Secretary-General to draw
the Security Council's attention to situations that
threaten international peace and security. With the tools
currently available to the Secretary-General and the
system, it would appear that the Security Council is
called upon only when a crisis is imminent and that
little preventive action can therefore be undertaken in
advance.
In 1992, An Agenda for Peace was issued by
Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali, who rightly noted
that tools which could be made available to the
Secretariat - and which, he felt, did not necessarily
depend on Member States - would allow the
elaboration of an appropriate preventive policy.
Furthermore, Dag Hammarskjold also resorted to
Article 99 to initiate peacekeeping operations. It might
be interesting for the Security Council and its
subsidiary bodies to look into how the Secretary-
General might be given better tools for pursuing
preventive policies and thereby achieve the objective
of involving the Security Council in situations that
might evolve into conflict.

In conclusion, we are faced with circumstances
that, as you, Sir, and others have noted, are
extraordinary. I believe that the Security Council and
other bodies in the economic, social and political
arenas are gradually making progress towards finding
ways and means of effectively addressing complex
crises. Today's debate and the statements made here are
important. The tasks entrusted to peacekeeping
operations are important. We will ultimately need to
find a way to devise tools that will allow us to assess
the effectiveness of decisions adopted and machinery
created and how they contribute to the achievement of
our goals.

