Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU). The Central and Eastern European countries
associated with the European Union 4 Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the
associated countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well
as the European Free Trade Association country
member of the European Economic Area - Iceland -
align themselves with this statement.

The European Union warmly welcomes today's
public debate on Somalia and the opportunity it
provides for Member States to share their assessments
of the situation in Somalia and their thoughts on the
United Nations role both there and in the Horn of
Africa as a whole.

I should like also to welcome among us Prime
Minister Galaydh of the Transitional Government of
Somalia and to thank him for his statement, which was
very useful and informative.

The Transitional Government has been in place
for nearly a year - that is, for a third of its mandate -
and has had to confront many problems, as today's
debate has shown. The European Union renews its
appeal to the Transitional Government to pursue its
efforts towards national reconciliation in a genuine
spirit of compromise, by peaceful means and with due
respect for all entities that have achieved a certain
degree of stability. The EU encourages all parties in
Somalia that have not participated in the Arta process
to enter into a dialogue in the same genuine spirit of
compromise, with a View to advancing and completing
the reconciliation process among all Somalis.

The EU welcomes the creation of the National
Commission for Reconciliation and Property
Settlement. This Commission must function
independently of the Government and constitute an
important forum for dialogue under the ownership of
all Somalis and with the support of the international
community. As suggested by the Inter-Government
Authority on Development (IGAD) Partners Forum, the
functional cooperation between the various political
and administrative entities represents an important
confidence-building measure.

Regarding human rights, the EU believes that the
crimes committed during the civil war at the end of the
1980s should not go unpunished. The administration of
justice must be strengthened in order to make possible
a fair trial for the perpetrators of those crimes.

The EU remains deeply concerned by the security
situation in Somalia, and in Mogadishu in particular.
Attacks against civilians and the staff of humanitarian
organizations are unacceptable and must cease. Non-
governmental organizations are doing exemplary work
in difficult conditions, and we pay tribute to their
efforts. The EU is also concerned by the presence of
many anti-personnel mines in several regions. These
mines present a great danger not only to the Somali
population as a whole, but also to humanitarian staff
working there. Thus it is important that the Mogadishu
airport and port be reopened, so that humanitarian aid
can be brought in and also to avoid prolonging the
political isolation of Somalia.

Allow me to address an issue that is very much in
the news at the moment: terrorism. The EU urges the
Transitional Government to cooperate with the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism and with the
United States Government on this question. The EU is
itself currently considering how best to help the
Transitional Government respond to the counter-
terrorism Committee's requests.

The situation in Somalia is closely linked to that
of its neighbours. So that peace may be established in
the Horn of Africa, the EU calls for the resumption of
political contacts between the Transitional Government
and its neighbours, particularly Ethiopia. States in the
region should abstain from military involvement in
Somalia or from taking any other initiative that could
jeopardize that country's sovereignty, political
independence and unity. Traffic in arms should also
cease.

The EU calls once again on the countries
involved to respect the arms embargo imposed by the
Security Council. The European Union supports all
ongoing regional efforts to find a political solution to
the Somali question, particularly those of IGAD and of
the Organization of African Unity. The EU agrees with
the Secretary-General that coordination of efforts
among external actors is still needed and that a
consultative mechanism could be useful to that effect.
The Secretary-General's idea of forming a committee
of friends of Somalia is worth examining.

The EU takes note of the recommendations in the
Secretary-General's report. At the beginning of this
year, the Security Council had wanted a peace-building
mission to be established in Somalia and had asked the
Secretary-General to draw up a proposal to that end.
The Secretary-General currently deems that at this
stage, the conditions for sending such a mission not
been met. Security concerns remain. We agree with the
Secretary-General that a thorough review of the
security situation has to be carried out. We are in
favour ofa new security assessment.

All parties to the conflict should redouble their
efforts to bring about the right conditions for the
deployment of international personnel. In parallel,
individuals and countries that have influence on the
parties involved should also act. New means should be
put into play rapidly to bring Somalia out of its current
impasse and to enable a lasting peace to be established.

The European Union, both collectively and
through bilateral aid from its Member States, is
participating in the reconstruction of the country. The
Union is ready to examine possibilities for institution-
building and support for good governance. We have
taken note of the needs expressed by the Transitional
Government regarding police training and the
establishment of regional administrations, as envisaged
in the Transitional National Charter.

A lasting solution for Somalia remains to be
found. The parties must urgently pool their efforts in
order for peace to be achieved. Peace must come to
seem more attractive to the parties involved than the
continuation of a latent conflict which has had such
dire consequences for the population. We hope that the
United Nations, the countries of the region and other
countries interested in stability in the Horn of Africa
will cooperate fully to this end.

