Mr. Lampreia (Brazil): As an African scholar has
recently stated, the shifting patterns of global politics
since the end of the cold war have radically repositioned
the African continent in contemporary world history. A
new era of swift and profound transformations in Africa
has brought the continent to the forefront of the
international agenda. Conflicts are perhaps the more
visible and disturbing side of this process of change. If
we are meeting at ministerial level in the Security Council
for the second consecutive year to examine the situation
in Africa, it is because tides of violence continue to
wreak havoc among societies that have already endured
suffering and exploitation for much too long.

But there are also signs of hope and rebirth in
Africa. The peaceful transition to majority rule in South
Africa looms large as an illustration of what some have
come to call an African renaissance. The example of
persistence in the struggle for freedom and human dignity
provided by President Nelson Mandela remains a source
of inspiration for all those who fight for justice and
democracy. Africans have finally reconquered their own
destinies, and a new generation of African leaders is
emerging with a powerful and mature voice. In our midst
we can rely on the talent of Secretary-General Kofi
Arman, a noble representative of the ancient Ashanti
tradition, who is bringing a renewed lustre to the concept
of diplomacy in world affairs.

The challenge confronting the international
community and the United Nations is that of promoting
stability in a way that reinforces the hand of those in
Africa who remain committed to dialogue and
reconciliation. We are convinced that the overwhelming
majority of Africans are eager to devote their energy and
creativity to social and economic reconstruction in an
atmosphere of tolerance and solidarity. As a country that
owes so much of its identity to the vitality of its African

 

heritage, Brazil is determined to play its part in meeting
this challenge.

Brazil has been actively involved in various bilateral
and plurilateral initiatives aimed at fostering peace in parts
of Africa and beyond. The examples provided by the
establishment of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries and the Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the
South Atlantic, as well as the effort towards the formation
of a southern hemisphere free from nuclear weapons, speak
for themselves. As a troop contributor to the peacekeeping
operations in Angola and Mozambique, Brazil has shown
its steadfast support for national reconciliation in those two
sister nations. We will continue to favour an in-depth
examination of the causes of conflict in Africa with a View
to promoting durable peace and development in all parts of
the continent.

In his thoughtful report entitled "The causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa", Secretary-General Kofi Annan
stated,

"Development is a human right, and the principal
long-term objective of all countries in Africa."
(S/I998/318, para. 79)

We agree with this statement and with his affirmation that

"Development is also central to the prospects for
reducing conflict in Africa." (ibid.)

A combination of internal and external factors,
however, has placed Africa's efforts to overcome poverty
at the mercy of chronic instability. The perverse by-
products left by a tragic legacy of manipulation by outside
Powers - foremost among which is the network of illicit
arms trade - have paved the way for the many self-
inflicted wounds of recent years, from Somalia to Rwanda
and Sierra Leone. For some time, the vast majority of these
conflicts seemed to be of an intra-State nature. More
recently, however, the threat of transborder spillover has
been placing the Security Council on a new level of alert.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
one of several worrisome signs of what could turn into a
perilous new trend.

As the Security Council attempts to focus in a more
effective manner on Africa, a sustained political
commitment is required in order to prevent the fragile truce
in many parts of the continent from reigniting into bloodier
fighting. The Council must invest its moral authority and
use its entire gamut of diplomatic resources to promote
peace and stability. There are indications that the Council
may be starting to respond. The establishment of a
peacekeeping operation in the Central African Republic
can be seen as a positive development after three years of
reluctance by the Council to authorize the deployment of
peacekeepers on the continent. The United Nations
operation that has been helping consolidate the peace
process in Sierra Leone may be cited as further evidence
of the Council's engagement in Africa.

In our view, the Council and the United Nations as
a whole should intensify their work in at least two main
areas.

Additional work is necessary to enhance the capacity
of African States to develop their own mechanisms for
conflict prevention and resolution. The countries in the
region can achieve a great deal themselves with the
attentive support and encouragement of the international
community. In Guinea-Bissau, the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries has been successfully
working hand in hand with the Economic Community of
West African States to normalize conditions in the
country and avoid civil war. A ceasefire has been holding
and could pave the way for further progress.

Secondly, the Security Council should also focus on
the question of the illegal flow of arms in Africa and
strengthen the effectiveness of arms embargoes imposed
by the Council. The unabated flow of arms to Africa
reduces the prospects for peace and squanders precious
resources that could otherwise be put to the service of
development. The decisions taken by the Council last
week can be seen as positive steps in that direction.

These are areas that pertain legitimately to the
Security Council's competence. In order to address the
momentous task of eradicating the root causes of conflict
in Africa we must also rely on the active involvement of
other relevant United Nations bodies. The General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, in
particular, must discharge their responsibilities regarding
the ideas in the Secretary-General's report that pertain to
social and economic development.

My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
emphasize the need for an intense and urgent diplomatic
effort to reverse the present sombre scenario in Angola.
The continued lack of observance of the Lusaka Protocol
by Jonas Savimbi is simply unacceptable. The complete
demilitarization of UNITA and the completion of the

 

process of extension of State administration are essential
conditions for the peace process to be put back on track.
Savimbi's persistent defiance of Security Council decisions
cannot be tolerated.

The United Nations continues to represent the best
hope for millions of Africans who suffer the ravages of
conflict, either as victims of landmines or as refugees and
internally displaced persons, or even as the unwilling
spectators of indiscriminate destruction and starvation. Let
us pledge to work with those in Africa and outside it who
- like Secretary-General Kofi Annan and like yourself,
Madam President - believe that it is possible to transform
the tragedy of Africa's recent past into a new reality - a
new reality that will permit the brave people of this ancient
land to enjoy the human security and the economic
opportunities they seek and deserve.

