Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to express our gratitude to
Mr. Fernandez Amunategui for his extensive briefing
today and to congratulate him on assuming the position
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General. I
also wish to extend our appreciation to former Special
Representative Edmond Mulet for his important
contribution and engagement through a rather
challenging period for Haiti.

We commend the first historic peaceful transition
of power in Haiti and wish newly elected President
Michel Joseph Martelly every success in performing
his duties and facing the great challenges that lie
ahead.

Bosnia and Herzegovina expresses its concern
about the current political stalemate in establishing a
new Government and defining a clear constitutional
reform process. This political stand-off threatens recent
democratic success and any progress towards lasting
stability in the country. We call upon Haitian political
leaders to strengthen their efforts in bridging the
political gap and finding a compromise in order to
make progress towards a political agreement. We also
extend our full support for the efforts and activities of

the Special Representative aimed at reaching a political
consensus.

Although the security situation in Haiti is
relatively calm, we remain concerned regarding
criminal trends in the aftermath of the earthquake,
especially the increase in murders, sexual and gender-
based violence, and kidnapping. There have also been
cases where children were used as soldiers. We urge
the Government of Haiti to take strong measures to
prevent such violence and ensure that the perpetrators
of those acts are brought to justice.

Bosnia and Herzegovina recognizes the
importance of the presence of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in the
country and its activities in maintaining stability and
security there, with emphasis on election run-offs and
the post-electoral phase at a time when the situation is
especially precarious due to possible clashes between
political opponents and their supporters.

We commend MINUSTAH for pursuing its
strategic security goal of reforming and strengthening
the Haitian National Police. The progress in institution-
and capacity-building is evident. However, the Haitian
National Police still has not acquired enough capacity
and strength to guarantee the security of the country's
citizens.

More than a year and a half has passed since the
devastating earthquake in Haiti, but the Haitians are
still suffering the consequences. There are still more
than 630,000 internally displaced persons, living
mainly in camps. The already harsh living conditions
are further aggravated by economic instability and
reduced donor funding. We take this opportunity to call
upon donors to continue their support to Haiti so that
the country can establish stability and security.

We are also concerned by the resurgence of
cholera cases, although the mortality rate seems to be
slowly diminishing. More efforts by the Government of
Haiti and international humanitarian organizations
must be put into preventive activities, such as
providing sanitation and clean water.
Haitian executive and legislative authorities need
to proceed with institution-building, particularly in the
domains of security, rule of law and justice. They must
also do their utmost to improve the living conditions of
Haiti's citizens by providing basic services, housing
and education. In this challenging process, the

assistance and support of the international community
to Haitian authorities will be of crucial importance. We
therefore support the recommendation of the Secretary-
General to extend the MINUSTAH mandate for another
year, with a recalibration of the Mission's role through
downsizing the surge capacities and increasing the
institutional capacities of the Haitian authorities.

