Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Special representative Mladenov for
his substantive briefing on the Middle East settlement.

Today's meeting is taking place on a landmark
day for the history of the peace process in the Middle
East. Forty years ago, the Camp David Agreements
were arrived at. Twenty-five years ago, the Oslo
Accords were struck. Those components, alongside
other parameters agreed upon by the international
community, have comprised the bedrock of a political
process that was also enriched by important Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid guiding principles, the
Arab Peace Initiative, and the road map of the Middle
East Quartet of international mediators on the Middle
East settlement.

At the heart of this international legal basis is the
two-State solution for the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
the implementation of which is contingent upon the
need for agreement to be reached on all final-status
issues, including Jerusalem, refugees, borders and
security, through direct dialogue between Israelis
and the Palestinian people. Unfortunately, those
landmark dates arrived amid troubling developments in
Middle-East policy. Indicators are increasingly pointing
to an aspiration to undermine what has been developed,
including with the participation of the United States,
namely, the platform for a settlement. How else can one
regard and View the recent decision taken by Washington
to close the Palestine Liberation Organization office
in the United States capital? We genuinely fail to
understand the withdrawal of financing for the United
Nations Reliefand Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) and the recent refusal to
continue to facilitate the operation of two hospitals in
East Jerusalem. Bilateral commitments have collapsed.
Even important security-related cooperation is under
threat. Such measures do major damage to collective
efforts to arrive at a comprehensive Palestinian-Israeli
settlement in the Middle East.

There is still time to rescind the decisions taken.
We see the response in the revision of the current
approaches, which have grave consequences for the
prospects of the peace process, and a return to the
roots of settlement. There needs to be an emphasis on
rekindling international cooperation in the spirit of
Russian-United States co-sponsorship, as well as of the
Madrid process. That of course led to the establishment
of the Middle East Quartet, which, as we see it, is the
most effective mechanism and which was approved
by the Security Council. It is necessary to revitalize
work to launch direct Palestinian-Israeli dialogue. In
that connection, what remains relevant is our initiative
to organize in Moscow a personal meeting between
the Palestinian and Israeli leaders. It is necessary to
reverse existing trends, which are a consequence of
unilateral decisions. I am referring to the cessation of
settlement activities by Israel in the occupied territory,
inflammatory rhetoric and violence on the part of both
sides. Of course, one cannot overlook humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian people, above all in the
Gaza strip. At the same time, we proceed from the
premise that robust assistance to Gaza needs to dovetail
with rebuilding unity among the Palestinian ranks.

We would note the important work carried out
by the United Nations, specifically UNRWA, in the
occupied Palestinian territories and in refugee camps.
We welcome and support the inclusion of regional
players in Middle East settlement. We note, and highly
value, the role of Egypt and Jordan in Palestinian
affairs. Russia's position on a Middle East settlement
was and remains principled and consistent. We firmly
believe that a fair solution to the Palestinian issue is
of key significance to remedy the situation throughout
the region. A pursuit of the conflict between Israel and
Palestine, on the contrary, will constantly poison the
overall international atmosphere, will have a detrimental
effect on efforts to resolve other regional crises and will
fuel terrorism. We would particularly draw attention to
the importance of improving relations within the Arab
family. We are interested in a united and potent League
of Arab States where all disputes are resolved on the
basis of mutually respectful dialogue. We advocate the
revival ofmultilateral efforts on Middle-East issues as a
whole. We propose that colleagues thoroughly consider
our vision to establish confidence-building measures in
the Persian Gulf, which eventually should lead to the
establishment of a pan-regional security architecture.
That is important not only to resolve the crises in Syria,
Yemen and Libya but also to prevent potential conflicts.

