Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Allow me first of all to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I am sure that with your
outstanding abilities and wealth of diplomatic experience
you will be able to guide the work of the Council this
month to a successful conclusion. I also wish to take this
opportunity to thank your predecessor, the Ambassador of
the United States, Mrs. Albright, for presiding over the
work of the Council last month and for completing the
task before the Council.

A few moments ago the Permanent Representative
of Burundi, on behalf of the Burundi Government, made
a comprehensive statement on the situation in Burundi,
which deserves our serious consideration. The Chinese
Government has been concerned all along about the
development of the situation in Burundi and sincerely
hopes that peace and stability in that country will be
restored as soon as possible. We have also made our own
efforts in this regard. We are pleased to note the common
understanding and determination manifested by the
highest authorities in Burundi for the solution of the
Burundi question. They are engaged in the process of
restoring peace and stability in their country so that the
overall situation there will move towards improvement. At
this point, the Government of Burundi is engaged in its
third campaign for the return of peace. All of this is
conducive to stability in the Burundi situation, and we
wish to commend and support this effort.

Even though the situation in Burundi is beginning to
move in a positive direction, the country still faces many
difficulties in the political, security and humanitarian
fields. The international community, particularly the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), have made tireless efforts for the proper solution
of the question of Burundi. The Secretary-General and his
Special Representative for mediation and good offices
have made a series of diplomatic and political efforts. A

 

few days ago in Addis Ababa, the Council of Ministers of
the OAU gave special attention to the question of Burundi
and decided to request the former President of Tanzania,
Mr. Nyerere, to continue his good offices as facilitator in
the search for a political settlement of the Burundi question.

The draft resolution that the Council is about to adopt
indicates that the international community, in striving for
humanitarian objectives, will continue to give impetus to a
broad dialogue involving all sides in Burundi in order to
establish mutual trust, so that Burundi will achieve national
reconciliation at the earliest possible date.

We have all along held the View that the internal
affairs of a country should be settled by the people of that
country themselves. The international community can
provide assistance, but it cannot engage in interference in
the name of assistance.

The Chinese delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us. However, it is our understanding, with
regard to the draft resolution, no matter what kind of action
the Security Council takes in the future, including a
humanitarian response, it should consult with the country
concerned, obtain its consent and broadly canvass the view
of all parties. Whether or not the question of Burundi can
be appropriately resolved affects not only the economic
development of Burundi and the life of its people, but also
the peace and stability of the entire Great Lakes region.
Therefore, we urge all parties in Burundi to act in the
interest of their country by carrying out a broad-based
dialogue as soon as possible and responding effectively to
the appeals contained in the resolutions of the Security
Council to create conditions for an early national
reconciliation and to make their contribution to regional
peace and stability.

