Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): We join others in
welcoming His Excellency the Foreign Minister of
Costa Rica to today's briefing. His presence reflects
Costa Rica's strong leadership on this issue. We also
welcome the new Permanent Representative of Belgium.

And, of course, we welcome Prosecutor Moreno-
Ocampo back to the Security Council today. We thank
him for his briefing and for his written report. We
commend him for his continued and untiring efforts,
together with his team, to implement the mandate
conferred upon the International Criminal Court (ICC)
by the Security Council in resolution 1593 (2005) to
investigate violations of international humanitarian law
in Darfur. The United Kingdom fully endorses the
Prosecutor's observation, which was also stressed by
many Council members in our debate six months ago,
that ending impunity is an essential component of a
solution in Darfur. That was the primary reason for the
adoption of resolution 1593 (2005).

It is therefore deeply disturbing to read, and to
hear in detail again from the Prosecutor today, reports
of continuing violence in the region. It is clear that the
humanitarian situation remains very grave. There is an
urgent need to end the cycle of violence in Darfur,
including the ongoing targeting of civilians, sexual
violence, attacks on peacekeepers and humanitarian
personnel and the hindrance of humanitarian aid.

As the Prosecutor notes in his report, there can
never be any excuse for bombing schools or raping
women and girls. All parties to the conflict should
cease acts of violence and work together towards the
creation of a lasting peace. The ICC, as an independent
judicial institution, has a vital role to play in efforts to
combat impunity, through its investigation of crimes in
Darfur. Those accused of the most serious crimes must
be brought to justice. We endorse what His Excellency
the Foreign Minister of Costa Rica said about impunity
and the principle of "never again".

We call upon all parties in the conflict in Darfur
to cooperate fully with, and provide all assistance to,
the ICC and its Prosecutor, as they are required to do
by resolution 1593 (2005). That obligation extends to
the Government of Sudan, so we are gravely concerned
to hear that there has been no change, since the
Prosecutor's last report, in the Government of Sudan's
attitude towards the ICC investigation. It is now more
than a year since the arrest warrants for Ahmad Harun
and Ali Kushayb for alleged crimes against humanity
and war crimes were issued, yet no action has been
taken by the Government of Sudan to execute the
warrants: the individuals remain at large. We call upon
the Government of Sudan to immediately execute the
arrest warrants for both of those suspects and to
provide all necessary cooperation to the Court.

As I said at the outset, the Security Council
conferred a mandate on the ICC to investigate the
situation in Darfur. The Prosecutor has to work
strenuously to implement that mandate. The Security
Council should respond by demonstrating clearly and
publicly through a presidential statement that the ICC
Prosecutor has the full backing of the Security Council
in his efforts to implement resolution 1593 (2005).

