Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We too
wish to thank the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-
Leste, Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, for his presence and for
his statement to the Council on the situation in his
country. My delegation is also grateful for the briefing
by the Special Representative for Timor-Leste,
Ms. Ameerah Haq. We want to welcome her warmly to
her new responsibilities in leading the United Nations
efforts in Timor-Leste. We also want to use this
opportunity to acknowledge the work carried out by
Mr. Atul Khare for stability and development to that
country.

We were pleased to observe that, as the
Secretary-General's report (S/2010/85) says, Timor-
Leste continues to enjoy an atmosphere of security and
stability. That generates optimism and good prospects
for tackling the challenges that are still to be resolved
in the medium and long term. We welcome the work
done by the technical assessment mission led by
Mr. Ian Martin to consider the role that the United
Nations Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) must play
on the basis of progress achieved in its mandate. We
agree with his conclusion on maintaining UNMIT in
the country until 2012. We hope that, for that date,
progress in peacebuilding and in strengthening the
institutions will allow the Security Council to analyse
the eventual termination of the Mission's work.

We commend the achievements of Timor-Leste's
authorities in strengthening electoral institutions. We
also commend the holding of elections, in an overall
peaceful atmosphere, and the maintenance of political
stability in the country. We trust that those efforts will
continue in the run-up to the presidential and
parliamentary elections to be held in 2012.

One of the basic challenges in terms of security is
the current process of transferring command to the
Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL), which will
fully resume the policing work that to date has been
done by UNMIT's police division. We believe that the
authorities' cooperation with the Mission should
continue and should be intensified so that the national
police can continue to benefit from its guidance and
efforts to promote institutional development and the
necessary capacity-building, with a view to allowing
the PNTL to once again fully take up policing
functions in all districts and units by the end of 2012.

A national police that has sufficient operational
capacity and behaves professionally and impartially
will be the foundation for daily stability throughout the
country. It is equally important that there be a clear
definition and delimitation of responsibilities between
the national police and the Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de
Timor-Leste, with a view to strengthening the
effectiveness and professionalism of both bodies.

Moreover, we commend and support all efforts
made by the country's Government, with the support of
the Mission, in the areas of creating jobs, combating
urban and rural poverty and improving access to basic
social services, which is certainly a basic component in
maintaining the country's stability and the security of
its population.

With regard to justice and accountability, we
believe that one of the essential elements in promoting
national reconciliation and lasting peace is to address
outstanding cases related to the crimes committed
during the 1999 and 2006 crises, in line with
resolutions 1704 (2006), 1745 (2007) and 1802 (2008).
My delegation agrees with the report of the Secretary-
General. We reiterate that, in line with the position of
the United Nations, there should be no amnesty or
impunity when it comes to war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide. In that connection, we were
pleased to note that the Parliament is to take up a draft
law to set up a successor body to the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation and the
Commission for Truth and Friendship. That will
contribute to improving the people's trust in their
institutions.

Lastly, with regard to protecting human rights, we
welcome the fact that the Government of Timor-Leste
has identified domestic violence as a crime. We hope
that this measure will have a positive impact on
women's participation in the political, economic and
social spheres. That simple but meaningful step reflects
the vision of the Timorese authorities and their
commitment to a future of gradual and sustainable
development.

