Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation feels highly honoured by your
presence, and we should like to thank you for the
initiative of the delegation of Romania to hold this
public meeting on the subject of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security. We
should also like to express our pleasure at the presence
of the representatives of regional and subregional
organizations, as well as that of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations.

The future creation of the Peacebuilding
Commission, together with the commitment of world
leaders regarding the necessity to strengthen the United
Nations with a view towards making it more efficient
and effective, mean that cooperation with regional
organizations has become a priority subject on the
agenda of the United Nations. Regional organizations
have the relative advantage of proximity to the conflict
zone, which allows for a timely detection of symptoms
of conflict in the region and the possibility of acting
quickly to offer effective solutions for the peaceful
settlement of conflicts. A recent example of this has
involved the African Union and the Economic
Community of West Africa in regard to events in
certain African regions.

The added value of the regional organization in
this sense is that it belongs to a geographic, economic
and social environment that, in a special way, brings it
closer and makes it more sensitive to the local conflict.
The tasks of prevention and warning may, in many
cases, require this proximity as an essential condition,
as does the important function of stabilization in the
construction of a stable environment. Consultation
mechanisms, both formal and informal, must be
promoted because they allow the United Nations to
take advantage of the perspectives they offer and vice
versa.

When our universal Organization examines a
specific conflict, before it takes action in the field, it
should, under ideal circumstances, receive the opinion
and advice of the relevant regional organization and
give it due consideration. Institutional experience and
operational capacity must be the bases for defining the
areas in which regional organizations can cooperate
with the United Nations. In this sense, the experience
and cooperation in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti seems an eloquent example. The
Organization of American States (OAS) has provided
its specific technical knowledge and has collaborated
actively in the political area, specifically in voter
registration, in a very satisfactory manner. In this way,
the regional organization, the OAS in this case, has
given fundamental support to the final goal of peace
and stability in Haiti.

The Charter of the United Nations confers upon
the Security Council the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
arrangement could now include the Peacebuilding
Commission, which would act as a liaison body
between the Security Council, other bodies of the
United Nations and regional organizations and create
new synergies in a post-conflict situation. By taking
advantage of existing elements we avoid an
unnecessary duplication of effort. Since there is a
connection between security, peace and development,
the specialized knowledge of regional organizations,
whose original mandate used to focus on the
stimulation of economic integration and commerce,
may be valuable to guarantee success of the strategies
for economic growth and stability in the long run.

We have referred to the important role of regional
organizations in the early detection of symptoms of
conflict, the offering of solutions for peaceful
resolution of conflicts and the elaboration of strategies
in peace consolidation in the post-conflict phase.
However, we must not forget the importance of
establishing official cooperation agreements between
the secretariats of regional and subregional
organizations and the United Nations, incorporating, if
possible, armed conflict prevention and peacekeeping
capacities within the forces, services and back-up
equipment system of the United Nations.

Systematic cooperation of the United Nations
with regional organizations would increase the capacity
of the United Nations to prevent conflicts, respond
quickly in the event of a conflict and provide solutions
for the construction of lasting peace. The draft
resolution that will soon be adopted urges us to make
progress in the right direction and Argentina fully
agrees with these commitments.

