Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): It is
a privilege to follow Ambassador Mufioz in his first
presentation to the Security Council. I congratulate him
and wish him the best of fortune for his period in New
York.

I shall say more on another occasion about the
departure of Ambassador Wang Yingfan, but we all
know we are going to miss his constructive wisdom in
this Council and I wish him, too, the best of fortune in
the future.

We have had excellent presentations this
morning from Under-Secretary-General Guehenno and
Executive Director Costa, and I thank them for that. I
shall come back to some of their substantive remarks in
a minute. The Greek presidency will make a statement
for the European Union, which will set out the Union's
policy on and commitment to Afghanistan - at a cost
that includes, tragically, the loss of German and
Spanish lives in recent incidents.

We think that we are reaching quite a critical
moment in the Bonn process. The political deadlines
have largely been met, but the security situation
remains too fragile. We have now reached a key point
in the regeneration of Afghanistan with the
Constitutional Loya Jirga due to take place in October
and the elections in June next year.

The International Security Assistance Force
continues to assist with security in and around Kabul,
but we need to bring similar benefits to the regions. We
agree with the Under-Secretary-General's view that
security across the country remains far from adequate.
The provincial reconstruction teams will help with
extending the authority of the central Administration,
contributing to an improvement of security and
facilitating security-sector reform and reconstruction.
We expect the United Kingdom's provincial
reconstruction team in Mazar-i-Sharif to be operational
in early July.

Meanwhile, there are encouraging signs with the
recent agreement on the payment of customs revenue
by regional leaders to the central Administration. This
needs to be implemented in full.

Better security for the Afghan people is essential
to allow faster reconstruction and economic
regeneration of Afghanistan to take place. The United
Kingdom is committed to helping Afghanistan achieve
long-term stability, security and prosperity and to
extending the progress made so far in security-sector
reform to all parts of the country. President Karzai, in
his visit to the United Kingdom earlier this month, was
firm in his commitment to forcing through change and
to securing the future economic viability of
Afghanistan.

Most of what I want to say, however, is on the
drug scene. Overcoming the growth in the drug trade in
Afghanistan is an essential aspect of the wider
challenge of political and economic regeneration. The
Afghan people need the opportunity to build
sustainable livelihoods in security. For as long as
regional leaders have access to income from the
cultivation and trafficking of illegal drugs, they will
pose a threat to the Transitional Administration's
authority in the provinces.

Drug trafficking and drug abuse are pressing
problems in all our societies, but the record of drug
control everywhere shows that there are no quick fixes.
Mr. Costa, in his excellent presentation, usefully
reminded us that the illicit economy in Afghanistan
includes many sectors beyond drugs. We have to be
realistic and to temper high ambitions with reasonable
expectations. It has always been clear that this year and
next would be difficult because law enforcement has
negligible reach outside Kabul and because it is too
soon for development work to be delivering sustainable
alternative livelihoods for farmers.
The General Assembly's special session on drugs
in 1998 called on countries to adopt comprehensive
national drug strategies. Some countries have done so,
but not all. The Afghan Transitional Administration
deserves much credit for its unequivocal stand on the
drugs problem and for the adoption on 19 May of its
own national drug control strategy. The Council should
now put its weight behind the implementation of that
strategy. To assist the Afghan authorities in their task,
the United Kingdom will increase its counter-narcotics
personnel in Afghanistan over the next few months
from two officials currently to a total of 14 by the end
of the year in Kabul and Kandahar. We will also be
committing up to $114 million to counter-narcotics
work in Afghanistan over the next three years. We urge
other member States that can similarly to assist the
Afghan authorities in the delivery of their drug control
strategy and to encourage the international financial
institutions and development agencies to address the
issue of rural credit rapidly.

To facilitate the full funding of the Afghan drug
control strategy, and better coordination of
international support for it, the United Kingdom and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) are ready to assist the Afghan Transitional
Administration through the organization later in the
year of a conference of donors, Afghan ministries and
international agencies.

The United Kingdom welcomes the emphasis that
your presidency, Sir, has placed on regional
cooperation against the drug trade and the intention of
the Afghan Transitional Administration to hold a
meeting on this issue later this year in the framework
of the Declaration on Good Neighbourly Relations. The
harm caused by the abuse of illegal drugs, the criminal
profits from the drug trade and the international
terrorism that it partly funds are threats not only to
Western societies; many of Afghanistan's near
neighbours know, to their cost, the damage that the
drug trade can cause. Their efforts to combat it are
welcome and essential, and they are a source of
experience on which Afghanistan itself may usefully be
able to draw.

The United Kingdom also welcomes the outcome
of last month's conference in Paris on drug trafficking
routes and the suggestions from Mr. Costa on how to
give practical expression to the conference's
conclusions and to the Paris Pact. Strengthening of
controls at border crossing points is an important
element. The United Kingdom is funding the
construction of inspection facilities at the Afghan-
Turkmen border, at Serhetabad, and contributing to the
equipping and training of border control personnel in
Uzbekistan. The United Kingdom is also helping,
jointly with Iran, to train Afghan border control
personnel.

The problem of Afghan drugs cannot be solved
only by action within Afghanistan. Stifling the trade in
illegal drugs further afield contributes to reducing the
market for the raw product and gives the Afghan
authorities a better chance of succeeding in their own
campaign.

The Security Council does not need to become
involved in the detail of counter-narcotics work, but it
is essential that we remain focused on the long-term
security and political stability of Afghanistan, thereby
creating the conditions in which success against the
drug trade becomes possible. The presidential
statement we shall adopt later in this debate meets this
requirement admirably.

