Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Tanin and Under-Secretary-General De Serpa Soares
for their briefings today. I would also like to thank
Deputy Prime Minister Dacic' and Ambassador Citaku
for their statements before the Security Council.

As this is the second of three meetings we will
have this year on this subject, with next year seeing
only two, let me say that in our view this welcome
reduction reflects the fact that the situation on the
ground is stable, thus allowing the Council to turn its
attention elsewhere.

As concerns the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, let me repeat our
call for a strategic review of the Mission. Eleven years
have passed since the last strategic review. A fresh
reassessment of the Mission's comparative advantage
is obviously needed. At this point, we would like to
also express our appreciation and support for the role
of the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo as well as other international
organizations in Kosovo for their efforts aimed at
fostering a safe and secure environment and the rule
of law.

Looking at the overall picture in Kosovo, let me
make the following remarks.

Most important of the issues by far is the
normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina. This is the key not only to unlocking the
potential of both countries on their way to European
integration, but also to the stability of the whole
region. We strongly urge Kosovo and Serbia to take
cues from Greece and North Macedonia, which settled
their long-standing dispute by way of negotiations. We
would like to see the meaningful resumption of the
European Union-facilitated dialogue and call on both
sides to show commitment towards reaching a legally
binding agreement on comprehensive normalization
of relations. In this context, we encourage Kosovo
to remove punitive tariffs on goods from Serbia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina and equally encourage Serbia
to halt its actions aimed at undermining Kosovo's
international position. We call on both to show goodwill
and openness.

With respect to the situation in Kosovo, we commend
progress on the way of reform and in strengthening
the rule of law. We also note with appreciation efforts
aimed at fighting corruption, organized crime and
violent extremism.

A lot has already been achieved, but still more
needs to be done. Improvements in the legal framework
need to be matched by changes in the political culture.
It is incumbent upon political elites to continue their
efforts to create a just and inclusive environment and
lay a solid foundation for the future prosperity of
all citizens.

Let me conclude by saying that Poland regards
Kosovo as being fully capable of managing its own
future, and we stand ready to extend our assistance in
this effort and share our experience as we have done
so far.

