Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first of all like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Annabi for the complete and useful information he has
given us.

I would also like to thank the delegation of
Bangladesh for its excellent initiative to hold an open
briefing on the question of East Timor. My delegation has
always said that it is necessary for there to be greater
transparency in the work of the Council through the
holding of meetings in which non-members of the
Council can participate.

There can be no doubt that the United Nations has
carried out a task of great magnitude during these first
months of the territory's transitional period towards
independence. Up to now, it has been possible to make
progress in the setting up of civil administration and
judicial structures, and the tremendous work to rebuild the
infrastructure and educational and health system of the
territory has commenced. It is very positive that the entire
effort has been carried out in close consultation and
cooperation with the Timorese people, as represented in
the National Consultative Council.

We would like to congratulate in particular the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Vieira de Mello, for his efforts and for the successes
he has had to date.

Nevertheless, we cannot fail to mention our concern
about two issues that, despite the passage of time, have
not yet been satisfactorily resolved. The first of those
concerns has to do with the problem of refugees,
especially in West Timor. The second has to do with the
illegal activities being carried out on the land border of
East Timor.

As far as refugees are concerned, although
tremendous efforts have been made in order to allow the
return of over 153,000 persons to East Timor, there are
still at least 50,000 other Timorese who are prepared to
return. The other aspect of this problem involves
individuals who wish to remain in Indonesia and who
have to be reintegrated economically and socially into that
country. We think that the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and the
specialized agencies should give the highest priority to
resolving these issues in close cooperation with the
Indonesian authorities.

 

With regard to border incidents, we cannot fail to
express our concern about increased tension along the land
border of East Timor as a result of the actions of some
militia elements. In this regard, we would like to express
our support for UNTAET's response, which enhanced
security in those regions and responded energetically to the
attacks. We believe that response shows militia members
that the United Nations stands ready to preserve the
integrity and stability of East Timor and the lives of all
Timorese by using all the means provided for in Security
Council resolution 1272 (1999).

I should like to reiterate once again the need for those
militias to be completely unarmed and for increased
monitoring of the border areas.

Finally, we would like to express our satisfaction at
the visit of President Wahid of Indonesia to East Timor. I
believe that the exchange of bilateral visits will foster
genuine reconciliation between the peoples and the
authorities of both countries and make it possible to resolve
the refugee problem as well as problems related to the
borders between East and West Timor.

The Indonesian military authorities have proposed that
General de los Santos set up joint monitoring posts along
the borders. In this respect, I should like to hear what
UNTAET's reaction has been to that proposal and what
additional measures are being considered to put an end to
the border incidents.

