Ms. Yparraguirre (Philippines): I congratulate
Spain on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. We also thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this high-level debate on preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors.

The Philippines recognizes the threat posed to
peace and security on the domestic and international
fronts by non-State actors acquiring, manufacturing
and using weapons of mass destruction. In order to
mitigate those risks, the Philippines continues to put in
place legislative and other measures so as to make the
environment difficult for non-State actors to acquire
weapons of mass destruction. Those measures include
the following.

First, the Philippines has enacted its Strategic
Trade and Management Act of 2015, which, together
with the Human Security Act of 2007, provides a legal
framework to regulate the trade in dual-use items and
ensure that the Philippines is not used as a transshipment
point for such items.

Secondly, we are considering amending the Human
Security Act to include nuclear terrorism and penal
provisions contained in the amendment to the Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material.

Thirdly, we will be setting up a Philippine nuclear
regulatory authority under the proposed comprehensive
nuclear regulation act, which will regulate the nuclear,
security and safety aspects ofthe peaceful utilization of
ionizing radiation sources.

Fourthly, on an operational level, in order to
detect any illicit trafficking in nuclear and radioactive
materials within and across our borders, the Philippines
has installed 20 radiation portal monitors at major ports
and compels users to submit a transport security plan
before transporting radioactive material.

In adopting a whole-of-nation approach, the
Philippines continues to consolidate its efforts to
mitigate the risks to its domestic security posed by
non-State actors, by working together with the various
agencies in Government and with the private sector and
civil society.

On the international front, the Philippines
believes that the threat posed by non-State actors
acquiring, transporting or using weapons of mass
destruction requires a collective and coordinated global
response. In that context, the Philippines continues
to actively engage with partners in the international
arena to enhance its capacities and share its national
experiences. The Philippines hosts the Chemical,
Biological, Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) Risk
Mitigation Centre of Excellence Regional Headquarters
for South-East Asia and has developed a proactive
Philippine national CBRN action plan. It is also a
founding member of the Group of Friends of CBRN
risk-mitigation and security governance, which, in line
with its goal of raising awareness of CBRN mitigation,
co-hosted a side event last September at Headquarters
on CBRN risk-mitigation in the context of combating
terrorism. At the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Forum (APEC), the Philippines, as Chair of APEC's
counter-terrorism working group, is pursuing efforts to
address the foreign-terrorist-fighters phenomenon. In
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
the Philippines actively participates in discussions in
that regard through the ASEAN Regional Forum, which
the Philippines will chair next year. The Philippines
is now an active member of the Global Initiative to
Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the Global Partnership
Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass
Destruction. That web of partnerships synergizes with
our domestic efforts, as well bilateral and regional
engagements, on CBRN issues.

In conclusion, one has to recognize that non-State
actors have been quick to adopt new technologies that
make it easier for them to acquire, transport and use
weapons of mass destruction. States must therefore
keep up with those developments and step up efforts
to prevent non-State actors from doing so and protect
our populations from the threat of a nuclear, chemical
or biological catastrophe. We must continue to enhance
our cooperation with each other, with the private sector
and with civil society so as to combat that threat as one
global community.

