Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank all
the briefers for their remarks today. We also welcome
Prime Minister Gomes and express our appreciation for
his ongoing efforts to foster unity in the Government
and prepare for critical elections in November.

The United States is pleased to note the welcome
political progress in Guinea-Bissau since April. We
commend the political leaders for taking much-needed
and long-delayed steps aimed at breaking through a
nearly three-year stalemate to get the Government
moving again for the well-being ofthe people oquinea-
Bissau, and encourage them to continue to implement
the Conakry Agreement and pursue critical reforms.

Next on Guinea-Bissau's political horizon, we
look forward to successful voter registration and free,
fair and transparent legislative elections in November.
We encourage the international community and
Guinea-Bissau's partners in the region to support the
Government's efforts to prepare for and execute these
elections. We also commend the generous contributions
of the Economic Community of West African States to
that effort and express our gratitude for its continued
leadership as a mediator.

Even with this welcome progress and upcoming
elections, the Security Council must remain vigilant,
since the consensus agreements that helped to ease
the political crisis remain fragile. The United States
shares the Secretary-General's concerns about the
continued threat that drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime pose to Guinea-Bissau and the broader
subregion. We welcome the support of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) for the Government's reactivation of
the transnational crime unit and encourage UNODC to
continue to build its capacity in the country.

We also salute the efforts of civil society and
concerned citizens to encourage transparency in
governance and a culture of respect for human rights
in the country. We are encouraged by the ongoing
expanding efforts of the Bissau-Guinean Council
of Women, in particular its drive for inclusion in the
development of the stability pact called for in the
Conakry Agreement.

Only a few months remain before critical elections
that could solidify the political progress made so far
this year. The steps taken to fix the wrongs of so
many wasted months of gridlock have been bold and
important, but the road to enduring success is long. We
will continue to work with the Government as it emerges
from this frustrating stall and strives to achieve security
and opportunity for all of its country's citizens.

