Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries of Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia; the candidate countries of Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates of
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
Montenegro; and the European Free Trade Association
country member of the European Economic Area,
Iceland, declare that they align themselves with this
statement.

Allow me to start by congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of December. I
thank you for giving us an opportunity to debate this
important issue. I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jan Egeland for his excellent and very
comprehensive intervention and for the work done by
his Office.

The European Union deeply appreciates, and
fully shares, the commitment shown by the Security
Council to, and the establishment of a regular dialogue
on, the protection of civilians agenda. Indeed, the
impact of armed conflict on civilians remains a
dramatic problem in many parts of the world, and
especially in some African countries. In addition to the
immediate human suffering it causes, it also has long-
term consequences for lasting peace, security and
development.

We must continue to raise awareness of the tragic
repercussions of conflicts on civilian populations, and
contribute to the promotion of a widespread culture of
protection, as the Secretary-General properly defined it
in his report of March 2001. Actually, civilians have
become the main victims of violent conflicts. They are
increasingly exposed to all sorts of abuse, exploitation
and violations of human rights. They constitute the
primary target of attacks motivated by ethnic and
religious hatred, political confrontation and the ruthless
pursuit of economic interests.

The European Union supports the United Nations
increasing focus on the conditions of civilians affected
by armed conflict, and commends the approach
adopted in recent years by the Security Council, the
Secretary-General and other relevant offices and
agencies of the United Nations. We remain convinced
that issues related to the protection of civilians must
remain at the top of our agenda. The European Union
therefore welcomes the proposed revised aide-memoire
to be endorsed by the Security Council and the updated
road map. We welcome the inclusion of such new
elements as those relating to the prevention and
remedying of sexual exploitation and abuse and
trafficking in women and children, as well as the
strengthened emphasis on internally displaced persons.

The European Union fully subscribes to the key
issues identified by the United Nations, as they
invariably arise in situations of armed conflict, and is
committed to supporting the efforts of the United
Nations to address them. Those issues include the lack
of, or restricted access to, vulnerable and affected
populations, which remains the primary concern in
most conflict areas around the world; the widespread
recourse to rape and other atrocities against women and
children, which are increasingly used as a brutally
devastating weapon of war; the need to separate
civilians and combatants so as to ensure that safe-
havens provided to civilian populations are not
exploited as recruiting grounds for armed groups; the
general breakdown in security, law and order, which
exacerbates the suffering of vulnerable populations; the
implementation of programmes for the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation of
combatants, which is also fundamental to the re-
establishment of a peaceful and secure environment;
the protection of civilian populations from the risks of
mines and explosive remnants of war; the security of
humanitarian personnel, which remains a key challenge
for the United Nations and all international aid
workers; and the provision of appropriate training for
humanitarian workers and peacekeepers to assure that
the culture of protection is deeply engrained in them.

In order to address those issues the European
Union calls upon all States and parties to armed
conflict to respect, and ensure compliance with,
international humanitarian law, as well as to respect the
neutrality, independence and impartiality of
humanitarian operations. The European Union is
concerned about the increased risks that United Nations
and associated civilian personnel are facing on the
ground, and reiterates the great importance it attaches
to the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel and to the expansion of the scope
ofthe legal protection under the Convention.

Furthermore, perpetrators of international
humanitarian and human rights law must be brought to
justice at the national level or, where not possible, to
international justice. The primary responsibility to
carry that out lies with each State. The European Union
therefore urges all States to ratify and implement all
relevant international agreements.

The European Union, while developing its
cooperation with the United Nations and increasing its
own capability in crisis management, is firmly
committed to ensuring that the protection, rights and
assistance needs of civilians are fully addressed in all
European Union-led crisis management operations, in
full compliance with international law and Security
Council resolutions. Accordingly, the European Union
is in the process of finalizing overarching guidelines to
assist in ensuring that its policy in this area is fully
consistent and coherent. Those guidelines are fully in
line with the aide-memoire adopted by the Security
Council on 15 March 2002. They are intended to
develop a comprehensive and action-oriented approach
to the protection of civilians in the conduct of
European Union-led crisis management operations.
They call for the European Union, in coordination with
the United Nations and other relevant international
organizations, to respect, and ensure respect for,
international law and other relevant norms relating to
the protection of civilians. Special attention is devoted
to the need to protect internally displaced persons and
refugees and to maintain the humanitarian and civilian
character of camps provided for them. All possible
measures will be taken to ensure that women play a key
role in refugee camp planning, management and
decision-making so that gender issues are taken into
account in all aspects, especially resource distribution,
security and protection.

Where an EU-led operation is deployed, all
possible measures will also be taken to protect the
rights of those persons who - on grounds of race,
colour, sex, sexual orientation, religion or faith,
descent or national or social origin - suffer from
discrimination. Special consideration will be given to
the rights of children, to ensure that they do not take a
direct part in hostilities and are not recruited or used by
armed groups, and that combatants, in particular child
soldiers and girls following armed groups, are
disarmed, demobilized, rehabilitated and reintegrated.

Where necessary, child protection expertise will
be integrated into the chain of command of EU-led
crisis management operations. The EU will also
continue to cooperate with the United Nations and
other international organizations to ensure family
reunification of displaced children and close
monitoring of and report on the protection of children
in armed conflict.

The need to protect women and children from
sexual exploitation, abuse and trafficking requires the
development of standards or codes of conduct for
national armed forces or police forces and all other
personnel deployed in European Union-led crisis
management operations. Such standards will reflect, as
a minimum, the provisions of the United Nations "Ten
Rules: Code of Personal Conduct for Blue Helmets", as
well as the six core principles established by the Inter-
Agency Standing Committee.

Within the available means and capabilities of
any given mission, the measures envisaged by the
European Union could include the systematic
incorporation of gender analysis into early-warning
activities, fact-finding missions, planning and
implementing processes for post-conflict reconstruction
and institution-building, field operations and standard
operating procedures.

States contributing personnel deployed in EU-led
crisis management operations should in particular
ensure monitoring and reporting of alleged violations
of human rights and of international humanitarian or
international criminal law. Investigation of each
complaint and prosecution of those responsible should
be ensured. Suitable training in these areas should be
provided to personnel deployed on the ground, both at
a national level and through European programmes,
where appropriate, in cooperation with the United
Nations and other relevant international bodies.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
one of the main issues on our agenda, given its
repercussions on international peace and security and
respect for human rights and international humanitarian
law. It also provides a major opportunity to enhance
cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union. We remain firmly committed to this
objective and fully subscribe to what the Secretary-
General has emphasized on several occasions: as
human beings, we cannot be neutral, or at least have no
right to be, when other human beings are suffering. In
this spirit, the European Union looks forward to
continue discussing all relevant aspects of protection of
civilians in armed conflict in the light ofthe next report
by the Secretary-General on the matter.

