Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, for his informative briefing, and the
Secretary-General for his report. My delegation also
deeply appreciates the important statement by the
Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste, Ambassador
Nelson Santos.
The recent news of the armed attacks against
President Jose Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister
Xanana Gusmao causes us profound concern and
pause. We hope that President Ramos-Horta makes a
swift recovery and will be able to resume his duties at
an early date.

We unreservedly condemn those attacks. They
constitute nothing less than an assault on Timor-Leste's
democracy. We praise the quick and effective actions
taken by the leadership of Timor-Leste to prevent
escalation of this grave situation. The leaders and
people of Timor-Leste have demonstrated their wisdom
in responding to the situation by exercising restraint in
their actions in the interest of maintaining peace and
stability. These latest deplorable events underscore the
need for the continued support and engagement of the
international community.

The Security Council mission to Timor-Leste last
November and the visit by the Secretary-General
provided us with a window into the current situation
there and a lucid and candid assessment of the key
concerns and issues that the country is facing. Together
with the current report of the Secretary-General, they
provide a basis for us to recalibrate the priorities and
approaches of the United Nations Mission's
programmes and activities in the country to better suit
the current realities and help reverse the setbacks that
have occurred there since 2006.

By far the most critical issue in the country
would appear to be restoring peace and security and
building sounder foundations for long-term stability. In
this regard, it is extremely important for the United
Nations Mission in Dili to continue, as a matter of high
priority, to support Timor-Leste in fully addressing the
unresolved root causes of the 2006 crisis, including
political divisions, weak institutions - especially the
national police and the security forces - and poverty
and unemployment, especially among the youth.

It is equally important for the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to support
the efforts made and the approach adopted by the
Government in resolving some grave issues remaining
from the 2006 crisis that continue to contribute to the
fragility of the security situation in the country, such as
internally displaced persons, petitioners and fugitives.

We appreciate the good offices efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
enhance dialogue among the leadership and facilitate a
consensus approach in addressing the various
problems.
We believe that with the strong determination and
untiring efforts made in a united manner by the
leadership of Timor-Leste, and with re-energized and
more focused assistance from UNMIT and other
partners, the serious challenges that the country is
facing can be overcome. It is only then that progress
made so far in the country's State-building can be
consolidated and its economic development
reinvigorated.

In practical terms, it is important for UNMIT to
focus on supporting the Government's programme on
short-term priorities contained in its 2008 budget.
Their effective implementation would have durable
impact on stabilization in the country. We place
importance on UNMIT's continued role in cooperating
and coordinating with United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes and other relevant partners in order to
support the implementation of the Government's
national recovery strategy.

Another important note is the issue of expediting
security sector reform. We support the Secretary-
General's plan to gradually transfer the responsibility
for police operations from the United Nations police to
the national police of Timor-Leste and to emphasize
training and mentoring assistance from the United
Nations police.

There is a great need for UNMIT to support
national capacity-building efforts and to shore up the
ability of the Government and other State institutions
to function in their proper roles. That includes the need
to strengthen the full range of political, judicial and
economic institutions and infrastructure so that
democratic governance can thrive. As a general note,
we attach great importance to the concepts of
ownership of and leadership by the Government and
people of Timor-Leste in the planning and
implementation of United Nations assistance in this
regard. Therefore, in the light of those considerations,
Indonesia supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General for the extension of UNMIT's
mandate for a period of 12 months.

We are pleased to inform the Council that
Indonesia and Timor-Leste continue to enjoy an
excellent bilateral relationship. We also witness
continuing superb rapport among leaders of both
countries. The Government and people of both
countries continue to deepen and expand cooperation
on the basis of forward-looking and reconciliatory
principles.

In conclusion, we wish to reaffirm my
Government's strong commitment to continue to assist
Timor-Leste on a bilateral basis in achieving peace,
stability, and prosperity for a democratic Timor-Leste.

