Mr. Sareer (Maldives): My delegation wishes
to congratulate Uruguay on assuming its seat on the
Security. In its capacity as President of the Security
Council, we thank Uruguay for having convened this
quarterly open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, with a focus on Palestine. I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
dedicated efforts to resolve the conflict in the Middle
East, and take note of his trip to Palestine in October
of last year.

It is with grave concern that the Maldives notes
that a peaceful resolution of the situation in Palestine
is moving ever further out of reach. Although Israel
has expressed commitment to a two-State solution, its
actions have not substantiated that. On the contrary, it
continues to strengthen and expand its control of the
occupied territory of Palestine, including the West
Bank, the Gaza Strip and East Jerusalem, with no
regard for the 1967 borders. My delegation calls on
Israel to translate its words into concrete actions, not
to make empty promises purely for diplomatic and
political gain.

My delegation is pleased to acknowledge the
increasing support for recognizing Palestine as an
independent and autonomous State under a two-State
solution, symbolized at United Nations Headquarters on
30 September 2014 by the raising of the flag of Palestine
as an observer State. While this is a meaningful step in
the right direction, we still have a long way to go to
affirm that recognition in the international sphere. The
Maldives continues to support Palestine on its journey
to becoming a full State Member of the United Nations.
The privileges and respect that it deserves as a State
have been denied it for far too long.

My delegation also firmly condemns the
unwarranted restrictions that Israel has imposed on
the Palestinian people, hindering their access to basic
necessities and threatening their lives and livelihoods.
This is particularly relevant in the light of the continued
Violence being perpetrated against Palestinian
communities. It is regrettable that at the beginning
of this month the United Nations Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian
territories felt compelled to tender his resignation
because Israel had repeatedly refused to grant him
access as an impartial and objective observer. The
Maldives has always supported and facilitated the work
of the special mandate holders of the United Nations,
and we believe their duties as objective arbitrators on
behalf of the international community should not be
obstructed. My delegation calls on the Israeli authorities
to cooperate with United Nations mandate holders and
other officials in order to enable them to carry out their
assigned tasks.

The Palestinian conflict has been constant
throughout much of history, and for the past five
decades the Palestinian people have been subjected
to life under occupation. It is inhumane to make these
people continue to suffer and submit to that suffering
as a normal way of life. Families live in a constant
state of fear, and children are growing up with no
understanding or comprehension of peace and stability.
In circumstances like these, where all hope is lost and
injustice prevails, radicalism and terrorism begin to
spawn.

There has been an alarming increase in violence and
hostility in the Middle East over the past few months.
The Government of the Maldives strongly condemns
the despicable attack by violent protesters on the Saudi
Arabia Embassy in Iran. We urge that the perpetrators
be brought to justice, and highlight the importance
of respecting mandatory international obligations,
including those under the relevant Vienna conventions.
My delegation also strongly condemns the heinous
attacks carried out in Beirut in November by the so-
called Islamic State. We reiterate that the ideologies and
activities of that terrorist group are completely contrary
to the principles and beliefs of Islam. We welcome the
initiatives the international community has taken to put
an end to this evil before it claims more innocent lives.

My delegation calls on the members of the Security
Council to take stronger and more meaningful action
to end the conflicts in the Middle East, including in
Palestine. We welcome political initiatives aimed at
achieving permanent and peaceful solutions rather than
piecemeal approaches that could aggravate existing
conflicts. We also welcome the humanitarian aid that is
being dispatched to alleviate the adverse conditions in
these war-torn countries. It is important to realize that
at the end of the day, peace and security are what every
country in the region aspires to achieve for its citizens.
With that common goal in mind, we must figure out the
shortest non-violent route to that end.

