Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):

First of all, on behalf of my delegation, I wish to thank
Ambassador Heraldo Munoz for his briefing and to
congratulate him on the very effective and expeditious
manner in which he has handled the work of the
Committee, continuing the work done by his country's
delegation since the beginning of this year and working
to ensure the fulfilment of the commitments mandated
by the Security Council under resolution 1267 (1999).

We wish also to thank you and the presidency of
the Security Council for having taken the initiative to
convene this open meeting, thereby allowing us to
discuss with the community of nations - Members of
the United Nations and the international community as
a whole - the difficult tasks that the fight against
terrorism requires.

The combat against terrorism is a fundamental
priority for my country, for many and varied reasons.
Our geographic location, the linkages within our
economy, and our globalization process all make us
aware of our vulnerability and of that of States in
general with respect to the methods and systems
utilized by international terrorists, in particular Al
Qaeda and its associates, in their activities.

For these reasons, my country has taken a number
of measures to implement United Nations resolutions
and to expand the scope of its international cooperation
in the area of the identification of funds and of terrorist
entities which might wish to use Mexico's financial
mechanisms or its territory to commit terrorist acts or
to make use of our territory for so doing in other
States. We have been very careful to prevent this from
happening, and the key to this effort is international
cooperation.

We believe that, to be successful, the fight against
terrorism must be supported by exchanges of
information among States and by the promotion of
confidence among judicial institutions and institutions
charged with the prosecution and prevention of crime
in our countries. What will truly make us effective in
our fight against terrorism is mutual confidence and the
exchange of information; readiness to cooperate;
willingness to coordinate our efforts; and our openness
to learning from the experiences of all.

Given the nature of this phenomenon, any
terrorist attack, whatever its location, is an attack on
the international community as a Whole. That is why
we all must shoulder the same level of responsibility in
our activities of international cooperation.

Only through the coordinated efforts of the
international community will the members of Al Qaeda
and the Taliban be brought to justice.

In the context of those efforts, the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) is of great importance. In this regard, it should
be noted that the work of the Committee is taking place
within a framework of transparency, which facilitates
exchanges of information and intelligence in the fight
against Al Qaeda and the Taliban.

In recent months, the Committee has continued to
work on confidence-building among Member States. In
this context, we would like to highlight the adoption of
guidelines for the handling of additional information
related to the designated individuals and entities on the
consolidated list. Mexico trusts that such measures will
promote a broader and more reliable flow of
information, which will allow the Committee to
propose better mechanisms for the implementation of
the sanctions against the designated individuals and
entities on the consolidated list.
Mexico also wishes to emphasize the importance
of the work done by the Monitoring Group and to
commend it for its efforts and for the professionalism
that it has demonstrated. In its most recent report, the
Monitoring Group reminded us of the very serious and
present danger that Al Qaeda represents to
international peace and security and alerted us to its
capacity to adapt, the evolution that the organization
has undergone and the threat that it continues to pose.
This should lead us to increase our effectiveness and be
more vigilant. Likewise, the Group reminds us that Al
Qaeda still has funds at its disposal. Here, it is
important to underline in particular the comments of
Ambassador Heraldo Mufioz with regard to the fact
that there are indications that drug trafficking
originating in Afghanistan continues to be a source of
funding for Al Qaeda's terrorist activities.

My delegation also wishes to congratulate the
Monitoring Group on its contribution to improving the
quality of the consolidated list in general and for
obtaining relevant information to improve the Taliban
list. In this regard, we would also like to thank the
Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for their support.

The reports of the Monitoring Group are always
of high quality. We hope that the Security Council will
continue to receive such excellent reports, as the Group
will now have at its disposal more staff dedicated to
information analysis.

The report of the Monitoring Group draws
attention to the fact that the results of the practice
according to which countries are required to submit
national reports have failed to meet expectations and
that the picture offered by these reports is therefore
still incomplete, as the group pointed out.

In this regard, the Security Council must redouble
its efforts to ensure that all States fully comply with
their obligations under Security Council resolutions.
We must also, however, acknowledge that, with regard
to the national reports, the working methods of the
Committee could be improved. There should be
improved and closer cooperation between the
Committee and that established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001). That would prevent bureaucratic
duplication in their reports - which discourages
countries from providing the necessary cooperation -
and facilitate complementarity between both
committees, which depend upon the support of States
in the implementation of their respective obligations.

The struggle against Al Qaeda is a commitment
for all Member States. We understand that it will be
neither a short nor an easy struggle. Defeating the
causes of extremism that nourish terrorism will require
cooperation in many areas at the international level.

I should also like to point out that the fight
against terrorism clearly presents us with a number of
difficulties. The report of the Monitoring Group
provides details about problems associated with
resolving those difficulties. These include the risk of
implicating innocent people or - because of mistakes
in processing names - of taking steps against people
who are not responsible for terrorist activities. There is
also a danger of restricting freedom and the fluidity of
financial and banking transactions. No less serious is
the risk to legitimate charitable and non-governmental
organizations, which might be affected by the measures
that we feel compelled to take.

All of these risks must be weighed by the
Committee and the Security Council. The most
effective tools at our disposal in this respect are
information and the capacity to undertake a precise
analysis of each of the measures taken. In that respect,
the work of the Monitoring Group is vital. It is the
Monitoring Group that points out to us the areas that
need further work and the risks that we must avoid, as
well as the mechanisms that we can use to minimize
the dangers that are inherent in this difficult but
necessary task of combating terrorism. Better
cooperation and information exchange will be essential
if we are to avoid those risks.

In this context, it is very important to note the
close link between the fight against terrorism and the
fight against organized crime. Terrorism makes use of
organized crime networks and utilizes many of the
methods and techniques that enable such networks to
avoid justice and exploit the financial and banking
system for money-laundering. Thus we must fight
organized crime, drug trafficking and corruption, as
well as terrorism, jointly and in a concerted manner.

Finally, no less important are efforts to control
arms trafficking. It is essential that the international
community redouble its efforts to prevent illicit arms
trafficking by all the means at its disposal, since the
availability of such weapons gives terrorists an
advantage that they readily exploit.

