Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Argentina thanks Peru for convening
this open debate on the links between international
terrorism and transnational organized crime. We also
thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov; the
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, Ms. Michele Coninsx; and the
International Consultant, Ms. Tamara Makarenko, for
their valuable briefings this morning.

Although Argentina recognizes the existence of
a nexus between terrorism and traditional organized
crime, we would be remiss if we did not reiterate the
need to bear in mind that both phenomena are governed
by different legal frameworks at the international level
and that their specificities must be respected.

Terrorism undermines the values and principles
of States, democracy and freedoms, which is why
the fight against terrorism requires an integrated
and collaborative approach. Argentina reiterates its
commitment to addressing the terrorist threat in all
its forms and manifestations, within the framework
of international law, international humanitarian law,
international human rights law and international
refugee law, as well as the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.

Argentina has also worked seriously in recent years
to strengthen our national capacities in the fight against
transnational crime, organized crime, drug trafficking
and trafficking in persons by preventing the illicit
movement of persons, goods, weapons and resources,
which directly contributes to increased regional and
global security against the scourge of terrorism.

At the regional level, the Republic of Argentina
supports initiatives in the areas of training and the
exchange of information, and best practices within the
framework of the Inter-American Committee against
Terrorism of the Organization of American States. We
contributed to the establishment of that Committee
in 1998, and we chaired it in 2018. Furthermore, on
19 July, Buenos Aires will host the second Western
Hemisphere counter-terrorism ministerial conference,
25 years after the terrorist attack on the headquarters
of the Argentine Israelite Mutual Association. We hope
that there will be a high level of participation from the
countries of the region.

At the national level, the Ministry of Justice
of Argentina is carrying out training for judges,
prosecutors and other public officials on property
investigations within the context of the crimes of money-
laundering, terrorism financing and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. Argentina has sought
to make progress in a balanced implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
For example, under pillar I, we have strengthened our
legislation on rights and guarantees to protect victims
of terrorism and other related crimes so as to provide
them with advice, assistance, legal representation,
protection and access to justice.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of increasing data collection on transnational organized
crime and stepping up the analysis of the current
situation as a starting point for an assessment of the
current scenario and the development of specific
strategies to address that issue at the regional level,
always in respect of the existing legal frameworks and
the specific competencies of the various bodies, in
accordance with the Charter.

