Mr. Nishida (Japan): I thank Special
Representative Lamberto Zannier for his comprehensive
briefing. Of course, I would like to join previous
speakers in extending a warm welcome to Foreign
Minister Vuk Jeremie of Serbia and Acting Foreign
Minister Vlora Citaku of Kosovo. Japan highly values
the contributions of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe to ensuring the stability of
Kosovo and the Western Balkan region as a whole.
Japan welcomes the adoption by consensus of
General Assembly resolution 64/298 regarding the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 22 July. We appreciate the flexibility shown by all
concerned parties towards its adoption. We hope that a
direct dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade will
follow, addressing issues that affect the everyday lives
of all the people in the communities of Kosovo. It is
equally important that the dialogue should build
confidence and contribute to rapprochement between
Pristina and Belgrade.

As the Secretary-General aptly states in his
report, this dialogue will "open a new phase"
(5/2010/562, para. 5 D. We expect that the European Union will facilitate the dialogue so that the entire
region can be stabilized irreversibly through its path to
integration with Europe. We hope that the recent
political ferment in Kosovo will not delay the launch of
the dialogue. We also hope that the new administration
will be established very soon. It is also important that
free and fair elections be held with the participation of
all eligible residents, including minorities.

We commend Kosovo's efforts to improve its
State capacity. As previous speakers have noted, one
example of this is the handover of responsibility from
KFOR to the Kosovo Police for the protection of some
Serbian Orthodox monasteries, as the Secretary-
General's report states. As for the humanitarian
situation, including the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees, we are particularly concerned
about the stagnancy in the process of reintegration of
minority returnees. As a proponent of the policy of
human security, Japan continues to support the
activities of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other institutions to
promote peaceful multi-ethnic coexistence and
sustainable development through various frameworks.

