Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Anibal Antonio Cavaco Silva, President of the
Portuguese Republic, at this meeting. I wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. I also
thank United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights Ms. Navanethem Pillay, Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs Ms. Catherine Bragg,
and Mr. Philip Spoerri, Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their remarks.

The issue of protection of civilians in armed
conflict is one to which Bosnia and Herzegovina
attaches great importance.

The Security Council has undertaken many
activities to protect civilians and improve the
protection of civilians agenda. Nonetheless, many
civilians continue to suffer from the consequences of
violent conflicts. Serious and ongoing violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
including systematic violence against civilian
populations, are being committed. It is the unfortunate
and unacceptable reality of our times that civilians
continue to be a main target for armed attacks and
account for a high number of casualties in conflicts.

In light of the fact that responsibility for the
protection of civilians rests primarily with the State,
additional efforts are necessary to make Governments
aware of their responsibility to protect civilians. It is
essential to support relevant national institutions and
strengthen their role and capacity to deal with those
issues. Furthermore, all parties to armed conflict must
fully comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law concerning the protection of civilians
in armed conflict.

We particularly underline the need to combat
impunity for perpetrators of violence against civilians.
The Security Council should take every opportunity to
send the message that crimes committed against
civilians are unacceptable and that all perpetrators of
grave violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law will be brought to justice. In
addition, Council-mandated action to protect civilians
must ensure full respect for the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as the sovereignty and integrity of
Member States. The international response must be
proportional to the threat, while the use of force should
be a last resort.

Protection of civilians is an integral part of
multidimensional peacekeeping operations. In that
regard, Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the work of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations with
police- and troop-contributing countries to improve
understanding, implementation of civilian-protection
mandates, development of a strategic framework for
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping missions
and the use of recently developed scenario-based
training modules.

Existing mechanisms for the protection of
civilians and of children in armed conflict and the
monitoring and reporting arrangements established in
accordance with resolution 1960 (2010) are important
elements of the peacekeeping agenda. Host
Governments need to be consulted, involved and
properly informed about their functioning. Moreover,
data collected during the work of those mechanisms
must be made available to national judicial systems.

At this point, allow me to mention a few concrete
cases where challenges to civilian protection are a
significant part of the overall efforts.

In Libya, strengthening security institutions and
their capacity by providing necessary training for
police and military forces is critical for protection of
civilians and the rule of law in the country. Ensuring
effective protection of the civilian population will be
essential for promoting inclusive dialogue and national
reconciliation and restoring peace and order in the
country.

One of the key tasks of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan is to assist the Government to
protect civilians in a volatile security environment
where it lacks the capacity to do so.

Civilians in Somalia continue to bear the burden
of the fighting between militants and the Transitional
Federal Government. The famine significantly
contributes to the worsening of the situation, forcing
many to seek refuge in Kenya and other neighbouring
countries. We urge the international community to
increase its efforts and provide much-needed
humanitarian assistance.

The Government of Syria needs to accelerate the
implementation of measures leading to a democratic
society, ending the ongoing unrest and suffering of the
civilian population, and to hold accountable those
responsible for the killings.

In Afghanistan, the high number of conflict-
related casualties caused by anti-Government forces, as
well as cases of child recruitment for military and
suicide attacks, is unacceptable. All parties to the
conflict need to respect the principles of international
humanitarian and human rights law, while the
Government must take decisive measures to investigate
such acts and bring the perpetrators to justice.

We must particularly underline that conflicts
remain the major cause behind increasing numbers of
refugees and internally displaced persons. We are
deeply concerned about the unsafe and too often
impeded humanitarian access to populations affected
by conflict. We are also troubled by attacks against
humanitarian workers, which must be strongly
condemned. We also believe that the Security Council
should take a more consistent and comprehensive
approach to addressing humanitarian access constraints
and ensuring accountability for grave instances of
denial of access.

Accountability for human rights violations should
be given the utmost priority. The International Criminal
Court should have better interaction with the Security
Council, while international and national mechanisms
should complement that work. National judicial
systems are the cornerstone for addressing
accountability and impunity, but the relevant United
Nations bodies need to develop comprehensive and
innovative approaches to support their work.

Civilian protection issues developed over the last
decade must be further enhanced. The Council can play
a leadership role, but the Secretariat and United
Nations agencies need to clearly delineate their roles
and responsibilities and allocate sufficient resources to
fulfil them. Sanctions and other targeted measures
against the perpetrators of violations against civilians
are important for enhancing accountability.

We believe that commissions of inquiry and fact-
finding missions could be used as preventive tools and
measures for possibly decreasing tensions before the
escalation of a conflict. Governments should fully
cooperate with the fact-finding missions sent by
commissions of inquiry and allow them to investigate
all alleged violations of international humanitarian law.
The crucial elements for the establishment of those
mechanisms are adequate timing, the availability of
experts, priorities adapted to specific situations, as well
as follow-up activities.

Finally, the challenges facing the Council with
regard to the protection of civilians call for greater
international cooperation and better coordination
between the Council and other United Nations bodies
and agencies. To that end, additional efforts should be
made to prevent conflicts and to promote early warning
systems and effective responses to situations that
specifically threaten civilian populations. Although the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
lies with States and parties to armed conflicts, the
United Nations, with its systematic approach to the
protection of civilians, must be and is at the helm of
the global effort.

