Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me once again to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the State of Kuwait on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February. I wish you every success
and assure you of our full support. Allow me also
to express my congratulations and appreciation to
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-Secretary-General and
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and
her team for the presentation of the comprehensive
and detailed briefing on the current political and
humanitarian situation with regard to chemical weapons
in Syria.

The political - and in particular the
humanitarian - crisis in Syria is reaching alarming
proportions. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
expresses its solidarity with the families ofthe countless
victims, as well as with the thousands of displaced
people trapped by the hostilities and the more than
13 million people who currently need humanitarian
assistance as a result of the continuing conflict.

I would like to take this opportunity to condemn
the loss of numerous civilian lives in this conflict, and
I call on all parties to comply with international law on
the protection of civilians and to distinguish between
military and civilian objectives and refrain from firing
rocket launchers into populated areas, as is being
reported in eastern Ghouta.

Equatorial Guinea can only express its satisfaction
at the destruction of almost all the chemical-weapon
production facilities declared by the Syrian Arab
Republic thanks to the technical assistance of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). However, while we welcome the cooperation
between the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
and the OPCW, it is necessary to be vigilant and
to continue to condemn in the strongest terms any
possible use, development, acquisition or manufacture
of chemical weapons in the country or transfers of such
weapons to other States or non-State actors. In that
regard, we vigorously condemn the recent use of toxic
chemical weapons by whomsoever. The perpetrators
of such horrendous acts must be brought to justice and
sentenced appropriately.

For seven years already, Syria has been a war
scenario that crystallizes internal, regional and, even,
international divisions. The primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
bestowed upon the Security Council by the Charter
of the United Nations should lead the 15 member
countries of this principal organ of the United Nations
to overcome their differences regarding the situation
in Syria and to renounce their political and strategic
interests in favour of the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people to achieve well-being and prosperity.

In that regard, it is appropriate that, as Russia has
already proposed, another mechanism be established to
replace the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism so that it can carry out the necessary
investigations on the use of chemical weapons in Syria
and thereby arrive at a result that garners consensus
among the members of the Council in order to again
unify our criteria for an objective examination of
the situation.

