Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I should like to join preceding speakers in
welcoming His Excellency Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh,
President of Djibouti, and to thank him for his
statement. I also welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Djibouti and his delegation and thank the
representative of Eritrea for his statement.

We in Libya are extremely concerned at the crisis
that has erupted in recent months between two
brotherly nations, in particular since those countries
belong to a region that has long been beset by
problems. Most people in that region are suffering the
effects of war, including lack of security, food and
medicine. It is regrettable that, thus far, the Security
Council has not been able to come up with effective
solutions to the problems in the region.

Like other countries, we believe that the situation
between Djibouti and Eritrea could be worse; the
border area is relatively calm. While we welcome that
fact, we are still concerned at the lack of progress
made thus far in finding a peaceful solution. It is also
regrettable that the good offices of the Council, of
regional organizations and other actors have not been
received positively, which could lead to a new crisis.
Fighting erupted again in June, and I believe that both
countries are duty-bound to reply favourably to the
message issued by the Council that same month.

As a member of the African Union, the League of
Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, Libya calls for the implementation of the
resolutions adopted by those organizations. We
welcome the repeated efforts of those organizations to
help the two countries to resolve their dispute. We call
on both parties to use those proposals to their best
advantage.

With regard to the evident differences between
the two brotherly countries with respect to the
demarcation of their border, we hope that they will be
able to reach an agreement on the international legal
instruments to be used to resolve the issue once and for
all. We insist on the need to continue to seek a peaceful
solution to the crisis. We support the good offices of
the Secretary-General and call on both parties to
respond positively to them.

