Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (interpretation from Russian):
It is a great honour for me to speak at today's Security
Council meeting devoted to consideration of the question of
the situation in Tajikistan and the further activity in our
country of the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT), and I welcome the opportunity to
draw the attention of Council members to the vitally
important problems of the present stage of development
of Tajik society.

First of all, I should like to express our sincere
gratitude to the United Nations for its unfailing support of
the efforts of the Government of Tajikistan to overcome
the consequences of the armed conflict and to return the
country to the path of civilized development, which is
fully in keeping with the historically proven and
recognized interests of the Tajik people.

We are also grateful to the entire international
community for rendering invaluable assistance to
Tajikistan at the critical stage of the formation of its
statehood and of the foundations for the normal
functioning of civilian society.

The ongoing assistance from the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund, which together with the
United Nations are coordinating the efforts of the
international community of donors, has already yielded
positive results in Tajikistan and, most importantly, gives
us hope for a gradual and full restoration of the basis of
the activities of daily life of the population of our
country, a basis which has been destroyed by many years
of conflict.

We would particularly like to take note of the efforts
of Russia, Iran and other members of the Contact Group
of Guarantor States of the General Agreement on the
Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan,
signed in June last year in Moscow, to assist the
progressive development of the peace process in our
country.

We note with satisfaction the contribution to
stabilizing of the situation in Tajikistan that is being made
by the military personnel of the Collective Peacekeeping
Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States and
the Russian border forces. We see the activity of
UNMOT and the staff members of other international and
non-governmental organizations as a specific
demonstration of the desire of the entire international
community to render assistance to the peace process in
Tajikistan.

We are deeply distressed at the murder in July of
this year of four staff members of the United Nations

 

Mission and are taking all possible measures to prevent this
tragic incident from having consequences for our future
relations with the United Nations and with other
international organizations. The leadership of Tajikistan has
already taken serious measures to improve security
conditions for international personnel working in our
country and is firmly committed to close cooperation with
the leaders of the United Tajik Opposition to successfully
complete the investigation of all circumstances surrounding
the incident in July.

We share the basic assessments and conclusions of the
report of the Secretary-General regarding the situation in
Tajikistan, and we note their objectivity and realism. The
peace process, and the gradual involvement in it of the
entire people of Tajikistan, is slowly but surely gaining
momentum. There is no need here to enumerate the obvious
achievements reached during the course of implementation
of the General Agreement. At the same time, I can state
with full responsibility that the Government of the Republic
of Tajikistan is fully aware that a great deal remains to be
done, jointly with the leadership of the United Tajik
Opposition, to resolve existing difficulties and to achieve
the goals stated in the General Agreement.

The regular and fruitful contacts between the President
of the Republic of Tajikistan, Mr. Emomali Rakhmonov,
and the Chairman of the Commission on National
Reconciliation, Mr. Abdullo Nuri, are unquestionably the
key to overcoming existing and possible future difficulties
on the complex path to national reconciliation.

The dedication to the peace process of both parties to
the General Agreement and of the entire Tajik people was
severely tested during the recent hostilities, which erupted
as a result of the attempt made by an armed group of rebels
in northern Tajikistan to seize power by force. Homes and
administrative buildings were destroyed, there was
considerable loss of life, particularly among the civilian
population, and people's lives were ruined. All of this is
typical of the anti-popular nature of the rebels and their
leaders, who enjoyed the external support of those who
wish to disrupt the Tajiks' constructive rhythm of life and
to strike a treacherous blow to the consolidation process of
Tajik society.

In this connection, President Emomali Rakhmonov of
Tajikistan has resolutely embarked on a course of
protecting the unity and territorial integrity of the country
and the existing constitutional system. He has firmly
stated that the peace process in the Republic is moving
ahead and that no force can stop it. Tajikistan is firmly
committed to building a democratic society of law and no
one can compel it to turn from its chosen path.

We are grateful to the Security Council, the
Secretary-General and the States members of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) - Russia
first and foremost - for their timely and clear political
assessment of the rebels' subversive and destabilizing
activities and for their determined and unequivocal moral
support for the Government and people of Tajikistan in
this very difficult time. We are counting on continued
cooperation with our partners in the CIS in order to
ensure Tajikistan's security and to prevent any new
attempt by destructive forces to strike a blow against the
process of national reconciliation.

We consider the new draft resolution on Tajikistan
before the Security Council today to be a reaffirmation of
the Council's unswerving support for the peace process in
the country. We announce our firm intention to do all in
our power to implement its provisions relating to the
Government of Tajikistan.

