Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I would
like to begin by thanking the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

The commitment of the United States to peace in
the Middle East and to advancing the vision of two
States, living by side by side in peace, is unwavering.
Many are rightly frustrated with the lack of progress,
and we are too. We will continue to be steadfast in our
support of efforts that will advance dialogue, peace and
progress, and to oppose those that do not. Progress will
be born out of hard choices made by both leaders with
the aim of advancing the cause of peace over parochial
politics. As such, we remain very concerned about the
recent wave of terrorism and violence and about the
utter lack of progress the parties have made towards
a two-State solution. It is important that both sides
demonstrate, through concrete policies and action, a
genuine commitment to achieving a two-State solution
in order to reduce tensions and restore hope in the
possibility of peace.

What we have seen on the ground, and what
people such as the Meir family present here today have
experienced first-hand, is absolutely unconscionable.
The recent spate of violence that has been going on for
more than six months has included stabbings, shootings
and vehicular attacks, including, as the Israeli
Ambassador just noted, reports of a bus exploding
in Jerusalem. Acts of terrorism have taken too many
lives, including those of Americans. The victims have
included soldiers and civilians, pregnant women and
mothers, Israelis and Palestinians. That must come to
an end. Let us be clear and unequivocal. There is no
justification or rationalization for terrorism. Terrorism
is terrorism. It is wrong, it is bloody and it must stop.
Anyone who aspires to achieve a viable and independent
Palestinian State must understand that engaging in
incitement to violence serves only to undermine that
goal. Only a political outcome, without violence, will
enable that goal to be realized.

The United States continues to call on the
Palestinian leadership, publicly and privately, to do
everything possible to combat all forms of incitement
and to explicitly condemn terrorist attacks. All
perpetrators of violence should be brought to justice,
and justice should be blind, fair and equal. We remain
deeply concerned about the shooting on 24 March in
Hebron of a Palestinian assailant by a member of the
Israeli security forces, and we are closely following
the legal proceedings against the accused perpetrator.
We note that just today charges of manslaughter were
brought against the soldier. It is critical that every
possible effort be made to show restraint, guard against
the unnecessary loss oflife and de-escalate tensions. In
cases where anyone from either side acts outside of the
law, they must be held accountable.

As we have stated repeatedly, the United States
strongly opposes settlement activity. It is incompatible
with, and calls into question the Israeli Government's
commitment to, two States. That is why we are deeply
troubled that, since 1 January, there have been a
number of Israeli declarations of State land in the West
Bank, including expropriating approximately 600 acres
south of Jericho and 250 acres south of Bethlehem.
Just last week, the Government of Israel advanced the
construction of hundreds of housing units in West Bank
settlements in various stages of the planning process.
Many of those units are located beyond the separation
barrier deep within the West Bank. Those actions - the
process of land expropriations, settlement expansions
and the legalization of outposts - are wrong and
fundamentally undermine the prospects for a two-
State solution. Similarly, we are deeply troubled by
the demolitions and evictions undertaken by the Israeli
authorities in several locations throughout the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. As we have repeatedly made
clear, we continue to look to both sides to demonstrate
with actions and policies a genuine commitment to a
two-State solution.

Nowhere are Palestinians suffering more than in
Gaza, where the slow pace of reconstruction remains
concerning. The stranglehold that Hamas wields over
the population in Gaza forces the pace of reconstruction
to stall further, as the taxes it levies and its diversion
of construction materials leave Palestinians in Gaza
with much less than they would otherwise have to
rebuild their homes, communities and infrastructure.
It was announced just today that the Israeli military
discovered a tunnel extending into Israeli territory
from Gaza 10 days ago. We all have an obligation to
ensure that reconstruction materials are used for their
intended purpose. We remain deeply concerned by the
humanitarian conditions in Gaza. The United States
provided an initial contribution of $43.4 million to the
$403 million emergency appeal of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, for its operations in the West Bank and
Gaza, and we thank those in the Council and within the
international community who have made contributions.
But far too few have stepped up with resources. We
ask others to join the United States in meeting those
vast needs. We note that the Government of Israel has
expanded the Palestinian fishing zone off of Gaza's
coast from six to nine nautical miles, which we hope
will somewhat improve the livelihoods of Palestinian
fishermen in Gaza.

Turning briefly to the political process, as the
Quartet principals jointly stated in Munich in February,
the status quo is unsustainable, and significant steps
are urgently needed to stabilize the situation and
reverse negative trends on the ground. Both sides must
demonstrate through policies and actions a genuine
commitment to a two-State solution in order to rebuild
trust and avoid a cycle of escalation. We believe that
the Quartet's upcoming report will help to inform
international discussions on the best way to advance a
two-State solution.

Turning now to the ongoing horrific situation
in Syria, we welcome the third round of intra-Syrian
talks, which resumed in Geneva last week, and thank
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his efforts. As
resolution 2254 (2015) states, the only sustainable
solution to the current crisis in Syria is through an
inclusive and Syrian-led political process that meets the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, including
through the establishment of an inclusive transitional
governing body with full executive powers, which
shall be formed on the basis of mutual consent while
ensuring continuity of governmental institutions.

That is the heart of the effort undertaken by the
International Syria Support Group and the process
that Special Envoy De Mistura aims to move forward
in Geneva. We are acutely aware that the Geneva talks
and the situation on the ground in Syria are deeply
interwoven. Success or failure in one area intimately
affects the others. The stakes are enormous. And
certainly with regard to both the cessation of hostilities
and improving humanitarian access, more can and
must be done. The cessation of hostilities is holding in
parts of the country and has improved the day-to-day
reality of numerous Syrians' lives in those areas, but
violations continue. We remain particularly disturbed
by the regime's ongoing attacks on parties to the
cessation of hostilities. Those violations not only harm
and kill Syrian civilians, but also place great strain on
other parties to the cessation of hostilities, many of
whom have made great efforts to show restraint. The
regime's behaviour will only strengthen the position
of groups like Jabhat Al-Nusra that consistently try to
undermine the cessation of hostilities. We continue to
press the opposition to resist being drawn into violence
as a result of Jabhat Al-Nusra and regime actions. We
have urged the opposition to maintain compliance with
the cessation of hostilities. There must be a halt in
the escalating violence in Aleppo and in other areas,
including Latakia, Hama and the suburbs of Damascus,
where recent events pose a serious threat to the
durability of the agreement.

To understand the human dimensions of violations
to the cessation of hostilities, I want to say just a word
about Dr. Hassan Al-Araj, a respected cardiologist
in the norther part of Hama, who was killed in an air
strike last week. As of today, there are very few doctors
left in Hama, and there are no cardiologists. Hearts that
need care will have no one.

Once again, the Syrian regime needs to end the
killing and the violence, and it needs to do much
more with regard to humanitarian access in besieged
and hard-to-reach areas. Of the 4.1 million Syrians in
hard-to-reach locations, the United Nations has been
permitted to reachjust 249,000 this year - 249,000 out
of 4.1 million, or little more than 6 per cent of those in
hard-to-reach areas. The main reason for that is clear: the
deliberate obstruction by the Syrian regime, including
disputing the United Nations population figures as a
new mechanism to prohibit aid from reaching starving
populations. The regime deployed that new strategy in
the Damascus suburbs ofArbeen, Zamalka and Zabadin,
as all three regions had been approved for assistance
delivery but were stalled as the United Nations had to
renegotiate with the Syrian regime exactly how many
people were in need of assistance. Instead of feeding
people, the United Nations is forced to negotiate and
renegotiate exactly how many starving people will be
fed. For those trapped within the besieged areas, where
people are intentionally starved and maliciously denied
access to international assistance, ofthe 486,000 people
in 18 besieged locations the United Nations has been
allowed to reach only 12 locales and 152,500 people.
We must do better, and we must do so quickly because
people are literally starving to death.

As such, we commend the United Nations efforts
in the recent successful airlift of food supplies for the
approximately 4,000 residents in Deir ez-Zor besieged
by Da'esh, while noting the remaining challenge to
address the needs of all 200,000 in the city. We also
hope that the recent United Nations trip to Darayya
will lead to the immediate delivery of assistance to its
people, who have not received one crumb of aid since
2012. The world is witnessing an intentional massive
starvation campaign in real time. All actors, including
the regime, need to allow food to reach people who are
literally dying for it.

We once again call on the Syrian regime to comply
with international law, including resolution 2254 (2015)
and the demands of the international community, to
allow assistance to reach all Syrians in need. The next
steps in Syria are as urgent as they are clear. There
must be a permanent cessation of hostilities, full
humanitarian access and an end to the violence, and
all Member States must support the political transition
in Syria.

