Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President,
we congratulate you for convening this meeting.
We are also grateful for the statement made by
Ms. Federica Mogherini.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is convinced
of the positive role played by regional and subregional
organizations in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts as well as in the process of peacebuilding
through recovery, reconstruction and development of
societies emerging from conflicts.

With regard to managing crises, we believe that the
European Union and its members must continue to act
in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

The European Union's contribution to the search for
peaceful and negotiated solutions to situations affecting
international peace and security is laudable. Particular
mention should be made of its efforts in the diplomatic
process of the P5+1 to achieve a comprehensive, long-
term and appropriate settlement of the Iranian nuclear
issue, which culminated with the adoption of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. That represented a
significant achievement in promoting and maintaining
the international non-proliferation regime. This
important diplomatic agreement highlighted once again
that dialogue and negotiation are the only possible
ways to achieve peaceful solutions to disputes affecting
international peace and security. We also reiterate the
need for the European Union to continue working to
promote the denuclearization of other regions of the
world, in particular the Middle East, in accordance
with relevant international treaties on the subject.

The situation of instability in the Middle East, which
is the result of the stalemate in the peace process and the
terrorist violence affecting the countries of the region,
calls on the Security Council, with the support of the
European Union, to play a prominent role in promoting
a definitive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
based on the two-State solution, including putting an
end to the occupation of the Palestinian territories and
the establishment of a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State along internationally secured pre-1967
borders. In this regard, we recognize that the European
Union, as a member of the Quartet, must continue to
support efforts to reactivate negotiations between the
parties in order to reach peaceful solutions leading to
a firm and lasting peace. We welcome the holding of
the ministerial meeting, which took place in Paris last
Friday, 3 June, and which we hope will pave the way for
the convening of an international peace conference on
the Middle East.

The armed conflict in Libya looms large on the
agenda of the European Union, as demonstrated by
its actions to address this problem. In this regard, we
call on that regional organization to redouble its efforts
to support dialogue and reduce tensions in order to
strengthen the Government of National Accord and
re-establish the political institutions in that country,
which was affected by the military intervention of
2011. We also call on it to coordinate its actions with
the African Union.

The conflict situations in other countries in the
Middle East and Africa have led to waves of migrants
fleeing wars, which have been exploited by criminal
organizations to carry out criminal activities related
to human trafficking with deplorable consequences.
The International Organization for Migration indicates
that, by May this year, the number of migrants and
asylum seekers who have reached Europe via different
routes across the Mediterranean had exceeded 200,
000 people, of which more than 2,400 were killed or
disappeared in their attempt to reach European soil.

Despite resolution 2240 (2015), we note that lost
lives are reported every day as a result of the sinking
of vessels used by organized crime. We would like
to reiterate that, in Venezuela's opinion, neither
making migration more secure nor criminalizing it
are appropriate approaches to this issue, which is
essentially a human rights issue. In this regard, we
reiterate our call for the actions and policies adopted
to work on this issue stay away from visions that run
counter to applicable international human rights law.
The discourse and actions must therefore lead to the
decriminalization of migration, respect for diversity and
tolerance. We welcome the initiative of some countries
of the European Union to welcome a considerable
number of refugees and migrants from these regions
in conflict.

In order to avoid or reduce the flows of migrants, a
greater effort must be made to seek peaceful solutions
to the ongoing conflicts rather than supporting policies
of regime change and investing more in improving
the living conditions of the populations in regions
suffering from deep economic and social inequalities.
We reiterate that any policy aimed at addressing this
phenomenon, must be in strict compliance with the
regulatory framework developed by the international
community for refugees and human rights.

Finally, we hope that these channels of cooperation
and communication between the United Nations and
the European Union will be strengthened and will
effectively contribute to the promotion of international
peace and security.

