Judge Higgins: I greatly appreciate your
invitation, Sir, to participate in this debate and the
welcome that you and the Legal Counsel have so
kindly extended.

The International Court of Justice is pleased to
make a contribution to this important day's reflective
work in the Security Council.

The theme of the Council's debate is
"Strengthening international law", and let me begin
with a few general observations on that concept.

International law is, of course, the law that
governs relations between States and between States
and international organizations. It is the law of each
and every one of us. In a world often divided by
politics, it is our common language.

What do we mean by "strengthening international
law"? Two meanings come to mind: first, the widening
and deepening of the content of international law; and
secondly, the fortifying of the mechanisms for securing
compliance with or enforcement of international law.
In fact, the discussion outline prepared by the
presidency touches on both elements.
In terms of the first meaning, the reach of
international law has expanded to an extraordinary
extent. The already known broad outlines of the law of
peace - title to territory, jurisdiction, immunities,
maritime spaces, the law of treaties, State
responsibility - have all been shaped by very detailed
provisions. And many other topics that were simply
unheard of when the Security Council began its work
are now established as part of the fabric of
international law; space, environment, trade law and
human rights are examples.

There is now a well developed international legal
framework for combating international terrorism.
There are currently 13 universal instruments and seven
regional instruments relating to the prevention and
suppression of terrorism. There are treaties on the
methods used by terrorists - bombings, hijackings,
hostage-takings, nuclear material; on places likely to
be targeted - aeroplanes, ships, fixed platforms; and
on preventing the financing of terrorism.

In a broader sense, there has been a profound
deepening of the law as it relates to jus ad bellum and
jus in belIo, with the Covenant of the League of
Nations, the Kellogg-Briand Pact and the United
Nations Charter being important catalysts for the
former and the Hague Peace Conferences, the 1949
Geneva Conventions and other more recent instruments
relevant to the establishment of new judicial bodies
having hugely important roles as regards the latter.

The term "strengthening" in the discussion
document clearly envisages the idea of embedding
international law into many of the contemporary
activities overseen by the Security Council.
Sometimes, the content of those activities is notably
different from the world of neat inter-State relations in
which international law has classically operated.

But strengthening may also mean increasing the
level of compliance with the rules of international law,
and also ensuring compliance with decisions of
international judicial bodies. There is a general day-to-
day compliance with international law: our routine life
depends upon treaties being honoured and normative
customs being adhered to. Usually, all States find such
compliance to be to their advantage. At the same time,
we are all aware that when the stakes are very high
there are eruptions of behaviour that clearly challenge
the legal requirements laid down in the Charter.

It can readily be seen that the first three themes
highlighted for debate are of critical importance. If I
may say so, they seem very well chosen and I look
forward to hearing what Member States have to say on
each of them. Each of the three themes is different,
presenting distinctive issues, but there is within them a
common theme. The problem of the rule of law
vacuum matched by the collapse of communal justice
systems, and the place of law vis-a-vis non-State actors
are interrelated elements that clearly present challenges
for the Security Council in its desire to fulfil its
Charter functions, but acting always within the
framework of international law.

Those are extremely pertinent challenges, but I
cannot but notice that they each relate to conflict or
post-conflict situations. The Charter system, of course,
envisages a system of settling disputes peacefully
before intractable conflict and post-conflict situations
arise. The General Assembly, the Security Council and
the International Court each have a responsibility to
contribute to that phase of international relations. But a
very particular responsibility has been assigned to the
International Court. It is my purpose today to remind
Member States that at least some of today's discussion
problems may be resolved by an early recourse to
third-party settlement.

The prime objective of the United Nations must
be to prevent those conflicts and post-conflict
situations that raise the key rule of law questions with
which the Council is grappling. It is unlawful
behaviour that so often requires the contemplation of
sanctions, whose efficacy and credibility is the subject
of the third theme. The second theme, which addresses
the range of issues that have arisen in relation to
institutions to insure there is no impunity for
international crimes, only becomes necessary if such
large-scale crimes have indeed occurred.

Peacekeeping, international criminal structures
and procedures and sanctions regimes are all important
mechanisms for the maintenance of international peace
and security within a rule-of-law framework. But sight
must not be lost of the fact that if problems can be
solved peacefully, these intractable contemporary
problems could present themselves less frequently.
There perhaps deserves to be more attention to the a
priori, rather than to the post hoc alone. All said and
done, we are speaking of disputes that threaten
international peace.
The Charter requires that disputes must be
settled, without specifying required means, although it
is clear that legal disputes should normally be referred
to the International Court. Time has shown that very
many disputes are, in fact, claims about perceived legal
rights, even if those are both politically charged and
diplomatically sensitive. The International Court has
always been prepared to deal with legal issues arising
in the wider context of highly political controversy.

Those who do not know the work of the
International Court may think that what we do is to
settle boundaries and allocate maritime spaces, but that
our judicial work is far from the world of military
conflict and human misery. The truth is otherwise. The
Court has been entrusted with many cases in which
political passions have run high, and in which, indeed,
some conflict is already occurring. All the evidence
suggests that the Court's contribution in such disputes,
once entrusted to them, has been both effective and
significant.

Further, it should not be thought that territorial
and boundary disputes are one category and disputes
relating to the use of force another. Disputes about
entitlement to territory are, alas, not always peaceful.
They can and do spill over into violence. Sometimes
the Court can, in providing an impartial
pronouncement on the underlying claims, stop high
tensions from developing into military action. Its
resolution of the Qatar v. Bahrain dispute has allowed
the resumption of friendly relations between those
countries and has assisted stability in the Gulf more
generally.

In the Chamber case of Burkina Faso v. Mali,
eruptions of fighting were brought to an end by the
decision of the Court. The judgment of the Court in the
Chad v. Libya case marked the conclusion of years of
military activity and the same has been true of the
Cameroon v. Nigeria case, to which Mr. Michel has
already alluded.

Sometimes, the cases come to the Court too late
for it to assist in preventing the fighting. But here too,
a judicial role can still play its part in conflict
resolution. The very detailed and objective findings of
the Court in the recent case brought by the Congo
against Uganda, for example, resolves at least some of
the intractable issues of fact and law in the Great Lakes
region.

The Security Council, faced with the massive
problems in its agenda, might be forgiven for
wondering whether judgments by a Court with no
enforcement powers of its own - indeed, the Charter
provides that the enforcement of Court judgments lies
ultimately with the Security Council - will, in fact, be
complied with. The answer, surprising to many, is that
out of nearly 100 contentious cases the Court has dealt
with, no more than a handful have presented problems
of compliance. Of this handful, the problems of
compliance have mostly turned out to be temporary.
The success in compliance has been as much true in
cases hard fought by political adversaries as in cases
brought jointly by States.

Sometimes compliance is instantly achieved. That
was the case in the hard-fought litigation of Qatar v.
Bahrain, where the parties accepted that the Court's
judgment would provide a new framework for peace in
the Gulf. Sometimes some short-term assistance from
the Security Council has assisted. Both parties
requested the assistance of the United Nations Aouzou
Strip Observer Group, established by the Security
Council to oversee the Court's judgment in that case,
and the withdrawal of the Libyan forces from the
territory declared by the Court to belong to Chad
followed very soon after.

Some judgments take longer to implement.
Indeed, the possible need to take care of things on the
ground may be foreseen in the judgment itself. Only
last week, an agreement was announced on the
remaining elements needed to implement the Court's
judgment of 2002 in the Cameroon v. Nigeria case.
What has been at stake for the States concerned is far
from trivial, politically and economically. This
negotiated outcome to the painstaking commitment to
implement the Court's judgment has been a tribute to
the skills of the Secretary-General and the dedication
of the two countries.

The Security Council will wish to know why the
question of compliance with the Court's judgments is a
relatively rare problem. The reasons, I think, are
various. First, the Court is the embodiment of the
United Nations, being a major organ thereof. The
potency of that factor should not be underestimated.
Thus it is not for States to rewrite, challenge or
approve of the way the Court functions. That is a given
in the Statute, itself a component part of the Charter.

Secondly, the Court is stated in the Charter to be
the primary judicial organ of the United Nations. This
authority accorded to the Court has served the United
Nations well over the years. Then there is the fact that
the Court is indeed the Court of all the Members, in the
sense that it is composed of 15 judges elected by the
entire United Nations membership - that is to say, by
the Security Council and the General Assembly -
judges of high expertise in international law who
represent the different legal systems of the world. The
decision-making process of the Court is such that all of
the judges are engaged in all of the cases, save in those
occasional circumstances where the parties themselves
request a reduced Bench, which we term a "chamber".
It is not the Court of any region or any personalities. It
is the Court of the United Nations.

The bringing of individual criminals to
accountability is very important. The creation of new
tribunals and courts dedicated to this end is to be
welcomed. Their work has my admiration. At the same
time, the fundamentals of peace maintenance are not to
be forgotten.

The International Court of Justice is a principal
organ of the United Nations and, as such, is part of the
general system for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Its role is thus not minor, nor is it at
the margin. It is at the very heart of the general system
for the maintenance of peace and security through its
specific contribution to the peaceful settlement of
disputes.

What then can the Security Council do to
mobilize this potential? Of course, there have been
important special efforts to this end, and I might
appropriately mention in particular the recent
resolution adopted by the Special Committee on the
Charter upon the Court's sixtieth anniversary.

But the jurisdiction of the Court is based on
consent. Thus, the bottom line is the will of States to
use what is on offer. This is not the occasion for me to
speak about the politico-legal issues associated with
the various ways of establishing that jurisdiction. In the
context of today's debate, I limit myself to saying the
following.

The first discussion point which asks how the
Council should develop a policy on certain
peacekeeping matters, that the Council might like to
consider whether it should develop a policy whereby,
in all political disputes that threaten peace and security

and where claims of legal entitlement are made, the
Council would strongly indicate to the parties that they
are expected to have recourse to the Court. Article 33
of the Charter provides that the Security Council may
inform parties to settle their disputes by means which
include judicial settlement, and Article 36, paragraph 3,
states that in making recommendations for the
settlement of disputes, "the Security Council should
also take into consideration that legal disputes should
as a general rule be referred by the parties to the
International Court of Justice".

I am obliged to say that the Security Council has
failed to make use of this provision for many years.
This tool needs to be brought to life and made a central
policy of the Security Council.

Litigation before the Court is not a hostile act.
This fact can be testified by the many friendly States
that have been wise enough to know that the best way
to avoid deterioration in their good relations, if that
cannot be done by negotiations, is to have a dispute
between them resolved by the Court. I could mention
Slovakia v. Hungary, Indonesia v. Malaysia, Namibia v.
Botswana, Malaysia v. Singapore and many other
recent examples. These cases happen to have come to
us by their joint agreement. But it is no more a hostile
act even to come to us unilaterally. Recourse to the
Court is one of the methods of dispute settlement
envisaged by the Charter in Article 33. How can use of
an envisaged Charter provision be unfriendly, any more
than mediation or conciliation might be? I would
mention also - and any State that has been before us
would testify as to this - that our proceedings are
always conducted in the Court in a manner conducive
to the calming of passions and the discouragement of
postures of enmity.

I have so much appreciated that Denmark should
have used this occasion to emphasize the need to
strengthen international law. The fearful problems of
today can be methodically addressed only by Member
States acting with great restraint and by each United
Nations organ fulfilling its respective responsibilities.
We are all partners in the same magnificent
enterprise - the enterprise spelled out in the Purposes
and Principles in the United Nations Charter. The
International Court of Justice stands ready to work
alongside the Security Council in the fulfilment of
these goals.

