Mr. Duale (Somalia): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of October. I am
very grateful for this opportunity to brief the Council
today.

I would like to briefly address a few key points.
First, the Federal Government of Somalia has worked
tirelessly during the past year to reduce major threats
to peace, security and stability in Somalia, and has also
demonstrated its commitment to complying with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, as a number of
members of the Council have mentioned today.

I would like to draw the Council's attention to
the stark differences between the Somalia of the
past-beginning in 1992, when the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea was established - and the Somalia
of 2015. Indeed, the Committee and its mandate were
established first when Somalia was in the middle of
civil unrest and subsequently, when the mandate was
expanded in 2009, during the administration of the
nascent Transitional Federal Government, a period when
the country lacked federal and regional institutions and
financial oversight mechanisms.

In contrast, Somalia today has functioning
institutions, including a board of directors for the
Central Bank of Somalia, parliamentary oversight
committees in the Somali Parliament, and the Office of
the Accountant General and the independent Office of
the Auditor General, as well as capacity support from
the Financial Governance Committee, whose members
are drawn from international financial institutions that
include the World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund and the African Development Bank. The
Financial Governance Committee's role is to assist
the Federal Government in enhancing its capacities in
public finance management and to support the Central
Bank of Somalia in its efforts to recover and manage
assets, conduct procurement activities, review potential
contracts and concessions and establish federal revenue
and budget procedures, as well as enhancing the
effectiveness of the Central Bank's governance.

Progress has also been achieved on the legislative
side. Today, there are four legislative instruments
pending before the Somali Parliament of particular
relevance to public finance management reform: an
audit bill, a public finance management bill, a public
procurement, concession and disposal bill and a bill
to combat money-laundering and counter-terrorist
financing. These institutional and legislative actions
demonstrate that the Federal Government is rapidly
improving its capacities and now has aproper mechanism
in place for overseeing its financial governance.

The Federal Government has also made tremendous
progress in establishing and implementing a framework
for State-building in Somalia. To that end, it has
established new interim regional administrations, a
national independent electoral commission and national
consultative forum, and has begun an extensive
constitutional review process. Three years ago, when the
Government was established, it created a vision for 2016
that identified three fundamental elements stipulated by
the Provisional Constitution: constitutional review and
implementation, completion of the federal system and
democratization. The Government is also committed to
a peaceful transition of political power in 2016.

Three years later, we are turning that vision into
reality. The process of reviewing and revising the
Constitution has started. Over the past three years, in
accordance with our Constitution, we have supported
the formation of three interim regional administrations,
and the formation of the last, for the Hiran and Middle
Shabelle regions, will proceed soon. That is the last
item remaining for the completion of the federalization
map of Somalia. I am also happy to inform the Council
that an agreement on resource-sharing between the
regions and the central Government has been reached
and signed.

Regarding democratization, earlier this week, on
19 October, we began the process of constructing the
third strand of statehood, our national consultative
forum, which is aimed at facilitating the process
of building a State, a task that must be citizen-led.
It cannot be exclusive in origin, implementation or
outcomes. It must be accessible, representative and
inclusive. The voice of the people who may have
struggled to be heard in the past must be strengthened,
and it is being strengthened. The National Consultation
Forum is also intended to facilitate the interest of
all the people of Somalia in reaching a common
destination, strengthening legitimacy through peaceful
and democratic means.

With respect to the security sector, we would
like to draw the Council's attention to the fact that on
9 September, the President of Somalia, His Excellency
Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, announced sweeping
security sector reforms, committing the Government
to building a more integrated and accountable security
sector. We are currently in the process of carrying out
a comprehensive review of the security sector in order
to address structural imbalances and inefficiencies.
That pending review would include a national threat
assessment in order to rationalize and streamline the
roles, missions and resource allocations across the
security sector.

The Somali Government is committed to undertaking
a comprehensive biometric registration process and a
security sector financial governance review, with the
support of our international partners, in order to establish
a foundation on which we can build a transparent and
sustainable security sector. Moreover, the Somali
Government has made significant gains in liberating
nearly 80 per cent of Somalia from Al-Shabaab and,
more recently in beginning the process of national
troop integration.

Somalia has also made significant progress in
the past year in complying with the weapons and
ammunition management notification, reporting
and control requirements. By way of example, just
over the past six months the Somali Government has
marked over 4,500 weapons, established a weapons
and ammunition technical working group, and agreed
upon the terms of reference for the joint verification
team. Furthermore, officials of the Somali Government
have held consultative meetings, to initiate the design
of a road map to develop a comprehensive national
framework governing the full life-cycle of weapons and
ammunition. That clearly demonstrates the significant
improvements made by the Somali Government in
complying with arms notification requirements.

The Somali Government has also been receptive
to the Security Council's resolutions and welcomes
the reports of the Monitoring Group on Somalia and
Eritrea, (S/2015/801 and S/2015/802). The Government
of Somalia recognizes that it needs to work with
the Monitoring Group, and we reiterate that we do
not necessarily agree with all of the findings of the
Monitoring Group. However, we will work with the
Monitoring Group, and during the next mandate we
shall seek to strengthen this relationship further. Once
again, we would be pleased to welcome the Monitoring
Group to Mogadishu again on a more frequent basis.

Finally, I wish to highlight and underline my
Government's appreciation and thanks for the support
given by international partners and community. We
express our particular appreciation and thanks to the
African Union and the countries that contribute troops
to the African Union Mission in Somalia.

