Ms. Sinegiorgis (Ethiopia): At the outset, I wish
to express our appreciation to the Republic of South
Africa for organizing this open debate on the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU), as well as for providing the
concept note (S/2012/20) and for making it possible for
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) to participate in this very important debate.

In the same vein, I would like to commend the
Secretariat for the report of the Secretary-General on
United Nations-African Union cooperation in peace
and security (S/2011/805).

I also wish to seize this opportunity to commend
the African Union Peace and Security Council for
organizing a debate on the same subject at the
beginning of the week in Addis Ababa, and the African
Union Commission for issuing a comprehensive report
concerning this critical partnership. The meeting in
Addis Ababa was indeed a very important event, which
gave us the opportunity to redouble our resolve to
strengthen the African Union's partnership with the
United Nations, based on the principles enshrined in
the United Nations Charter, as well as the principles of
complementarity, subsidiarity, burden-sharing,
comparative advantages and flexibility.

I also wish to associate myself and, indeed, fully
subscribe to the statements delivered by Commissioner
Lamamra and Mr. Moses Wetangula.

In our view, this debate has come at the right
time- a time when Africa is making tremendous
efforts to address the peace and security deficit, at the
continental and subregional levels, through the African
Peace and Security Architecture.

IGAD is encouraged by the level of cooperation
that exists between the United Nations, on the one
hand, and the African Union and African subregional
organizations, such as IGAD, on the other. We also
welcome the intention to consider further steps to
promote closer cooperation. We note with appreciation
that, in the past few years, significant strides have been
made in conflict resolution, peacekeeping and
post-conflict peacebuilding and reconstruction. That is
indeed in consonance with the overriding objective of
the African Union's peace and security agenda, which
is to create an enabling momentum for a more
integrated, peaceful and prosperous Africa.

In this regard, the signing and implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in the Sudan, the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and the African Union Mission in Somalia are
illustrative examples of cooperation based on
flexibility and making best use of the comparative
advantages of the African Union, subregional
organizations such as IGAD and the United Nations in
the areas of effective mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding strategies.

In IGAD, we always emphasize the overriding
role of the African Union in matters of continental
peace and security. It is because of this unwavering
commitment that we make every effort to coordinate
subregional efforts with our continental organization. It
must be underlined that no meeting of IGAD, at any
level whatsoever and no matter how sensitive the issue
on the agenda, takes place without the presence of the
African Union. We have no doubt that, by acting
together, we have the potential to produce results
beyond the sum of the constituent parts.
Despite many positive developments, the
challenges of clarity of mandate, capacity deficit and
predictable, flexible and timely financing remain issues
of concern. Therefore, it is vital that all parties
concerned continue their engagements in activities
aimed at reaching innovative and feasible solutions to
those important elements of a comprehensive and
effective implementation of this strategic partnership.

While emphasizing the need to consolidate these
gains, we believe that the African Union, and through it
subregional organizations like IGAD, should be
supported by the Security Council, based on the
principles of complementarity and subsidiarity, as
enunciated in Chapter VIII of United Nations Charter.
We are of the view that those continental and
subregional organizations are better placed in terms of
geographical proximity, political and cultural
familiarity with local conditions, and shared
experiences with regard to regional peace and security
initiatives. Hence, without prejudice to the global
mandate of the Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the international
community will benefit by lending the requisite
support to those institutions for the maintenance of
regional peace and security.

In this regard, greater efforts are required to
ensure that the cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union is more effective, including
through joint planning and joint assessments for peace
operations on the continent. Those efforts must be
guided by respect for each organization's mandate and
responsibilities, seeking the best division of labour
among them.

The mandate of the Security Council is clear. It is
the body that has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, but it
should not be too difficult to apply Chapter VIII with
flexibility and wisdom, the goal being to address a
common challenge. Indeed, the results IGAD has
achieved, in partnership with the AU, in the Sudan,
Somalia and other areas of regional security concern
are illustrative of what can be achieved in this regard.
Thus, we would like to emphasize the need for the
United Nations to intensify such regional initiatives
and to accelerate its efforts to implement the United
Nations 10-year capacity-building programme for the
African Union. More strident efforts are also required
to fully operationalize the African Union's African
Peace and Security Architecture, including the African
Standby Force and the continental early warning
system.

Furthermore, the enhancement of cooperation
between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council, including the annual
consultations, is vital for reaching those objectives. It
is our considered view that those meetings should
result in concrete action on the modalities and means
for the development of strategic partnerships when
addressing specific issues of mutual interest and
concern. In this regard, concrete steps should also be
taken to strengthen the policy-level coordination
between those two important entities to avoid not only
conflicting positions but also duplication of efforts.

At the operational level, the Secretariat and the
African Union Commission need to ensure the
complementarities of their efforts, as well as realistic
benchmarks and timelines. Strengthening the efforts of
the African Union and its institutional capacity to
effectively plan, deploy and manage peacekeeping
operations is a key prerequisite for their success. It is
also of high importance that the African Union ensure
leadership and ownership of the process. That will
require greater partnerships, inclusiveness and
purposeful leadership. We believe that there is scope in
the cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union to incorporate those vital elements.

Our best intentions, however, will amount to
nothing if we fail to provide adequate, flexible and
predictable funding for peacekeeping operations in
Africa. It is also necessary to coordinate efforts
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
IGAD strongly supports closer collaboration between
the United Nations and the African Union and
subregional organizations. To stimulate a more
comprehensive engagement of regional organizations,
we must replace old habits and institutional
protectionism with an open and flexible approach,
adapted to the particular situation at hand.

Allow me to conclude by expressing our
congratulations to the new members of the Council and
our immense gratitude to Gabon and Nigeria for having
represented Africa in such an excellent manner.

