Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): My delegation wishes to thank Mr. Farid
Zarif, the new Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his
briefing on the situation in that country. We wish once
again to express our appreciation to him and his team
for their commitment to peace and stability in Kosovo.

I also welcome the presence here today of the
Ministers of Serbia and Kosovo, and I thank them for
their respective statements.

My delegation will focus its statement on the
security and political aspects of the situation,
particularly in northern Kosovo, which has drawn the
attention of UNMIK and other international missions
operating under resolution 1244 (1999).
The events of July, which we all regretted,
contributed in large measure to the deterioration of the
security situation in northern Kosovo. According to the
report of the Secretary-General before us (S/2011/675),
they have also hindered the continuation of political
dialogue. As recently as yesterday, an incident arose in
which two soldiers of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) were
wounded, which we wholeheartedly deplore. We call
on all parties to exercise restraint and to resort to
dialogue and cooperation to resolve issues of common
interest. Peace and sustainable security in the region
can be established only through such means.

The efforts of the international organizations -
UNMIK, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and KFOR - should be
welcomed, as should the resumption on 21 November
in Brussels of discussions between Belgrade and
Pristina. My delegation believes that these discussions,
pertaining to subjects that are vital to peace and
security in the Balkans, must be strongly supported by
the international community.

Furthermore, the conclusion of an agreement on
customs stamps in Kosovo and the resumption of trade
between Kosovo and Serbia are achievements that
deserve the support of the Council. We call on the
parties to be equally resolved to end the current
impasse with respect to the reopening of the northern
border posts. My country calls on all parties to refrain
from taking any unilateral action that could spark new
tensions.

As we have often said in prior statements, we
remain convinced that finding a settlement in Kosovo
is the primary responsibility of the parties directly
involved. Indeed, it is up to them to establish the
conditions necessary to a peaceful settlement of the
situation, which would contribute greatly to the
implementation of the European perspectives of Serbia
and Kosovo. Lastly, we reiterate that the international
community should continue its financial support for the
protection of cultural and religious heritage and for the
work of the Working Group on Missing persons. It
should also facilitate the return of displaced persons to
their homes.

