Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity
to address the Security Council at today's meeting.
I would also like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
presidency of the Council this month, and to thank you
and the delegation of the United Kingdom for drafting
today's resolution on Libya (resolution 2174 (2014)). I
am also grateful for all the consultations you held on
the resolution.

I would like to say, however, that I do not know why
the Libyan delegation was not invited to participate in
the entire meeting and was not seated in the Chamber
while the resolution was being adopted. Is this a new
practice in the Council, unanimously agreed on by its
members, or was it a decision by the President or by the
Secretariat? The fact is, I do not know why it was done.
Is there a particular message that the President or the
Council wishes to send the Libyan delegation?

I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Tarek Mitri, for his briefing.
Since Mr. Mitri is preparing to leave us, I would like to
commend his savoir-faire, his abilities, his dedication,
his patience and all his efforts to help Libya emerge
from its current difficult situation. I would also like
to emphasize that during his two years as Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) he
has forged friendly relationships and earned the respect
of all who are familiar with UNSMIL's mandate and the
difficult political and security situation in Libya. I am
firmly convinced that the majority of the Libyan people
respect and feel grateful to Mr. Mitri. There can be no
question that all who have met Mr. Mitri consider him
to be a brother and a friend. Since he has decided to
relinquish his job, we can only wish him every success
in his future career. We await his memoirs.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the appointment of Mr. Bernardino Leon to
replace Mr. Mitri. As the European Union's Special
Representative for Libya, he is well acquainted with
the situation and the Mission in Libya. I would like to
congratulate him on the trust the Secretary-General
has placed in him and to reaffirm that the Libyan
Government will make every effort to help him carry
out his tasks.

The Council is of course aware that the situation
in Libya is complicated. However, since 13 July that
situation has become even more complicated and
threatens to turn into a large-scale civil war if it
is not dealt with carefully and, above all, by every
party involved. I have always personally ruled out the
possibility that a civil war might break out, but the
situation has changed. Inthe past, security incidents were
limited, isolated and rare, but the new confrontations
in Tripoli and its environs have taken place between
two armed groups using heavy weapons. Each of the
them has allies in all the other regions of the country.
Unfortunately, those two armed groups were the first
players to take part in the 17 February revolution. They
fought side by side against the dictatorship and tyranny.
They were also the two most heavily armed groups in
the period following the revolution.

Many believe that the power-sharing arrangement
between the two groups and the oversight of Tripoli
and the terrorist acts perpetrated by them against the
country's authorities and their interference in the work
of the National Transitional Council are the main causes
of the present chaos. But it must also be recognized that
one of the two groups currently supports the house of
representatives and the Government, while the other
group is opposed to the house of representatives and
the Government and is calling into question their
legitimacy.

It is not a question of deciding who is right and who
is wrong in the context of the latest confrontations, since
all armed groups in Libya, including army units, are
acting for the most part outside the bounds of the law.
Those groups do not report to the Ministry of Defence
or the Government. But I would just like to say that
the destruction inflicted on State institutions and the
targeting ofthe Tripoli airport and aircraft, Government
headquarters, ministry headquarters and institutions of
State are all acts that could be considered serious crimes
for which their authors and instigators are responsible.
Similarly, those actors have to assume responsibility
for the death of innocent civilians, including young
people who were pushed into harm's way in the war,
and for the displacement of people, the ransacking of
homes, the pillaging of public libraries - all of which
are serious crimes falling under the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court. Indeed, the Court has
commenced inquiries into those crimes.

All armed confrontations, regardless of their
location, create new animosities and new grounds for
reprisal, bringing about a new atmosphere that leaves
no room for patience and tolerance. Unfortunately,
in Libya, most political and religious leaders and the
media are inciting combat and disregard for the law
and for the State institutions. None of them today are
calling for tolerance, love or brotherhood, for refraining
from violence or allowing the principles ofjustice and
equality to prevail. Unfortunately, the principles and
precepts of Islam have not taken hold in the hearts of
the fighters.

There are many strong voices in the media that only
spread rumours, incite violence and misrepresent the
facts. Many of those voices belong to people with two
nationalities, who live outside of the country with their
families, who do not care about those who have died or
about the destruction, who are acting only with their
own personal interests in mind.

There is a crying need to help the Libyan people
disarm the armed groups, especially those possessing
heavy weapons. That is the only way to guarantee that
the carnage will stop and that the lives of young people
being used by the politicians will be spared. Those
who are clinging to power are using young people to
fuel a dirty war that violates all religious and moral
principles. Such principles are the sole guarantee for
keeping the war from being waged in the cities and for
not causing the displacement of populations, which we
have seen in recent weeks.

I believe the only choice the armed groups have,
if they want to lead a normal life and have any kind
of future, is to respect the decision of the house of
representatives to dissolve the armed groups and have
them lay down their arms. In that regard, two things
must happen. First, the groups must begin to understand
the importance of reforming the army. Secondly, the
armed groups must accept the presence of an Arab and
Muslim force, restricted in size, to help them lay down
and destroy their weapons. I believe that when the
house of representatives will have appointed a general
chief of staff from the ranks of the revolutionaries, a
new ethos within the army will be born. I hope that all
the armed groups will work with the new general chief
of staff once the armed groups have been disbanded.

The situation in Tripoli and Benghazi has forced
the house of representatives to hold meetings in places
other than those two cities, which is not contrary to
the Constitutional Declaration, which provides that
the seat of the house of representatives is in the city
of Benghazi but that the Council can meet in other
cities. The international community must help the
Libyan house of representatives and the Government to
maintain control of the State and the entire territory of
the country, through the fight against terrorism and the
disarmament of armed groups.

We welcome the role played by the countries of the
region in helping the Libyan authorities restore peace
and stability. We welcome the outcome of the Foreign
Ministers meeting held in Cairo on 25 August. The final
communique of that meeting sets out several points,
including, first of all, halting all armed confrontation
in order to facilitate the political process and holding a
dialogue with all political parties that have renounced
violence in order to achieve reconciliation and
draft a new national constitution. The communique'
emphasizes the important role of the countries of the
region, including in terms of following the situation
in Libya as it develops and the importance of Libya
participating in all regional and international initiatives
aimed at finding a solution to the crisis.

Second, it calls for all the militias and armed agents
to lay down their weapons through an incremental
approach. The groups must also renounce the military
option in the context ofa consensus among all political
parties to set aside violence through a mechanism
supported by countries of the region.

Third, it underscores that foreign parties must
refrain from exporting weapons to illegal groups in
Libya and it stresses the importance of promoting
oversight of airports and other ports of entry into
Libya. Moreover, the Libyan State is the only party that
can request that weapons be imported, and only after
the approval of the Sanctions Committee.

Fourth, it stresses the importance of fighting
terrorism in all its forms, drying up its sources and
combating transnational organized crime and all illegal
activities.

Fifth, it states the need to promote the role of
legitimate State institutions, including the council of
representatives, establish State institutions, including
the police and the army, and rehabilitate them through
specific programmes aimed at restoring peace. The
objective in that respect is to lay the foundation for
stability and peace and to promote development.

Sixth, it states that support must be provided to the
Libyan Government in order for it to exercise control
over its borders with neighbouring countries through a
comprehensive programme and to in order to put an end
to all illegal export activities.

Seven, it highlights that a mechanism should be
established for taking action when there is a failure to
comply with sanctions, including the sanctions targeted
against individuals and entities who undermine stability
and the political situation.

The resolution just adopted by the Security Council
is a positive milestone that sends a very clear message to
the parties to the conflict. However, the Libyan people
still await active efforts by the international community
in accordance with the plan adopted by the council of
representatives and the Government. That plan, which
I transmitted to the Council yesterday and which I
asked be circulated as an official document, is aimed at
restoring security and stability, dispelling the spectre
of fear and terrorism and enabling people to express
their legitimate views freely without being accused of
taking sides or being threatened with being killed or
kidnapped. Those are practices perpetrated by armed
groups against political figures, human rights workers
and all those who have fled the country because of such
threats. Many have also been killed.

Lastly, I would like to say that the freedom of
expression in Libya has been constrained by the actions
of armed groups and the absence of the rule of law. Our
hope is that all the parties will put the public interest
above their own personal interests.

