I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Ambassador Skoog and Ambassador Kridelka, in his capacity as Facilitator of the format under resolution 2231 (2015), for their briefings. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) remains a central pillar of the global nuclear non-proliferation architecture and multilateral diplomacy. It is fundamental to the maintenance of regional and international peace and security, and its preservation is therefore of critical importance. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its commitment to the full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and we remain strongly in support of the JCPOA. We deeply regret the May 2018 withdrawal of the United States from the agreement. Its subsequent decisions and actions to reimpose sanctions, terminate waivers and issue a notification to the Security Council in August run counter to the requirements and goals of the resolution and the JCPOA. Regarding the August notification, we maintain the position, outlined in the 20 August 2020 joint letter by the members of the group made up of the three African members of the Security Council - the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia - and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, that: "having confirmed its withdrawal from the JCPOA and by not participating in any of the JCPOA structures or subsequent activities, the United States ceased to be a JCPOA participant and is, therefore, ineligible to submit a notification to the Security Council under the terms of resolution 2231 (2015)." We continue to urge the United States to rejoin the JCPOA. Furthermore, we appeal for the lifting all unilateral coercive measures, which not only contravene resolution 2231 (2015) and run counter to the objectives of the JCPOA, but also considerably debilitate the Islamic Republic of Iran's ability to combat the coronavirus disease pandemic. In an interconnected global community, this public health emergency demands international cooperation to ensure that all States are able to effectively and efficiently respond to the challenges. Political disputes must therefore be set aside to foster solidarity and to save lives. We also regret Iran's decision to cease performing several of its nuclear commitments under the JCPOA. We take note that Iran has indicated that those steps are reversible, having undertaken them subsequent to the withdrawal of the United States from the agreement. However, we urge Iran to return to full compliance to fulfil the totality of its obligations and to assist in safeguarding the agreement. In that regard, we recognize Iran's continued cooperation with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in its verification and monitoring activities. Our support for the mandate of the IAEA to promote the safe, secure and peaceful use of nuclear technology is steadfast. Resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA were not only conceived in order to guarantee that Iran's nuclear programme would be used exclusively for peaceful purposes. They are also intended to nurture an environment that promotes and facilitates the development of normal trade and economic relations with the country. As such, the procurement channel must continue to function to ensure that both the resolution and the JCPOA indeed confer the benefits of the relationship that they were envisaged to cultivate. Similarly, the sustained operation of the Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges is essential. It is only through commitment to dialogue and negotiation and the effective fulfilment of all obligations that current differences between JCPOA participant States can be resolved. Furthermore, we urge the entire international community to refrain from taking actions that could exacerbate tensions and deter positive engagement or the full implementation of the agreement. In that connection, we firmly condemn all targeted extrajudicial killings, which are a grave violation of international human rights law, for which perpetrators must be held accountable. We reiterate that the JCPOA remains the only viable path to ensuring a peaceful, comprehensive and long-term solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. The international community must therefore support it and all other multilateral instruments aimed at promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, such as the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. For its part, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its commitment to achieving a nuclear-weapon free world. In conclusion, we say goodbye to Belgium and thank it for its dedicated work as Facilitator of the 2231 format. We also bid farewell to our colleagues from the Dominican Republic, Germany, Indonesia and South Africa. We congratulate South Africa on a well-organized and immensely successful presidency - even though there is still a week to go. We wish South Africa a well-deserved, quiet rest of its presidency. It was certainly an honour to work with everyone this year.
