Mr. Menon (Singapore): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September, and to wish you every success as you and
other members of the Security Council deal with
several difficult issues on the Council's agenda. I also
join other delegations in thanking you for organizing
this public meeting. My delegation would also like to
thank Ambassador Heraldo Munoz, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), for his comprehensive briefing.

In the past fortnight, the world has witnessed
another rash of heinous terrorist acts: the almost
simultaneous destruction of two Russian passenger
aircraft, the abominable hostage-taking in a Russian
school and the bombing outside the Australian
Embassy in Jakarta, Indonesia. We are again reminded
that terrorism is a clear and present danger around the
world. Singapore joins others in strongly condemning
those atrocities. We also express our solidarity and
sympathy with those affected.

Each country must take responsibility for its own
security. But that is not enough. International
cooperation is vital if we are to be able to effectively
confront the threat of transnational terrorism. The
events that we are witnessing are not isolated episodes
of terrorism. They reflect the existence of a terrorist
network with global reach that is capable of organizing
deliberate and prolonged acts of terrorism around the
world.

Al Qaeda has spawned a network of affiliated
terrorist groups around the world that subscribes not
only to its extreme terror tactics but also to its deviant
ideology. In South-East Asia, the extremist regional
network Jemaah Islamiyah, which is Al Qaeda's
principal representative in the region, wants to
establish an Islamic caliphate comprising much of
South-East Asia, including Singapore. Investigations
under way clearly point the finger of suSpicion for the
recent bombing in Jakarta to that group.

We need to work together to deal with the
unprecedented challenge of transnational terrorism.
While the efforts of individual countries are extremely
important, the war against terrorism cannot be won by
the efforts of one country alone. International
networking and cooperation are also essential. An
effective network requires support from individuals
equipped not just with special skills, but also with a
common understanding of the bigger security strategic
picture.

Singapore will continue to support the efforts of
the United Nations in this area. We have, for example,
cooperated fully and in a timely fashion with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Al Qaeda and
Taliban sanctions Committee and its Monitoring Team.
Singapore has worked closely with other countries in
implementing a series of practical anti-terror measures.
Singapore has, and will continue, to work with like-
minded countries from our region and beyond in
intelligence exchanges, capacity-building activities and
counter-terrorism operations.

In Singapore, we have implemented many
security measures to harden the country against the
terrorist threat, including critical infrastructure
protection and border controls. We have also sought to
change the general public's mindset to stress that
security is a paramount, and not a peripheral, issue. We
have mobilized Government agencies, the business
community and the general public to work together in a
concerted national effort against the threat of
transnational terrorism.

In conclusion, we join others in urging countries
to stand firm and not waiver in the campaign against
terrorism, here at the United Nations and domestically.

