The President: I thank Ambassador Konuzin for
the clarifications he has provided.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
briefing by the Chairman of the CTC on the work
of the Committee.

"The Security Council reaffirms that terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations constitutes one of
the most serious threats to peace and security and
that any acts of terrorism are criminal and
unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation,
whenever and by whomsoever committed.

"The Security Council recalls the statement
by its President on 16 October 2003
(S/PRST/2003/l7) and resolution 1535 (2004),
which indicated the Council's intention to review
the structure and activities of the CTC.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation for Ambassador Inocencio Arias'
(Spain) activity as Chairman of the CTC and also
expresses its confidence that the new Chairman,
supported by the new Bureau of the Committee,

will continue the effective coordination of the
CTC in the global fight against terrorism under
the aegis of the United Nations, by monitoring
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

"The Security Council invites the CTC to
pursue its agenda as set out in the work programme
for the CTC's twelfth 90-day period (S/2004/54l)
focusing on practical measures to implement
resolution 1535 (2004) on the revitalization of the
Committee, including by considering the
organizational plan for the newly established
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate.

"The Security Council notes the importance
of continuing the CTC's efforts aimed at
increasing the capabilities of Member States to
combat terrorism; to identify and address the
problems faced by States in implementing
resolution 1373 (2001); to facilitate the provision
of technical assistance adjusted to the countries'
needs; to encourage the largest possible number
of States to become parties to the international
conventions and protocols related to counter-
terrorism, and to strengthen its dialogue and
cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations acting in the areas
outlined by resolution 1373 (2001).

"The Security Council invites the CTC to
accelerate its work on country assessments of
assistance needs that can be shared with
interested donor States and organizations and
welcomes the initiation of preparations for the
first visit by the CTC to a Member State with its
consent in order to enhance the monitoring of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001),
focusing in particular on the assistance that might
be available to address States' needs.

"The Security Council notes that, as of
30 June 2004, 71 States had not met the deadline
for submission of their respective reports to the
CTC as set out in resolution 1373 (2001). It calls
on them urgently to do so, in order to maintain
the universality of response which resolution
1373 (2001) requires.

"The Security Council invites the CTC to
continue reporting on its activities at regular
intervals and expresses its intention to review the
structure and activities of the CTC in October
2004."

This statement will be issued as a document of the The Security Council has thus concluded the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/26. present stage of its consideration of the item on its

. . a enda.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my g

list. The meeting rose at 1.30 pm.
