Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I should like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga, for the briefing he
has just given us and to hail his courage when on
9 September he was confronted with an attack on the
airport in Mogadishu, where he was to meet President
Sharif, accompanied by the Special Representative of
the Chair of the African Union Commission and the
Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). I would also like to thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya and the
Permanent Representative of Somalia for the candour
and the clarity of their statements. I note their
commitment to work for stability in Somalia.

As emphasized by the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2010/447), the security situation in Somalia
is deteriorating in a troubling way. The offensive
launched by extremists in recent weeks has led to
violent clashes in Mogadishu. The militias control
today a significant portion of the capital, threaten the
headquarters of the transitional institutions and are
capable of infiltrating neighbourhoods controlled by
the Transitional Federal Government (TFG). Attacks
against parliamentarians on 24 August and against
representatives of the international community and the
President of Somalia at the airport a week ago, are
evidence of that.

In Somalia the main day-to-day victims of
terrorists are civilians. In the past four months, 1,600
civilians have been admitted to Mogadishu hospitals as
a result of fighting, including 400 children under
5 years of age. Insecurity also undermines the TFG's
reconstruction efforts and harms economic
development in the country.

The capacity of Al-Shabaab to cause harm also
extends beyond the borders of Somalia and involves
the entire region, as shown by the bloody attacks in
Kampala on 11 July. Finally, instability in Somalia is
still fertile ground for the piracy that threatens offshore
sea lanes.

In this context, we welcome the commitment of
the Ugandan and Burundian troops of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which makes it
possible to secure key infrastructure in the capital and
that of the transitional institutions. The entire
international community must continue to support
them. While IGAD and the African Union announced
in July an increase of AMISOM. troops to 8,000, the
assistance that new contributors could provide would
no doubt be critical.

For its part, France is actively contributing to the
efforts of the international community in Somalia. Let
me recall that in 2009 we trained 500 TGF soldiers. We
are working with the European Union to train 2,000
Somali soldiers. Moreover, France has trained 5,600
AMISOM. soldiers over the past three years, and today,
with our European partners, we are financing soldiers
of the force. We are also contributing to the United
Nations logistical support package for AMISOM.

10-5364]
Finally, France is involved in Operation Atalanta to
combat piracy off the coast of Somalia.

Support for Government forces and AMISOM
cannot take place without a genuine strategy
coordinated with the political action of the TFG. The
United Nations has a role to play in this matter.
Politically and on the ground, the support of the
countries of the region is necessary for success.

In the spirit of the Djibouti Agreement the TFG
has in recent months made efforts to broaden its
political base. The rapprochement with Ahlu Sunnah
Wal Jama'a is an important step, which must be
solidified. Work on drafting a constitution is also
proceeding. Still, we expect more from the TFG.
Disputes among the representatives of the transitional
institutions have undermined their action and are
unacceptable. Gestures must be made towards all who
have agreed to renounce violence. Similarly, regular
dialogue must be conducted by the TFG with the
regions of Puntland and Somaliland. Finally, less than
a year before the end of the transitional period, it is
time for the TFG to prove that it is capable of offering
basic services to the people: health care, education,
justice and security. In all of these areas, needs remain
considerable.

The United Nations is currently assisting the
efforts of the TFG. At the same time, it could adapt to
make its action more effective. The United Nations is
currently conducting in Somalia various and
complementary activities - political, logistical,
humanitarian and development-related - through 25
separate bodies. We support enhanced integration of
these various actions under the direct authority of the
Special Representative, so that they can be more
coherent, as proposed by the Secretary-General. We
will carefully study the specific proposals of the
Secretary-General on this matter. The initial measures
of coordination - including the establishment of a
Senior Policy Group bringing together the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the Resident
and Humanitarian Coordinator and the Director of the
United Nations Support Office for AMISOM. - are a
first step, but they must go further, because our
credibility is at stake.

We also encourage, as soon as possible and in
particular once the security situation permits it, the
establishment of a United Nations office in Mogadishu,
so as to mark the continuity and involvement of the
United Nations in Somalia. In this regard, we strongly
encourage the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to continue his efforts to ensure this United
Nations presence in Somalia, as the Secretary-General
has asked him to do.

With respect to piracy, we all agree that we need
to find solutions on land; we also need to pursue our
action at sea. The debate held on 25 August (see S/PV.6374) enabled us to take a look at options
proposed by the Secretary-General for prosecuting and
imprisoning arrested pirates. The recommendations of
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on these
issues, Mr. Jack Lang, should enable us to find a
solution that is both effective and equitable, for States
in the region as well as States involved at sea.

The coming months will be critical for Somalia as
the transitional period draws to a close, so I would like
to assure Mr. Mahiga that he will have the support and
confidence of France as he carries out the complex job
he has undertaken.

