Mr. Annabi: There have been a lot of questions
raised by members of the Council, and I will try to
answer as best I can. I want to apologize in advance ifI
do not reply with the degree of detail that some
delegations might expect. This is my third briefing to
the Council today, and it is not always easy for me to
master every detail on every operation on a given day.

I was asked about the status of the United Nations
Trust Fund. Contributions to this Trust Fund amount
today to $28.6 million. A total of $14.1 million out of
these $28.6 have either been spent, meaning disbursed,
or committed to various priority activities, including
the reconstruction of public buildings, which is of
course a very important requirement given the level of
destruction that took place in the wake of the
consultation last year.

As regards the situation of the World Bank Trust
Fund, that Fund has received a total of $38.4 million
out of the $147 million that were pledged during the
Tokyo conference at the end of last year. The level of
expenditure remains low and represents about $2
million at this time, but now that the Bank has
completed the general procedures regarding the
initiation of some of the projects that are foreseen, we
expect that the disbursement will increase fairly
quickly in the coming weeks and months. In fact, a
number of agreements with the World Bank totalling
$30 million to $40 million are near to being finalized
in the health, agriculture and education sectors, where
specific projects have been identified. We also
understand that projects to be funded under the first
instalment of the $29.8 million infrastructure project of
the World Bank, which was agreed in March with the
Asian Development Bank, are underway, and that the
first emergency road contracts, representing some $4.5
million, will be mobilized in June, next month.

Finally, on this particular issue, let me say that
we hope that the Lisbon donor meeting, which will take
place next month, will provide a good opportunity to
take stock of where we are in terms of implementing
these rehabilitation and reconstruction projects and to
assess what further steps will need to be taken. I also
wish to assure members of the Council that we have
done our best at this end to try and cut through some of
the red tape to facilitate disbursements. In fact, the
Comptroller had authorized the World Bank to borrow
money from the United Nations Trust Fund pending
completion of its own procedures regarding the
initiation of the implementation of some of the projects
that were scheduled to be funded from its own Trust
Fund.

The second important issue raised was the issue
of benchmarks on the path to independence and the
longer-term vision of UNTAET in this regard. I
mentioned in my briefing last month some of the
benchmarks that have been identified and on which
consultations with the East Timorese are continuing. I
think it is important to understand that the
implementation of these benchmarks touches on very
important issues for the East Timorese. Some of them
have strong views on some of these issues and we
need, of course, to respect their views so that, when we
do come forward with a more elaborated presentation
of these benchmarks, we do so with their support and
cooperation.

Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello will probably be able
to come to New York following the Lisbon donor
meeting next month. I believe that we, and he in
particular, will have more to say on this subject at that
time. But again, I want to repeat that these issues
cannot be decided independently by UNTAET and that
we need to work with the East Timorese and to respect
their views. I think that an important timeline in this
regard will be the congress of the National Council of
Timorese Resistance, which is expected to be held in
August and which, I think and hope, will help the
Timorese to come to a more precise definition of their
views in this regard.

The next question related to the security situation
inside East Timor and the level of criminality. The
question was: Is this criminality related to the
economic situation and to the social dislocation which
East Timor has experienced, or does it have a political
character? I think the answer is that it is essentially
linked to the economic situation; to the very high
degree of unemployment, which stood at some 80 per
cent when UNTAET was established; and to the very
deep social disruption and dislocation that have
resulted in the country from the events of last
September.

I was also asked about the division of labour
between the military component of UNTAET and the
civilian police component. The division there is the
same as what we have in other theatres where we are
present. The police are in charge of the basic law and
order functions and, in the case of East Timor as in the
case of Kosovo, we have been given direct law
enforcement responsibilities. At the same time, the
military component provides and ensures the Wider
security environment in which the police component
can carry out its functions. The military component can
also be called upon, of course, to provide back-up to
the police should situations develop with which the
police are not able to cope. This is the same set-up as
we have in Kosovo and Bosnia and that we have had in
other peacekeeping operations.

There have also been questions on the reduction
of the military component of UNTAET. As I indicated,
UNTAET is proposing to carry out an initial reduction
of some 500 troops between now and October, which
would be pulled out of the eastern sector of East Timor,
which has been fairly quiet. This fits, of course, into a
wider programme, a wider plan, that would foresee, if
the security situation remains stable, further reductions
by next April. It is envisaged at this time that there
could be a total reduction of 50 per cent of the troops
in Sector East by April and a further reduction by the
summer of 2001. But all of this is predicated upon a
stable security situation.

UNTAET will continue to review the situation
and to propose and implement reductions in other
sectors if it assesses that that has become possible. We
do not believe in micromanaging or directing this
process from here. We believe that the force on the
ground should have a reasonable degree of autonomy
in this regard and the capacity to propose the necessary
additional reductions in due course.

There was also a question on the current efforts
of UNTAET to train the local Timorese police force.
This is, of course, one of the two main tasks of the
UNTAET police component, the first being to ensure
the maintenance of law and order and the second being
to develop an East Timorese police force that can take
over from UNTAET in due course. The East Timor
police college, as I may have mentioned last month,
opened on 27 March and the first group of trainees is
scheduled to graduate from the school on 2 June, so the
process of training the future Timorese police forces is
under way. Under present plans, it is foreseen that a
total of 3,000 East Timorese will have been trained and
will graduate from the police school by the end of next
year. In the meantime, UNTAET is also working with
what is called the "police assistance group", which is
composed of former East Timorese police officers who
are assisting UNTAET, after being retrained as
necessary.

There was also a question on the present state of
payment of assessed contributions to the UNTAET
budget. I must confess that I do not have that at my
fingertips. There is a monthly publication issued by the
comptroller that provides detailed information on the
status of each peacekeeping account and can be easily
consulted. What I can say is that, of course, delays in
payment of assessed contributions make it difficult for
us to reimburse troop contributors in a timely manner.
This has been a daunting problem over the last few
years because, if I may say so, troop contributors get
punished twice: they go out to the field and take the
risks that some of these operations have to face, and
then at the same time they do not get reimbursed in a
timely manner. So I can only hope that the UNTAET
budget is current, but we will need to look at that
monthly report.

I was also asked to provide information on the
ongoing consultation and discussions between
UNTAET and the National Council of Timorese
Resistance (CNRT) on the future of the Armed Forces
for the National Liberation of East Timor (Falintil). I
mentioned last month that the East Timorese had
clearly indicated the wish to have a security force in
East Timor that would not be part of the police and
would not be a gendarmerie-type force. In this regard,
Xanana Gusmao has written to the Secretary-General,
who has assured him that the United Nations would
respect the decision that the East Timorese will take on
how best to ensure the security of the country when it
becomes independent. In other words, we have
recognized that an independent East Timor will have
the sovereign right to establish a security force, but at
the same time it is important that, prior to the
formation of such a force, its framework be defined in
accordance with the principles of civilian oversight,
democratic accountability, universal recruitment and
international human rights norms and standards.

We also feel that a decision as to the timing,
process and setting up of such a force would need to be
taken in full consideration of the findings of the study
that will be undertaken by the Kings College in
London. The Kings College has offered to carry out a
study on the possible options in this regard, and the
Timorese have welcomed this initiative. This study will
be conducted by a multinational team. It is expected
that it will take about six weeks and will begin fairly
soon. It is agreed with the Timorese that, on that basis,
the various options will be considered and discussed.
The Secretary-General has, of course, drawn their
attention to the fact that the decision to establish a
security force will have important long-term external
and domestic implications that need to be viewed in the
context of regional security, the future constitutional
framework and its possible impact on the economic
situation of the country. So this is where things stand
on this issue.

As regards the registration of refugees now being
carried out by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the purpose of
this exercise is to have a reliable View of the exact
number of refugees, the composition of the families,
their occupation or former occupation and place of
origin in East Timor. This will provide a data base that
will be used for purposes of assistance and for the
determination and promotion of durable solutions,
which are, of course, either voluntary repatriation, or
resettlement in West Timor or other regions of
Indonesia.

On the question as to whether UNHCR will be
trying to ascertain the wishes of the East Timorese, the
answer is yes, UNHCR will try to do this, if and when
circumstances permit. But we have to remember that
the security conditions prevailing in the camps, to
which I alluded in my briefing and which clearly
remain precarious, do not always make that possible.
UNHCR expects to complete this registration process
by the end of June. UNHCR is continuing its efforts to
promote voluntary repatriation on the one hand, and it
is continuing, on the other hand, to discuss with the
Indonesian Government and other agencies concerned
the preparation of a local integration plan for those
who will decide to remain in West Timor. My UNHCR
colleagues tell me that they expect this plan to be ready
by July of this year.

Another question relates to what is being done in
East Timor to ensure that the refugees can return
safely. This is, of course, arranged locally with the
representatives of the Timorese, with the local
communities. We ensure that UNTAET police are
deployed in those areas, and there is also monitoring of
the returnees both by UNHCR and UNTAET once they
return. There have been a few incidents when some of
the returnees have been suspected, rightly or wrongly,
by the local population of belonging to, or having been
active in, the militia, but, by and large, that process has
so far proceeded without too many difficulties.

There was also a question on the status of
national reconciliation and how that is proceeding.
Clearly, the best expression of national reconciliation
in East Timor is the National Consultative Council.
The National Consultative Council includes not only
the CNRT, which is itself a broad umbrella
organization for several political parties, but also
includes representatives from the pro-autonomy
parties. You will recall that three seats had been
reserved for the pro-autonomy parties in the National
Consultative Council. Two of those have been filled.
The third one has not yet been filled, because the party
concerned was somewhat controversial, to say the
least, and emotions in some quarters in East Timor are
still running high after last year's tragic events.

There was a question on the recent agreement
with the World Bank in the health sector. I must
confess that I do not have detailed information on that
today, butI can tell the Council the following about the
health sector: some 80 health facilities have been
opened throughout East Timor. These include 50
mobile clinics, involving some 838 health workers. The
interim health authority that has been established for
East Timor is now staffed with 29 East Timorese
professionals, 13 district health officers and seven
international staff. It is envisaged that each district will
have a lead non-governmental organization in the
health field, which will work in that district and carry
out programmes on behalf of the Transitional
Administration. At the present time, Medecins sans
Frontieres is present in a number of districts in East
Timor and has the largest presence among non-
governmental organizations in the territory.

I think that covers some of the main issues that
have been raised. Again, I apologize ifI have not been
able to provide detailed answers to all the questions
that have been raised.

