Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of the His Highness Sheikh Khalifa
Bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the United Arab Emirates, I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for holding this important meeting
and for inviting representatives of Member States
to participate in the debate, at which the Council
adopted resolution 2178 (2014), on the flow of foreign
fighters from around the world to join foreign terrorist
organizations.

The acts of terrorists organizations, which have
recently seized large numbers of cities and villages and
directly engaged in fuelling conflicts and committing
grave violations against innocent people, including
assaults, kidnappings, displacements and mass murders,
serve to confirm our belief that there is a common
threat facing all Member States that requires a united
effort to take strong and immediate measures.

The threat we face today has been exacerbated
recently by the lack of deterrent actions in the past. Two
decades ago, we faced the threat of Al-Qaida and other
terrorist organizations whose acts were multiplying
across the Arabian Peninsula and beyond. Today we
continue to suffer from the same threats, and even more
serious ones, due to the emergence of various forms of
violence that are not limited to committing murder and
kidnapping and causing displacement, they also include
sexual violence against women as a prime target, which
is always overlooked during talk about the crimes
committed by those organizations.

The acts committed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) in both Iraq and Syria are the
largest proof of that and have become a source of
concern for the United Arab Emirates. Therefore, we
appeal to the international community to continue its
efforts to eliminate a principal element contributing to
terrorism - the recruitment of foreign fighters - and to
ensure that the effort becomes part ofa comprehensive
strategy aimed at eliminating other elements that fuel
terrorism.

The United Arab Emirates strongly condemns the
recruitment of foreign fighters and related financing
activities. We consider such operations one of the most
dangerous elements that contribute to international
terrorism. We also emphasize that the dangerous
proportions of the issue are not limited to areas of
conflict, but also include safe areas from which those
fighters are recruited. The United Arab Emirates
therefore welcomes the resolution adopted today
and regards it as an important and crucial document.
Addressing this threat cannot be done through
security and military measures alone. It also requires
the international community to pursue a unified,
comprehensive strategy that prevents the recruitment
of terrorist elements through the following strategies.

First, we must strengthen international cooperation
at all levels, particularly in exchanging information on
recruitment campaigns for young foreign fighters and
on their movements. It is also important to establish
clear and specific criteria for regulating that process.

Secondly, it is important to tighten control over
social networks, which are used in attracting a larger
number of deluded youths to achieve the vicious goals
under religious slogans, which have no connection with
any divine faith. The United Arab Emirates is currently
conducting a study on the mechanisms for preventing
terrorist organizations from using social networks in
recruitment.

Thirdly, we must tighten national legislation and
laws to ensure the criminalization, prosecution and
punishment of the people involved. In that context, I
would like to point out that the United Arab Emirates
recently adopted a strict federal law to punish those
found guilty of inciting terrorism or who have carried
out terrorist acts.

Fourthly, we need to take all the necessary steps
to combat acts of violent extremism, including by
promoting educational and rehabilitation programmes
for unemployed youths to shield them from incitement
and recruitment by terrorist campaigns. On our part,
the United Arab Emirates is committed to combating
violent extremism and its related beliefs and terrorist
acts and coordinates through its membership in the
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum with the other
partners to ensure that their territories are not used for
disseminating terrorist acts and other related crimes. By
hosting the Hedayah Centre, the United Arab Emirates
is also contributing to the international community in
the area of sharing best practices for countering violent
extremism in all its forms. At the same time, we will
work on strengthening preventive policies through the
establishment of centres for the rehabilitation of people
affected by extremist and terrorist ideologies.

Finally, we commend the efforts of the Council in
adopting previous resolutions pertaining to the subject
within a short period, most recently in resolution 2170
(2014), which condemns the recruitment of foreign
fighters by ISIL and the Nusra Front in Iraq and Syria.
That shows that the Security Council has a clear
strategy on fighting terrorism. We also hope that the
serious efforts of the Council will include allowing
Member States to participate in its discussions in order
to ensure that our efforts for combating terrorism are
effectively coordinated.

