Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on presiding over this important meeting, which
reflects the significance of the relationship between the
United Nations and the African Union. I also appreciate
the valuable briefing of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, who described in depth the
considerable ongoing progress and development in the
relations between the two organizations concerning
the implementation of the framework agreement
signed by them in April 2017. I also thank Ms. Fatima
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations, for her comprehensive briefing
on the joint efforts under way in certain African States
dealing with conflicts.

With regard to the field Visit of the Security Council
members to Juba and Addis Ababa few days ago, I
would like to thank Ambassadors Matjila and Craft,
who led the meetings, and all those who contributed
to the good preparation of the visit in Addis Ababa in
view of the fruitful and constructive meetings between
the members of the Security Council and of the African
Union Peace and Security Council. We are aware of the
high levels of cooperation, coordination and partnership
between the two Councils, as was clearly demonstrated
in the meetings on matters of mutual interest, as well
as the genuine desire of members of both Councils to
further promote closer relations.

As described by the Secretary-General in his latest
report (S/2019/759) on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union on
issues of peace and security in Africa, the systematic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union has made significant progress in terms
of its orderly and predictable nature and through the
joint strategy to address complex challenges to peace
and security in Africa. That is an excellent example of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, which is particularly commendable
given that Africa's concerns permeate most United
Nations meetings and activities, as reflected in the
work of all its organizations, agencies and programmes.
We emphasize the importance of promoting bilateral
cooperation and partnership between the League of
Arab States and the African Union, as well as trilateral
cooperation between the two organizations and the
United Nations, in order to reach peaceful solutions
and put an end to conflicts - for instance, in Libya
and Somalia.

Peace operations represent the most important
facet of cooperation between the two organizations,
particularly between both Councils. The success ofthose
operations is a fundamental issue for effectively finding
solutions to peace and security challenges in Africa.
That is evident in the fact that seven of the 14 active
United Nations peace operations are deployed on the
African continent, with a total of 80,000 peacekeepers.
We call for the preservation and consolidation of our
achievements, in particular the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, to ensure that those
operations become more efficient, better equipped,
stronger and safer. That requires clear mandates with
sustainable, continuous and predictable funding.

We commend the commitment of the African Union
to covering 25 per cent of the costs of peace operations
in Africa on a permanent basis, as well as the fact that
the Peace Fund currently has $124 million at its disposal,
the highest amount since the establishment of the Fund
in 1993. That proves the real commitment of States to
energizing the Fund. We hope to see the adoption of a
Council draft resolution that would allow the financing
of peace operations led by the African Union and
authorized by the Security Council, especially given
the African Union's serious intention to implement the
2018 joint declaration in order to establish frameworks
for joint planning, respect for human rights, conduct,
discipline and accountability in African Union peace
operations, in accordance with resolutions 2320 (2016)
and 2378 (2017).

We believe that regional economic commissions
contribute to facilitating the partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations in the prevention
and resolution of armed conflict. We welcome the
ongoing consultations between the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union and regional economic
commissions, and we call for them to continue.

In parallel, many other developments merit
highlighting. There is the dawn of a new era in the
Sudan, the historic reconciliation between Ethiopia
and Eritrea and the gradual drawdown of joint United
Nations-African Union operations in Darfur, which
is expected to be fully completed in 2020. Those are
all positive factors that we hope will continue. We
reaffirm the importance of the Security Council
continuing to support the partnership between the two
Organizations in order to achieve more progress with a
view to achieving the ultimate goal of peace, security
and stability. To that end, we support all efforts by the
Secretary-General through his Special Envoys.

We wish to recall the historic and privileged
relationship between the State of Kuwait and the
African continent. We have established cooperation and
partnership with Africa through our observer status at
the African Union. That relationship motivates us to
continue to support the African Union in achieving the
objectives ofits Agenda 2063, in harmony with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. It also motivates
us to implement the African Union's Silencing the
Guns in Africa initiative, which was highlighted by the
Security Council in its resolution 2457 (2019), in order
to establish peace, stability and security in Africa.

