Mr. Chikoti (Angola): Since I am the first
member of the Angolan Government to be on
American soil since 1 February, allow me to express
my condolences to the American Government and
people on the disaster and loss of life sustained in the
space shuttle Colombia accident that took place on that
day.

Allow me also to congratulate you, Sir, in your
capacity as President of the Council during this
important meeting. We hope that, under your country's
presidency, we will meet the enormous challenges
facing us. I should like also to extend our thanks to
France for the outstanding manner in which it
conducted the Council's meetings during the month of
January.

It is, at this crucial moment, important for me and
for my Government to recognize the important
initiative taken last week by President George Bush to
send Secretary of State Colin Powell to share with us
today the compelling intelligence information of which
we have just been apprised.

The question of Iraq has for 20 years been at the
centre of the concerns of the international community.
In the 1980s, Angola expressed concern at the war
waged against Iran, and later joined in the universal
condemnation of the invasion of Kuwait and took part
in the joint action by the Security Council and the
international community against Iraq's armament
programme. We all know - and it is our conviction -
that, had its goals been reached, it would have led to a
global catastrophe of unimaginable consequences.

This gathering therefore constitutes a particularly
important moment in this joint action. Reports and
clarifications were provided to the Council by weapons
inspectors a few days ago, and earlier today we
received supplementary information from the United
States Administration through Secretary Powell
concerning the situation in Iraq.

We welcome the fact that this information was
presented directly to the Security Council through the
respected and authoritative voice of Secretary Powell.
We deem this development to be a very significant
contribution that will surely enable the Security
Council to take the important decisions which the
world expects with an even greater sense of
responsibility and of purpose.

The pertinent information presented by Secretary
of State Colin Powell adds new elements which should
make clear the importance of continuing to monitor the
situation and of being prepared to take a position
within the framework of the Security Council.

The provisions contained in resolution 1441
(2002), in particular in operative paragraph 10, request
Member States to give full support to the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and to the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in the discharge of
their mandates, including by providing any information
related to prohibited programmes or other aspects of
their mandates; we have just seen an example of this.

Following the presentation of the reports of
UNMOVIC and the IAEA, we expressed our
appreciation - which we reiterate today - to Mr. Blix
and to Mr. ElBaradei, as well to the inspection teams in
Iraq, for their efforts and commitment in the discharge
of the important mandate entrusted to them by the
Council.
My delegation recognized, as did the inspectors,
the cooperation of Iraq in providing the necessary
assistance for the establishment of the inspections
infrastructure, whose importance should not be
minimized. However, we expect and strongly urge Iraq
to do much more. Iraq's substantive cooperation with
inspections is an obligation under the terms of
resolution 1441 (2002). Only through such cooperation
can Iraq prove beyond any doubt that it is ready to
embark on a programme for the elimination of its
missile, chemical and biological weapons.

The Security Council needs a clear and
unambiguous answer from Iraq to the outstanding
questions raised by the inspectors.

It is our assessment that the strengthening of the
inspections and the enlargement of their scope is an
important development and an additional opportunity
to enhance their efficiency. The inspections - if they
enjoy the full political support of the Security Council
and of the international community, and if adequate
time is allowed for thoughtful action - can be a
powerful tool in our common endeavour to meet the
objective of disarming Iraq, averting war and
reinforcing international peace and security.

The overall picture of the situation, in our view,
makes clear the need for the continuation of the
inspections programme. In this respect, we urge Iraq,
the United Nations inspectors and those countries with
the means to do so to pursue their efforts urgently and
in a more aggressive and cooperative way, so that
information can be obtained that is conducive to an
accurate identification of weapons of mass destruction
and their elimination, in accordance with the pertinent
Security Council resolutions.

In this context, it is relevant to call the attention
of the world to the example set by the African
countries, which, through the Pelindaba agreement.
decided to free the continent of weapons of mass
destruction.

We deem it essential for the Security Council, in
order to preserve peace, to maintain its unity and to
continue to extend its political support to the
inspections. This must be done with determination and
perseverance, in order to attain the goals set by the
international community with respect to Iraq.

The question of Iraq poses a real threat to
international peace and security. However, we still
believe that a peaceful solution can be found. My
country, Angola, is living testimony of the disastrous
consequences of war. More than 2 million people died.
There are 4 million internally displaced persons, more
than 80,000 persons mutilated, more than 100,000
orphans, and a total and unimaginable destruction of
the physical infrastructure. That reality, so vividly
present in our minds, leads us to ponder the severe
consequences of a war.

Directly concerning the subject matter under
consideration today, I would like to refer to the
pertinent paragraph of the declaration just adopted by
the summit meeting of the African Union Central
Organ, held in Addis Ababa, affirming that

"a military confrontation in Iraq would be a
destabilizing factor for the whole region and
would have far-reaching economic and security
consequences for all the countries of the world
and, particularly, for those of Africa [and the
Middle East]."

My delegation therefore thinks that we should
persevere on the road towards a peaceful resolution of
the question of Iraq. War would demonstrate a failure
of our multilateral system based on respect for the
United Nations Charter by all nations.

The option we support is to follow the path that
allows an effective role for the Security Council within
the framework of a multilateral approach to the
question of peacefully disarming Iraq. We believe that
at the present stage we have not exhausted all the
options before we accept the inevitability of a war.

