Mr. Ruzicka (Slovakia): I thank the French
presidency for organizing today's debate and all
the briefers for their presentations earlier. I would
like to align myself with the statement made by the
representative of the European Union.

I would like to mention some numbers: 2 million,
6 million, 300 million, 1 billion. These are unbelievable
numbers. One may ask what connection these numbers
have with today's debate. According to the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development, at least
2 million children have died in the past decade as a result
of wars. Many have been targeted as non-combatants or
killed in action as soldiers. Some 6 million have been
disabled or seriously injured, with many more suffering
from disease, malnutrition or sexual violence. The
European Commission's Humanitarian Aid and Civil
Protection Department has stated that conflict-affected
areas are home to 1 billion children - 1 billion - of
whom 300 million are under the age of five.

In recent decades, the proportion of civilian
casualties in armed conflicts has increased dramatically
and is now estimated at more than 90 per cent. About
half of these victims are children. We join the Security
Council in its strong condemnation of ongoing violence
against civilian populations, notably women and
children. Since 2009, we have witnessed a deplorable
string of violence and abuse of children. The immediate
cessation of Boko Haram's hostilities and abuses,
which are now shockingly spreading outside Nigeria
and brutally affecting neighbouring Chad, Cameroon
and Niger, is absolutely necessary, together with the
unconditional release of all abducted civilians and
children, including the 276 schoolgirls abducted in
Chibok, Borno State in April 2014.

We hear statements about children being killed,
maimed, abducted, sexually abused, recruited and used
by armed forces. Victims of such crimes lack adequate

assistance and, in most cases, the perpetrators remain
unpunished. Many red lines have been crossed. There
are no words to describe the suffering of these children.
In fact, no words are necessary; action must be taken.
In that regard, the role of the International Criminal
Court is indispensable, and the United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, should further examine
ways to assist the Court in fulfilling its mandate.
Accountability is a crucial element, and we have to find
ways to better exploit mechanisms designed to enforce
it.

But there is one question that bothers me very
much. Why are young people affected by and attracted
to radicalism? We see many young people turning their
sympathies to radical movements regardless of their
social background. What are we doing wrong? Perhaps
a safe home, safety, education and prospects for living
in a stable society are the areas we should concentrate
on when speaking about a better future for children
who survive armed conflict.

With regard to safety and security, in the annual
report of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, special
emphasis is given to attacks on schools and hospitals.
Schools and hospitals should create safe heavens, and
not serve as targets.

Education is another key word. In the Millennium
Development Goals, the world community set a
deadline of 2015 for universal primary education and
for the elimination of gender disparities at all levels of
education. But we have to go much farther.

Let me conclude by expressing the hope that there
will be a light at the end ofa tunnel. In March 2014, ajoint
initiative "Children, Not Soldiers" was launched by the
Office of the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict and UNICEF, with the aim of ending
and preventing the recruitment and use of children by
Government armed forces in conflicts by 2016. As the
Special Representative Leila Zerrougui has assessed,
in that campaign's first year progress has been steady.
The campaign has received broad support and achieved
results that are making a difference in children's lives.
Slovakia applauds and fully supports it.

However, the campaign's first year has also shown
that more can be done. The international community is
obliged to assist the States affected to re-establish their
entire institutional system, but most importantly to
update and reform so that all citizens may feel secure,
free and with a promising future. Emphasis will have to

be put on complete reconstruction and transformation
of societies, including deep, conceptual and meaningful
reform of their armed forces, law enforcement bodies
and the entire security sector. Violence against any
child now will negatively and irreversibly affect at least
the next two generations. We should and must take
action to avoid this fat for our children, grandchildren
and great-grandchildren.

