Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Allow me to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this open meeting. At the same time I wish
to thank Ambassador Arias for his briefing on the work
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).

Over the last three months, the Committee has
achieved significant results in its work, which merits
full acknowledgement from the Security Council. The
Committee focused its deliberations on reports
submitted by Member States on their implementation
of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and has
moved on to stage B in its deliberations on a number of
countries.

At the same time the Committee is continuing to
intensify its efforts in providing assistance to the fight
against terrorism and encouraging its experts to
actively engage Governments of Member States to
learn about the difficulties they experience in
implementing the resolution and the assistance they
need, and to follow up on the provision of assistance.

On 7 October, the Committee, in conjunction with
the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism of the
Organization of American States, organized a second
special meeting with national regional and subregional
organizations, thereby further enhancing the
communication and cooperation among various
organizations in the fight against terrorism.

China supports the CTC's ninth 90-day work
programme. We believe the CTC should further
intensify its efforts in providing assistance to the fight
against terrorism, and to take all possible measures to
meet the assistance requests of the large numbers of
developing countries.

We hope the new requirements in this context, as
reflected in the ninth 90-day work programme will be
effectively complied with. We support the CTC in its
efforts to further enhance its communication and
cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations, while ensuring the CTC's
leading role in the worldwide fight against terrorism.
The authority and legitimacy of the CTC, established
pursuant to Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter,
are irreplaceable.

Terrorism remains a major threat against
international peace and security. Combating terrorism
is an arduous and complex long-term task. In order to
more effectively combat terrorism, the international
community, in the fight against it, should abide by the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
and the fundamental norms of international law.

The fight against terrorism should address its
symptoms as well as its causes, focusing on eradication
of the root causes that breed terrorism. For this
purpose, there should be a comprehensive approach
encompassing economic, political and social
dimensions. In particular, efforts should be made to
solve the conflict in question, and to actively help
developing countries eradicate poverty.

We also believe there should be no double
standards in the fight against terrorism. All terrorist
organizations should be targeted relentlessly, but at the
same time, the fight against terrorism should not be
used as a pretext to wilfully expand the scope of such
combat. International cooperation should also be
enhanced in the fight against terrorism.

China supports the leading role of the United
Nations in the fight against terrorism worldwide. We
support strengthening the role of the CTC. We will
continue to work with the Chairman and the members
of the Committee to advance the work of the CTC to a
new stage.

