Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): I join previous speakers in
congratulating you, Sir, the very able and skilful
Ambassador of Bahrain, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. My
congratulations are also addressed to the Ambassador of the
United States on his excellent work as President of the
Security Council for the month of November.

It was the expectation of the international community
that the end of the cold war would lead to a lower level of
regional conflict. Unfortunately, however, such conflicts,
especially in the form of intra-State strife, have registered
a substantial increase during the past few years. It is
therefore of the utmost importance for the Organization to
be able to prevent and contain the resurgence and escalation
of conflicts, with their attendant consequences.

Hence, the issues of the maintenance of peace and
security and post-conflict peace-building continue to be
the raison d 'etre of the United Nations, the reason for its
very existence, especially in the changing context of the
regional and international milieu. Beyond doubt, all
Member States share the view that the pursuit of peace,
security, development and prosperity is of paramount
importance as we approach the new millennium. My
delegation considers that discussion on these interlinked
issues should be carried out within the framework of the
Organization's agenda and under the respective
competence of the various organs. Meanwhile, we need to
devise a more viable system of collective security, as
envisioned in the Charter, in which all Member States can
participate in accordance with their respective capabilities.
In that way, the burden of making the world safer for all
would be equitably shared by all.

In this context, we have noted the recent proposal by
the Secretary-General to broaden the role of the Security
Council by invoking Article 65 of the Charter because of
the increasing need for the Council to be provided with
accurate and relevant information on economic, social and
humanitarian crises that threaten international peace and
security. We share his view that only efforts to resolve
underlying socio-economic, cultural and humanitarian
problems can place the achievement of peace on a durable
foundation. However, Indonesia deems it proper and
appropriate that any action by the Council in this sphere
must be taken in conjunction with the Charter-mandated
role and responsibilities of the wider membership, which
is reflected in the General Assembly. This position is
analogous to the one taken by the Non-Aligned
Movement at its summit meeting held in Durban, South
Africa, last September, which held that without prejudice
to the competence of the other principal organs of the
United Nations with regard to their respective roles in
post-conflict peace-building, the Assembly must have the
key role in decision-making.

Maintaining peace and security, whether in a conflict
area or a potential conflict area, needs concerted and
coordinated efforts by international and regional
organizations and, more importantly, by the disputing
parties. If these activities are conducted within the
framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter, regional
organizations can make a distinct contribution to the
Security Council's efforts to seek peaceful solutions. It is
also an undeniable truism that in efforts to resolve
conflicts and to maintain peace and stability, regional
organizations, for geographical, historical and other
reasons, are uniquely placed to propose viable solutions.

 

Close cooperation and coordination between the regional
organizations and the Security Council could substantially
enhance the prospects for the political settlement of disputes
without intervening in matters that are deemed to be the
internal affairs of States.

Concurrently, we should also recognize that
prolonging conflicts, especially those involving armaments,
only brings increased hardship and suffering to the people.
Of equal importance is that neither the United Nations nor
regional organizations can impose preventive measures on
conflicting States or parties without their consent. Such
endeavours, if undertaken at the request of the parties or
Governments concerned, have a greater chance of success.
The request for, or at least acquiescence in, action by
regional or international organizations is conditio sine qua
non from the legal as well as the political perspective.

Indonesia is fully aware that the 16 United Nations
peacekeeping missions dispatched during 1998, comprising
14,500 civilian and military personnel from 77 countries,
including Indonesia, primarily deal with conflicts within
States. These conflicts have resulted in half the world's
war-related fatalities and have displaced millions of people.
Nevertheless, it is of utmost importance that the traditional
concept of peacekeeping operations be maintained. Such
operations can be and still are useful if they are undertaken
with the support of the overall membership of the
Organization, are launched with the consent of all the
parties involved and have a precise and realistic mandate
within a specific time-frame setting out the main political
objectives. It is equally essential that they be in full
conformity with the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter, such as sovereignty and non-interference
in internal affairs, as well as the recommendations and
conclusions of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations.

The transition from peacekeeping to post-conflict
peace- building is critical. It must be aimed at eliminating
the factors that contributed to the strife and, more
importantly, that contribute to the risk of a resumption of
conflict, in order to create conditions more conducive to
reconstruction and rehabilitation. It also calls for measures
to ensure the security of civilians and an adequate
infrastructure to more clearly define post-conflict
peace-building needs and ways of meeting them.

In this regard, it is pertinent to note that the
maintenance of peace calls for a well-structured
programme, especially in the complex task of post-conflict
peace-building, which requires a comprehensive and
concerted approach encompassing, among other things,
the transformation of armed movements into civilian
mechanisms, the restructuring of the police and armed
forces, strengthening the national judicial system,
demining and, most important of all, national
reconciliation through confidence- building measures, as
well as international support for elections, the eradication
of poverty and the promotion of democracy, sustainable
development and respect for human rights. It is of crucial
importance that, in the implementation of such steps by
the international community, equal attention should be
given to all post-conflict regions in providing aid and
assistance, while the form of development chosen by the
country should be respected.

In conclusion, the maintenance of peace and security
and post-conflict peace-building encompass many aspects,
including economic development and social and
humanitarian aspects, rather than solely military ones, and
hence should not be the exclusive responsibility of the
Security Council. They call for a multifaceted approach
that requires the effective integration of the political,
security, socio-economic and humanitarian dimensions.
They should complement and be harmonious with each
other. This calls for greater coordination and interaction
between the General Assembly and the Security Council,
which would serve greater unity of purpose and coherence
of efforts.

