Mr. Elbakly (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish, on behalf of my delegation, to welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United Kingdom
to New York, and to express our pleasure at seeing you,
Sir, preside over this meeting. Today's open debate in
the Security Council is one means to develop ways for
the Council to address important issues, taking into
account the views and interests of the entire
membership of the United Nations.

While the delegation of Egypt would like to
emphasize the importance and timeliness of the theme
of today's discussion on energy, security and climate
and the powerful and serious impact of climate change
on our world, we share with many developing countries
the surprise and concern clearly reflected in the letters
addressed to the President of the Security Council by
the Chairs of the Group of 77 and China and of the
Non-Aligned Movement on behalf of the entire
membership of both groups, and in the Sudanese
statement to be delivered later on behalf of the African
Group.

It is obvious that the subject of today's debate lies
clearly and squarely within the mandate of other bodies
in the United Nations system, in particular the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the
Commission on Sustainable Development and the
machinery of relevant United Nations treaties. This
open Security Council debate also coincides with the
preparations to address the same subject in the
Commission on Sustainable Development later this
month, as well as in other international treaty bodies,
such as the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) and its Kyoto Protocol,
which are key instruments for addressing climate
change.

What concerns us more is the deliberate
encroachment of the Security Council on the mandates
and primary responsibilities of other principal United
Nations organs and subsidiary bodies, as defined by the
Charter. This reflects clear and deliberate neglect of the
provisions of the Charter. We are also concerned by the
Council's indifference to the repeated demands of
Member States to put an end to this dangerous and
unjustified phenomenon. It is a clear challenge to the
general membership of the United Nations to leave the
way open for every President of the Security Council
to decide a theme for an open debate, even if it lies
totally beyond the Council's mandate. That makes it all
the more important to reform the working methods of
the Security Council and to expand its membership, as
well as to ensure that the General Assembly takes more
decisive measures to stop such infringement.

The claim that the issue of climate change and
energy lies within the mandate of the Security Council,
based on its impact on international peace and security,
is an exaggerated claim which the Council presidency
has sought to buttress through a concept paper
(S/2007/186, annex) that seeks to emphasize that all
subjects within the domain of the General Assembly
and its subsidiary bodies have an impact on
international peace and security, and hence may be
seized by the Security Council. Such logic is
unacceptable to the States Members of the
Organization as it involves encroachment on the
mandates and responsibilities of the General Assembly,
which, as it represents the entire membership of the
United Nations, is more universal and more
democratic.

In the light of recent reports and scientific studies
and the latest report of the Secretary-General on
climate change, there is no room for doubting, arguing
against or rejecting the dangers of climate change and
its repercussions for humanity. But objectivity requires
focusing on the circumstances which led us to this
dangerous juncture, and on the proper and ideal
manner in which to address it. I will not be saying
anything new if I note that the developed countries are
responsible for this phenomenon, because they have
continued to pour emissions into the upper atmosphere
and have failed to fulfil their obligation to rectify the
situation and address it according to the provisions of
the UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol.

Thus, the developing countries, including Egypt,
View this open Security Council debate as an attempt
by the developed countries to shrug off their
responsibilities in that regard. The right path to combat
this dangerous phenomenon is clear and lies in the
fulfilment by all parties - developed and
developing - of their commitments according to the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities,
and not according to the principle of shared
responsibilities which some countries are seeking to
promote.

Needless to say, addressing this phenomenon
effectively requires dealing with its causes and
adapting to its adverse effects, especially when we
know that the most affected States, in particular the
07-30973

African countries and the small island developing
States, produce the smallest quantities of damaging
greenhouse gas emissions and are at the same time the
least capable of adapting to the negative impact.

In that context, Egypt, as one of the least
significant emitters of greenhouse gases, emphasizes
the need to address that serious problem from the
perspective of the common interest of humanity -
and, again, in the proper forum in which all Member
States participate - not only from a security
perspective, but from the perspective of the three
pillars of sustainable development. If implemented in
the framework of strong and active international
cooperation, this would address the security impact
referred to in the concept paper.

Finally, the Security Council has before it many
other challenges which are more pertinent to the
maintenance of international peace and security, which
require more attention from the Council, and which lie
within, not outside, its main mandate. There is no
doubt that achieving a comprehensive and just peace in
the Middle East lies at the heart of those challenges,
along with the implementation of the comprehensive
package agreed to at the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, including the
resolution on the Middle East. The importance of
implementing the package and the 13 practical steps
towards nuclear disarmament was stressed at the 2000
Review Conference.

We therefore look forward to the nuclear-weapon
States - including the United Kingdom - implementing
the package and seeking to include it in the agenda of the
2010 Review Conference. This process should begin
with the first meetings of the Preparatory Committee
this year. There should be no attempt to evade or to
change the package in a way that would make it
unsuccessful and would only adversely affect
international peace and security by endangering the
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime.

Those are the issues that we wish to see the
Security Council focus on, and that will be met with
support from the general membership.

