Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
would like to thank both Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock and Special Envoy De Mistura for their
respective briefings. Let me also express our thanks
to all those United Nations and other humanitarian
aid workers who are providing life-saving aid to those
most in need. We salute their selfless and brave work in
dire circumstances.

I would also like to join others in offering our
condolences to Russia and the families of those who
lost their lives in the downing of a military plane. It
adds to the long list of casualties that this conflict has
caused and underscores the need for a political solution.

Despite the relative calm of the past few days, the
situation in and around Idlib remains extremely tense.
Everything needs to be done to prevent an all-out
offensive. The agreement between Russia and Turkey
on a demilitarized zone around Idlib seems a step in
that direction.

I would like to focus on the following points: the
need for further de-escalation in Idlib; the need to revive
the political process and to form the constitutional
committee; the need to deliver impartial humanitarian
aid and the reasons why it is not the right time for
reconstruction aid at this moment.

On the need for de-escalation in Idlib, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands once again underlines
that further escalation of violence in Idlib could lead
to an international confrontation and a humanitarian
catastrophe. Some of the 2.9 million civilians inside
Idlib have already been on the move in the past few days.

Yesterday in Sochi, an agreement was reached on a
15- to 25-kilometre-wide demilitarized zone. Chances
of a military confrontation between the regime and
opposition groups have been reduced significantly.
Still, some questions remain. What happens until the
moment the deal comes into force, supposedly on
15 October? Can Russia and Turkey guarantee that
civilians will not be forced to move from their homes?
Will there be access for humanitarian aid delivery to
people living in the demilitarized zone? We would
appreciate clarification from Russia on those questions.

There is consensus in the Security Council on
the need to counter terrorism of Council-designated
terrorist groups. The protection of civilians should be
at the core of every possible plan. We reiterate that
combating terrorism is no excuse to attack without
distinction, proportionality or precaution. We support
efforts to separate terrorists from civilians, to prevent
terrorists from using civilians as human shields. We
call on all parties to ensure full respect for international
humanitarian law, and to refrain from any attacks on
basic services and hospitals. The Syrian army and the
Russian air force have the coordinates of the hospitals.
All attacks that have already taken place, as well as
those that might still take place in the future, fall
under their responsibility, and accountability needs to
take place.

On the need to revive the political process and form
the constitutional committee, we welcome the progress
with regard to the establishment of the constitutional
committee. It is not a goal in itself but is part of the
broader political process based on resolution 2254
(2015). One can speak only of a credible political
process when the constitutional committee itself is
credible. That means there is a need for inclusiveness
and representation of all Syrians. We reiterate that the
Special Envoy must have the freedom to compile the so-
called third list. It should not require negotiation with
States. We repeat our support for the Special Envoy's
commitment to have 30 per cent female representation
in all parts of the constitutional com mittee.The United
Nations should set a date for the first meeting of the
constitutional committee and move ahead with creating
a new constitution. We look forward to hearing back
from the United Nations on its progress by 31 October.

On the need to deliver impartial humanitarian aid,
unimpeded and unconditional access for principled
humanitarian assistance - both cross-border and
cross-line - remains an absolute necessity. The
2.9 million citizens in Idlib must be protected and their
needs need to be met. We welcome the United Nations
action plan. It is of the utmost importance that it now be
quickly financed and operationalized. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands is willing to do its part. It is essential
that the United Nations remains operative and has free
access to enable efficient humanitarian aid throughout
Syria. We repeat our call to the Syrian authorities,
Russia and Iran to immediately improve independent
and free access for all humanitarian organizations.

The regime makes independent needs assessments,
coordination and reporting by the United Nations
impossible; however, those are conditions for needs-
based financing. We repeat our scepticism about the
concept of humanitarian corridors or other evacuations
of civilians and moderate fighters from Idlib, as
proposed by the regime and Russia. First, there must
be clarity on the evacuation process, destinations,
monitoring by the United Nations and guaranteed
access to satisfactory conditions of shelter, hygiene,
health, safety and nutrition. Evacuations should always
be voluntary and should never be used for political or
demographic purposes.
Let me conclude by condemning the current call
for reconstruction aid and the call for the return of
refugees. There will be no reconstruction aid for Syria
until there is a lasting political transition in Syria. It
is also inconceivable that we start rebuilding when a
massive attack still looms around Idlib. Syria currently
is not ready for the safe, voluntary and dignified return
of refugees. Contrary to what some want to make us
believe, it is not the lack of reconstruction that keeps
people from returning. Many Syrians cannot go back for
fear of violence, persecution and imprisonment. Those
Syrians fear security screenings and forced conscription
and, last but not least, they have no homes to return
to, due to the potential consequences of laws such as
Law Number 10. It is clear that fundamental structural
changes are needed in Syria's Administration. An
inclusive political transition must be the starting point.

