Mr. Burkhalter (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Mr. President, and the Russian presidency
for having initiated this debate.

Increasing instability and human suffering in
the Middle East, massive refugee flows, the rise
of transnational terrorism all call for a swift and
determined response that includes not only additional
humanitarian assistance but also, primarily, a political
solution to the violent conflicts that have plunged
the region into chaos. The impasses have lasted long
enough - much too long, in fact - and Syria needs
our help.

A national dialogue should be initiated to begin to
end the bloody war between the Damascus Government
and the opposition. Switzerland supports the efforts of
the United Nations Special Envoy to encourage thematic
discussions in the Syrian working groups established to
address key aspects of the 2012 Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). From the beginning we have
supported the United Nations efforts to find a political
solution to the Syrian crisis. We will continue along
that path until peace is achieved, by providing experts,

logistical support and financial resources as needed.
We urge Syria to take advantage of thr opportunity to
participate in the working groups. We also demand the
rapid formation of an international contact group that
would be responsible for supporting the search for a
political solution.

All regional and international actors share the same
responsibility for stabilizing Syria. They must come to
the table and discuss the issues. Switzerland welcomes
the strengthening of diplomatic efforts to find common
ground. Now is the time to leave behind the maximalist
positions and finally seek compromise. The only path
that will lead to peace is that of an inclusive dialogue
that includes the Syrian Government and which aims
to define the parameters of a managed transition. That
process will difficult, given the enormous sacrifices
that will have to be made. The parties to the conflict
will have to make difficult choices to find compromise.
But the only way that a lasting solution can be achieved
is if all parties work sincerely for peace. The millions
of women, children and men who have suffered the
atrocities of this war deserve such efforts and sincerity.

An inclusive dialogue and power-sharing are not
only vital for Syria, but also for stabilizing Iraq and
resolving the conflicts in Yemen and Libya. My country,
Switzerland, with its multiparty Government, is willing
to offer its expertise. We are prepared to facilitate
discussions in Geneva, should that be appropriate, and
to support the efforts of the United Nations.

With regard to the fight against the terrorist
threat in the Middle East and North Africa, terrorist
groups such as the so-called Islamic State cannot be
part of a political solution. However, resolving those
conflicts will weaken terrorist groups. And again, a
key role in that regard falls to the United Nations. We
are concerned about the apparent lack of coordination
among various military actions in Syria, and we ask the
Security Council to assume its responsibility in leading
the efforts to oppose terrorism and re-establish peace
and security in Syria.

We also welcome the announcement by the
Secretary-General on the presentation this year on a
plan of action to prevent violent extremism. Military
force and coercive measures to enforce the law are not
enough to eliminate terrorism. We must also ensure that
young people are able to resist the demagoguery of the
terrorists, and for that we must to combine peace and
security measures, development measures and human

rights measures. In other words, we must mobilize all
the strengths of the United Nations.

