Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The Security Council is
meeting today as the Middle East once again stands at
the brink of another grave crisis. The rocket attacks of
22 March threaten to undo in one stroke the
achievements of careful international diplomacy over
many years. Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, a paraplegic in a
wheelchair, was killed with eight other Palestinians.
The spectre of a new cycle of violence haunts both the
Palestinians and the Israelis. The peace process is in
mortal danger.

The Security Council is meeting not to defend
any ideology, nor the actions of any one individual.
The Council is meeting to defend the principles of the
Charter and international law. The action by the Israeli
armed forces is in complete violation of international
law. There can be no justification for targeted
assassinations and extrajudicial killings as an
instrument of State policy.

This is also in direct conflict with Israel's
obligations as the occupying Power under the Fourth
Geneva Convention. The logic of self-defence cannot
be extended to justify extrajudicial executions. Even
suspected terrorists should be subject to the rule of law,
especially by a country that prides itself as a
democracy.

The Israeli action has understandably caused
shock and indignation throughout the world. Pakistan
joins those who have condemned this provocative
action and expresses grave concern over its vital
ramifications. The world community is justified in the
fear that both the Palestinians and the Israelis are less
secure today than they were on 21 March.

The prospect of more bloodshed and heightened
violence is not the only likely consequence of this
illegal action. The fragile peace process in the Middle
East has been dealt a severe blow.

The Secretary-General has rightly noted that
Sheikh Yassin's assassination "has complicated issues"
and that it does not "facilitate the task of peace
makers".

Inaction is not an option for the Council. The
Council must pronounce itself on this issue. We must
condemn this act and must call on Israel to disavow its
policy of arbitrary assassinations. The killing of
innocent civilians, whether in the occupied territories
or in Israel, is a tragedy for the people involved, for the
families involved and for the entire region. But let us
all remember that the root cause of this violence is the
continued Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territories. Violence can end - will end - when Israel
withdraws from the occupied territories. Meanwhile,
the Security Council must act to rein in all those who
believe in unilateral and violent solutions and who in
the process shatter the dreams of a life of peace,
normalcy and freedom from fear for their own peoples.

We must do everything within our means to
salvage the peace process. We must reassure the
Palestinian people that the international community,
and especially the Security Council, will make every
effort to secure the full and equitable implementation
of the Quartet's road map. In that context, we must
secure assurances from the Government of Israel and
from the members of the Quartet that the contemplated
unilateral withdrawal from Gaza will constitute a part
of the process of full and complete withdrawal from the
occupied Palestinian territories, in accordance with the
prescriptions of the road map and in faithful
implementation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003).

We must also ensure that the illegal separation
wall being built by Israel on the West Bank does not
lead to annexation of Palestinian territory and does not
prejudge the final settlement.

It is only thus that we can protect the vision of
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security. It is only when there is a just peace
in the holy land that there can be durable peace,
stability, progress and prosperity in the wider region of
the Middle East.

