Mr. Haspels (Netherlands): It is an honour for
me to address the Security Council for the first time
since the Kingdom of the Netherlands began its 2018
membership. Right before I entered the Chamber this
morning, I spoke with two of Afghanistan's leading
citizens - Roya Mahboob and her sister Elaha.
They founded an organization to teach Afghan girls
programming and robotics. Both of the girls are present
here today, sitting high up there in the gallery. Roya,
Elaha and their students are a living example of what
has been achieved in Afghanistan. Thanks to their
organization, Afghan girls today can study in Herat,
where they are learning to build robots for hospitals
and farms.

The difference between today and the Taliban
era could not be greater. Back then, women were
marginalized to the point of complete invisibility.
Today, they can study, travel, make films and build
robots. Since the fall of the brutal Taliban regime, a lot
has been achieved. In only 16 years, life has improved
greatly in Afghanistan.

But when we spoke, Roya and her sister reminded
me of the many obstacles Afghans still face. The
security situation is still volatile. Access to justice is
limited. There are still barriers to girls who want to
go to school. Insecurity and corruption are hampering
economic growth. As a result, Afghans are seeking
shelter and opportunity elsewhere.

That is one of the reasons why the Kingdom of
the Netherlands supports Afghanistan in its efforts to
improve the lives of its people. We chose an integrated
approach - combining military, development and
political efforts; investing in security, good governance,
the rule of law and accountability - together with other
countries, partners and, of course, Afghans themselves.

Our contribution to peace and security in
Afghanistan has sometimes involved painful sacrifices.
We will remember those who paid the ultimate prize
with great respect.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan plays a key role in coordinating the many
elements of the international effort in Afghanistan. As
a penholder on Afghanistan in the Council, we look
forward to working with all members to ensure that the
United Nations can continue to play its essential role
after March.

But in the long run, true stability in Afghanistan
can be guaranteed only through an inclusive peace and
reconciliation process that is Afghan-led and -owned.
The Kabul Process meeting in February must bring us
closer to that goal. It is paramount that all neighbouring
countries take up their responsibilities by actively
contributing to that goal.

At the same time, we encourage the Afghan
Government to continue on the path of reform, to
continue the fight against corruption, to strengthen good
governance and the rule of law and to uphold human
rights and hold timely and credible elections - because
only a secure and stable Afghanistan can offer the
Afghan people the opportunities they so deserve.

That is what today's debate is all about: the need
to achieve long-term peace, stability and development
in Afghanistan. In that regard, the region also has an
important role to play. I commend the Republic of
Kazakhstan and other Central Asian nations for their
efforts to increase regional cooperation, especially
where economic ties are concerned.

In conclusion, I would like to thank Kazakhstan
for arranging this highly topical debate, I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and I thank Minister
Karzai of Afghanistan for his Government's leadership.

Roya and Elaha remind us that we need to invest
in young Afghans. After all, the future stability of
the country will depend upon the prospects that
Afghanistan can offer them. We all have a responsibility
here. The Kingdom of the Netherlands will remain a
committed partner, both during our term on the Council
and beyond.

