Mr. Vamos-Goldman (Canada) (spoke in French): We also welcome Dr. Piot.

Over the past two weeks information about the
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
pandemic - some very encouraging but most very
disturbing - has made headlines around the world.
That information has reached us as up to 10,000
representatives from Government, scientific research
institutions, public health agencies, non-governmental
organizations and service organizations dealing with
AIDS gathered in South Africa for the Thirteenth
International Conference on AIDS. The item is also on
the G-8 Summit agenda, which will take place soon in
Japan.

From the Canadian perspective, there is no
question that the AIDS pandemic has reached
proportions that pose a clear threat to stability and
development. The overwhelming facts and statistics
that have been broadly publicized over the past weeks
give substance to this concern. Estimates that almost
half of all 15-year-olds in South Africa and Zimbabwe,
and even more in Botswana, will die of AIDS should
be more than enough to convince anyone still in doubt
of the devastating political, economic and social impact
of this disease.

Canada agrees with former President Mandela
that the AIDS pandemic is one of the greatest threats
humankind has faced. This is not, however, just an
issue of concern to Africa alone. No region of the
world can afford to be complacent. The prevalence of
HIV/AIDS is exploding in Asia, where in the last three
years about 3 million people have tested sero-positive.
And in Canada new alarming rates of HIV infection are
showing up again in our major cities.

(spoke in English)

There are, fortunately, some bright spots on the
AIDS horizon. We would be remiss if we did not
recognize efforts made by many countries to address
AIDS through the adoption of comprehensive national
strategies integrating education and awareness,
prevention and treatment aimed at all segments of
society. We welcome the update provided by UNAIDS
on its work in support of these national efforts, as well
its broader activities to intensify cooperation within the
United Nations system in its fight against AIDS. We
urge all countries that have not put into place effective
strategies to deal with AIDS to do so. The international
community can assist, but it cannot act in the absence
of national efforts.

Approximately 150 Canadians - including
scientists, health workers and activists led by Canada's
Minister for International Cooperation - attended the
Durban Conference to underline Canada's continued
commitment to the global fight against AIDS. In June,
we launched an aggressive action plan outlining
Canada's proposed contribution to serve clear and
attainable international goals that included reducing the
level of infections in the 15-24 age group by 25 per
cent in the most affected countries by 2005 and
ensuring that by 2010 at least 95 per cent of young
women and men aged 15-24 will have access to the
information, education and services necessary to
reduce their vulnerability to HIV infection. Canada will
spend $120 million over the next three years, as
compared to the $22 million spent in 1999, an
important increase in funding that underlines our
determination to do our share.

We noted when we last discussed this issue in
January that we welcomed the Security Council's
consideration of AIDS as further recognition of the
need to include non-traditional threats, particularly
those that affect human security, in our definition of
security. Given the sheer enormity of the AIDS
pandemic and the need for urgent action on a global
scale, it is appropriate that the Council speak to this
issue. The devastating impact of AIDS on people,
families and whole societies cannot but conspire
against our efforts to build security within and between
countries.

We particularly welcomed the Views expressed by
troop contributors in consultations held on 11 July. We
commend the President of the Security Council for
organizing this consultation sufficiently early in the
consideration of this draft resolution so that the Views
of the troop contributors could be taken into account.
This process should provide a model for future
Security Council consultations.

In Canada's View, the Security Council can be
most effective in contributing to the fight against
AIDS, most notably in Africa, through stepped-up
efforts at conflict prevention and resolution. It is clear
that populations fleeing conflict areas are more likely
to be vulnerable to all types of diseases, including
AIDS, and to suffer more as a result of more difficult,
if not impossible, access to medical treatment. Ridding
affected regions of conflict is the best way to enable
them to dedicate resources to the fight against AIDS
and to ensure that international support for that fight is
most productive.

The safety and well-being of the individual are
increasingly the reference point in efforts to promote
international peace and security. World peace depends
not only on securing borders, but on securing people
against threats to their human security, whether it be
armed conflict, crime, natural disasters or disease. It is
in this context that the AIDS epidemic poses a
fundamental challenge to human security, and the
threat it poses challenges our humanity. This is reason
enough to integrate the fight against AIDS into our
efforts on behalf of international peace and security.

