Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honore, for presenting
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/225)
and for her substantive briefing on the situation in
the country.

We are carefully monitoring the development of the
political situation in Haiti, where the electoral campaign
has once again encountered serious setbacks. As a
result of the worsening inter-party standoff, it proved
impossible to elect a new Head of State within the time
frame laid out in the Constitution. Nonetheless, we
welcome the adoption by Port-au-Prince of a political
solution that enabled the National Assembly to elect an
interim President, Jocelerme Privert, for a transitional
120-day period. We hope that that compromise will
help to ensure institutional continuity, while avoiding
a vacuum in the executive branch and moving toward
a constructive completion of the electoral process. The
electoral marathon for the legislative authorities has
been successfully concluded. The fiftieth anniversary
session of the Haitian National Assembly assumed its
functions in January. The country thereby demonstrated
its ability to overcome significant domestic political
differences and solve the most difficult problems. We
hope that Haiti's political forces will be able to muster
the necessary will and restraint in order to successfully
elect a President within the established time frame.
Numerous difficult economic and other domestic
problems also remain on the table.

A well-qualified and properly equipped police force
is absolutely crucial for the State to be able to develop
successfully. The latest report of the Secretary-General
notes a slight decrease in the size ofthe Haitian National
Police. We hope that the reasons for the departure of
qualified members of the police force will be analysed
and eliminated. MINUSTAH's police contingent
could assist the Haitians in that matter, although it is
undergoing its own difficulties with regard to providing
the necessary personnel. We believe that reaching the
target of 15,000 national police, set by Port-au-Prince,
by the end of the year is still possible.

The economy in Haiti remains fragile. The country
is not demonstrating sufficient economic growth, and
the national currency has fallen in value. We believe
that those difficulties are not of an extraordinary nature.
If there is enough political will, that issue can be fully
resolved, as well as the issues of the food shortages and
drought. We are concerned by the unstable situation
that has resulted from cholera. The number of those
afflicted periodically decreases, only to increase later.
An important role in that problem should be played
by specialized United Nations agencies, international
organizations and donors. Where possible, Port-au-
Prince should make more significant efforts to inform
the population about the disease and how to avoid
contracting it.

We were pleased to learn that, in the coming
months, the remaining 7,000 families that fell victim
to the devastating earthquake of 2010 will move into
permanent homes. That achievement will enable the
people of Haiti to overcome, once and for all, the
difficult legacy left by that natural disaster, while
enabling resources to be directed to other development
projects. In October, we are looking forward to
carefully studying the outcome of the strategic review
and the recommendations of the Secretary-General
with regard to the future of the United Nations presence
in the country. We are convinced that the key role of
continuing the successful development of the State and
concluding the drawn-out electoral process falls on the
shoulders of the country's national authorities.

