Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU). The candidate countries
Montenegro and Albania, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.

While the Middle East faces multiple challenges
today, including the crisis in Syria, the Middle East
peace process cannot be allowed to slip from our
agenda. It is crucial for the Israelis and the Palestinians,
but also for regional peace and security. The increased
deadly violence in October, not least in East Jerusalem,
the West Bank, Gaza and Israel, claiming many lives
and injuring over a thousand, is a tragic reminder of
this. We deeply regret the loss oflives and our thoughts
are with the victims and their families. The risk of
escalation is a source of great concern. We therefore
urge political leaders on both sides to promote calm,
encourage restraint and avoid actions which could
further fuel tensions.

Violence or acts of terror against any innocent
civilian are simply unacceptable. The response of
security forces needs to be proportionate and consistent
regardless of who is the perpetrator. The continued
cooperation between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority to ensure de-escalation and the restoration
of order is crucially important. However, current
developments on the ground provide the evidence that
the status quo is not an option. They prove the need for
a political horizon. The best way ofhalting the violence
is an immediate return to a credible political process.
The immediate priority for the parties is to agree on
substantial steps, which would improve the situation
on the ground and build a path back to final status
negotiations.

The EU position has been clear and consistent.
A negotiated two-State solution, which ends the
occupation and fulfils the aspirations of both sides, is
the only way of bringing the lasting peace and security
that both Israelis and Palestinians deserve. By the same
token, actions by either side that call into question their
stated commitment to a negotiated solution must be
avoided. This includes demolitions and the expansion
of Israeli settlements in the West Bank, which are
illegal under international law, and of projects funded
by the EU and EU member States.

The two-State solution will also require Palestinian
factions to work together to address the needs of the
Palestinian population. We therefore continue to
urge them to make reconciliation a top priority. The
Palestinian Authority must take greater responsibility
in this regard and assume its Government functions
in the Gaza Strip. The dire situation in Gaza must
be fundamentally changed to allow for improved
socioeconomic conditions for the local population and
security for all.

Let us also not forget Jerusalem, a city sacred to
three religions. The historical status quo at the holy
sites, a matter of great sensitivity, must not be altered.
Therefore, all relevant parties must open a serious
dialogue to ensure the status quo at the holy sites is
upheld.

A renewed peace process will require a common
international effort. The EU remains determined
to play its part, not least through the EU Special
Representative for the Middle East Peace Process,
Fernando Gentilini. We will work with all sides,
through the implementation of existing agreements,
to allow Palestinian socioeconomic development and
to empower Palestinian institutions in preparation for
statehood.

The EU warmly welcomes the statement issued
by representatives of the Quartet, dated 30 September,
and their consultations with the Foreign Ministers of
Egypt, Jordan and Saudi Arabia, as well as with the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States and
other interested member States. Outreach to regional
partners will remain essential, as the Arab Peace
Initiative is of key strategic importance for any future
comprehensive peace agreement.

The EU offers its full support to the Secretary-
General's Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Mladenov. The Security Council,
with primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, continues to have a
crucial role in regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
However, ultimately sustainable peace will require
courageous decisions by the parties to the conflict.
We urge them to carefully consider the high price of a
continued unresolved conflict, which will continue to
be paid by local populations.

The EU continues to follow developments on
the ground very closely. It remains determined to do
its utmost to preserve the viability of the two-State
solution in the interest of both Palestinians and Israelis.

Turning to the conflict in Syria, there is an
increasingly urgent need to find a lasting solution that
will end this conflict. Only a Syrian-led political process
leading to a peaceful and inclusive transition, based on
the principles of the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) of 30 June 2012, will bring back stability to
Syria, enable peace and reconciliation, create the
necessary environment for efficient counter-terrorism
efforts and maintain the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian State.

There cannot be a lasting peace in Syria under the
present leadership and until the legitimate grievances
and aspirations of all components of Syrian society are
addressed. The international community has to unite
around two complementary and interlinked tracks: a
political one aimed at ending the civil war by addressing
all the root causes of the conflict and establishing an
inclusive political transition process that will restore
peace to the country; and a security one focused on the
fight against the regional and global threat of Daesh.

The European Union reiterates its full support to
the United Nations-led efforts and the work of United
Nations Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. We call
on all Syrian parties to show a clear and concrete
commitment to the United Nations-led process and to
participate actively in the working groups proposed by
the Special Envoy. The moderate political opposition
and associated armed groups urgently need to unite
behind a common approach in order to present an
alternative to the Syrian people.

We urge all those with influence on the parties,
including on the Syrian regime, to use that influence to
encourage a constructive role in the process, leading to a

political transition and to end the cycle of violence. The
EU will proactively engage with key regional actors,
such as Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Egypt
and international partners within the United Nations
framework, to build the conditions for a peaceful and
inclusive transition.

We condemn the excessive, disproportionate and
indiscriminate attacks that the Syrian regime continues
to commit against its own people. The Al-Assad regime
bears the greatest responsibility for the 250,000 deaths in
the conflict and the displacement of millions of people.
International humanitarian law applies to all parties,
and human rights need to be fully respected. We call on
all parties to stop all forms of indiscriminate shelling
and bombardment against civilian areas and structures
and, in particular, on the Syrian regime to cease all
aerial bombardments, including the use of barrel bombs
in line with resolution 2139 (2014). We also call for the
immediate cessation of the use of chemical weapons,
which is a violation of resolutions 2118 (2013) and
2209 (2015). In that light, we welcome the unanimous
adoption of Security Council resolution 2235 (2015)
to identify those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons, and stress that those individuals, entities,
groups or Governments must be held accountable. The
systematic targeting of civilians by the regime has led
to mass displacements and encouraged recruitment to
and the flourishing of terrorist groups in Syria. This
calls for urgent attention and action.

We strongly condemn the indiscriminate attacks,
atrocities, killings, conflict-related sexual violence,
abuses of human rights and serious violations of
international humanitarian law perpetrated by Daesh
and other terrorist groups. We support international
efforts and initiatives to address those issues. We
condemn Daesh's deliberate destruction of cultural
heritage in Syria and Iraq, which amounts to a war
crime under international law. Those responsible for
war crimes and crimes against humanity in Syria
must be held accountable. We reiterate our call on the
Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.

The EU supports the efforts of the Global Coalition
to Counter Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. As a
consequence of its policies and actions, the Al-Assad
regime cannot be a partner in the fight against Daesh.
Action against Daesh needs to be closely coordinated
among all partners, and needs clearly to target Daesh,
Jabhat Al-Nusra and the other United Nations-
designated terrorist groups.

The recent Russian military attacks that go beyond
Daesh and other United Nations-designated terrorist
groups, as well as on the moderate opposition, are of
deep concern and must cease immediately; so too must
the Russian violations of the sovereign airspace of
neighbouring countries. That military escalation risks
prolonging the conflict, undermining apolitical process,
aggravating the humanitarian situation and increasing
radicalization. Our aim should be to de-escalate the
conflict. The EU calls on Russia to focus its efforts on
the common objective of achieving a political solution
to the conflict In that context, it urges Russia to push
for a reduction of violence and the implementation of
confidence-building measures by the Syrian regime,
pursuant to the provisions of resolution 2139 (2014).

The EU will reinforce its efforts to scale up the
implementation of the Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) to deliver
cross-border and cross-line assistance in order to help
those Syrians most desperately in need, intensify
humanitarian diplomacy, seek ways to improve access
and protection and promote humanitarian principles
and local consensus with regard to guidelines for aid
delivery.

