Ms. Zewde: I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of December. Since this is also
your country's last month as an elected member of this
Council, along with Libya, Viet Nam, Croatia and
Costa Rica, I would like to pay tribute to the
outstanding work you have done for the African
continent and, indeed, for international peace and
security. May I take this opportunity to also
congratulate incoming members Nigeria, Gabon,
Bosnia, Brazil and Lebanon on their recent election. I
hope we can count on their support during their tenure
in the Council.

This is my first briefing before the Security
Council following my appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the Central
African Republic. It coincides with the presentation of
the last report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in the Central African Republic (8/2009/627) before
the transformation of the United Nations Peace-
Building Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA) into the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic (BINUCA).

For the past six months, I have held consultations
with the stakeholders in the peace process. These
include the political parties, the armed groups, civil
society, development partners, regional organizations
and neighbouring countries. I would therefore would
like to share my observations and initial thinking on
how we could address the present situation in the
country.

The Central African Republic has experienced
violence and confrontations between the Government
and the rebel groups since 1999. The signing of the
09-64893
various peace agreements, the Libreville
Comprehensive Peace Agreement of 21 June 2008 and
the holding of the inclusive political dialogue in
December 2008 gave hope for a return to normalcy in
the country. The process has now reached a critical
stage where the successful holding of elections before
the end of April 2010, and the completion of the
disarmament and demobilization part of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) operations
before elections will determine the fate of the political
process. These two major events are among the key
recommendations of the inclusive political dialogue
and are critical to the lasting stabilization of the
Central African Republic.

An Independent Electoral Commission was
established on 8 October and the United Nations has
signed a memorandum of understanding with the
Government of the Central African Republic on
electoral assistance, while such partners as the
European Union, the International Organization of la
Francophonie, the United States Agency for
International Development and the African Union are
involved in the coordination of assistance to the
Central African Republic for the conduct of the polls.

In the meantime, a number of factors could derail
the electoral calendar. These include attempts by some
political actors to create a constitutional vacuum and
request an extension of the mandate of the current
Administration beyond April 2010, restrictions on the
ability of political leaders to carry out normal political
activities, and the possibility that political leaders may
incite hatred or divisions. In addition, the current level
of insecurity generated by the activities of those armed
groups that have not yet joined the peace process, the
movements of the Lord's Resistance Army in some
parts of the country, and the delay in the
implementation of the disarmament and demobilization
programme pose a serious threat to the entire peace
process.

The economic progress accomplished so far
resulted in the attainment of the completion point
under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt
Initiative earlier this year. However, much more
remains to be done to fight poverty. The Government's
programme of civil service reform and its fight against
corruption, as well as the introduction of a statutory
declaration of assets by senior civil servants and heads
of public companies, are encouraging. The audit of
such key economic sectors as forestry, mining and
telecommunications recommended by last year's
inclusive political dialogue should be carried out.
09-64893

The United Nations has continued to work
closely with the Government of the Central African
Republic authorities to pursue the implementation of
12 priority projects to the tune of $10 million by the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) to address the immediate
needs of the country in priority peacebuilding areas.
The level of implementation of most of these projects
should be increased and the PBF Steering Committee,
which I co-chair with the Central African Republic's
Minister of Planning, Economic Affairs and
International Cooperation, has been discussing
strategies to accelerate the process of implementing
these key projects. Discussions have already started on
the release of a second allocation with the convening of
a national consultation on 25 September to revise the
national PBF priority plan of June 2008 to align it with
the main pillars of the strategic framework for
peacebuilding in the Central African Republic.

The implementation of the strategic framework
remains the most viable way for dealing with the
challenges facing the Central African Republic in the
three key peacebuilding areas of security sector reform
and DDR, good governance and the rule of law, and
socio-economic development. In that regard, I wish to
take this opportunity to express my appreciation to
members of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
especially its country-specific configuration for the
Central African Republic chaired by Ambassador Jan
Grauls of Belgium, for their commitment to the
sustainable stabilization of the Central African
Republic. The PBC delegation's recent visit to the
Central African Republic indicated the readiness of the
Commission to support the efforts of local authorities.

To achieve peace and stability in the Central
African Republic, the Government, national political
actors and other stakeholders should show commitment
and political will to confront the multiple challenges
facing the county. Similarly, concerted regional and
international support and assistance are required at this
very critical point to support the peace process. In this
connection, political discussions and good offices with
all the parties and actors in the peace process should be
intensified in order to obtain the full implementation of
the outcome of the Libreville Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and the inclusive political dialogue.

The capacity of the Dialogue Follow-up
Committee set up on 29 January should be reinforced
to speed up the decision-making process and ensure the
implementation of the decisions. Mediation efforts and
local peace initiatives should continue to ensure that
the forthcoming polls do not ignite a political crisis.
3

Meanwhile, the permanent consultation framework
recommended by the inclusive political dialogue
should be established. As recommended by the recently
deployed United Nations electoral needs assessment
mission to the Central African Republic, the capacity
of the United Nations to provide political guidance
during the electoral and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) processes should be
strengthened. Likewise, there should be an increase of
the regional and international support to the
Independent Electoral Commission to allow it to fulfil
its mandate. To that effect, international efforts and
assistance should be coordinated and provided in a
timely manner.

The progress made by the DDR Steering
Committee and the deployment of the 31 military
observers are commendable. These observers should be
deployed during the coming days to ensure the
completion of the disarmament and demobilization
process prior to the holding of the elections. In the
meantime, the reintegration programme for ex-
combatants belonging to the various rebel movements
that have signed the peace accords and the
disarmament of other armed groups, ethnic militias,
self-defence and unconventional armed elements which
are not included in the process should be accelerated.

Those objectives would be at the top of my
priorities. I will continue to work closely with the
national stakeholders, the United Nations family,
international non-governmental organizations, the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community, the African Union, representatives of the
international community accredited to Bangui, the
ECCAS Mission for the Consolidation of Peace, the
Central Africa Multinational Force, the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan to achieve the
aforementioned goals.

The Security Council may wish to support the
aforementioned recommendations. With its blessing,
the international community would assist in providing
the necessary means to accelerate the DDR process.
That would encourage the implementation of the
recommendations of the inclusive political dialogue
and pave the way for reconciliation with groups that
have not yet joined the process. It would also help
create conditions for free and fair elections and
promote economic assistance.

Let me now provide a brief update on the process
of transforming BONUCA to an integrated,
peacebuilding office: BINUCA. Based on the Council's
decision of 7 April (see S/PRST/2009/5), and in view
of the budgetary cycle of the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly, the Department of Political Affairs
and the Department of Field Support, in close
coordination with BONUCA, have been working hard
to ensure that an integrated office is in place on
lJanuary 2010. We have completed all substantive
interviews for the substantive posts of the new mission.
I am determined to have a functioning integrated office
by the time of my next report to the Council, early next
year. I count on the Council's support during this
transition process, which, as members know, is not an
easy exercise. We are working hard to ensure the full
implementation of the mission's mandate by taking a
harmonized approach and putting in place coordination
mechanisms for the whole United Nations system in
the Central African Republic. To achieve this, the
mission will need appropriate human and financial
resources and full support and cooperation from the
Peacebuilding Commission, other international and
regional efforts and other United Nations missions in
the region.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
overall political, security and socio-economic situation
in the Central African Republic remains fragile and
challenging. Only a clear course of action by the
international and regional actors will help the Central
African Republic to shift from conflict to being a post-
conflict country. A peaceful Central African Republic
would contribute to stability in Central Africa, as the
region is experiencing security challenges.

A combination of factors - good offices,
mediation, financial support and effective action -
would help to bring about a lasting peace and
sustainable socio-economic development in this
paradoxically mineral-resources-endowed but poor
country.

