Mr. Wittig (Germany): I, too, would like to thank
Special Adviser Jack Lang for his excellent briefing
and report (S/2011/30) on legal issues linked to piracy
off the coast of Somalia. We commend the report for its
high level of detail and its systematic and
comprehensive approach. The report is a most thorough
analysis of the legal issues connected with piracy.

Germany is very concerned about the persistent
and indeed growing threat of piracy and armed robbery
off the coast of Somalia and in the region. The Security
Council needs to address this threat to peace and
security in a comprehensive manner.

In recent months, pirates have increased their
level of violence and extended their range of operation.
Piracy is a serious crime. It has detrimental effects on
the security and safety of international navigation and
commerce. It also threatens urgently needed
humanitarian aid to Somalia. The destructive effects of
piracy ultimately jeopardize our common efforts to
stabilize Somalia. The overall cost of piracy is
immense - as Mr. Lang has pointed out - not only to
the international community and to the States in the
region, but first and foremost to the people of Somalia.

The Security Council and the international
community have shown unity and resolve in tackling
the problem of piracy, but we do indeed have to step up
our efforts. The European Union is substantially
engaged in the fight against piracy. It has deployed its
first naval operation, Operation Atalanta, off the coast
of Somalia. Germany has participated in this operation
from the very start and will continue to do so. Many
other partners are committed. Kenya and the Republic
of Seychelles have assumed responsibility by trying
and imprisoning pirates. Mauritius will, it is hoped,
soon follow suit. We would like to thank those
countries for their important contributions. We hope
that more partners will join in these efforts.

The Special Adviser's report proposes the
strengthening of existing measures and the introduction
of new ones. All of his proposals deserve our close
attention.

Military and judicial action is indispensable in
the short term, but both deal only with symptoms. We
will have to address the factors facilitating piracy and
look at the situation on shore in Somalia. The
international community must continue to support the
Somali people in their efforts to re-establish peace,
security and development in their country. We need
economic opportunities and State actors that prevent
and prosecute piracy ashore. These are tasks for police,
coast guard and law enforcement authorities that need
to be set up and strengthened in Somalia.

The effective prosecution and imprisonment of
those responsible for piracy and armed robbery have
seen progress, but remain a huge challenge. The legal
framework is set out in the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea, which reflects the customary
international law giving all States the right to prosecute
pirates. All States should create the legal conditions
that enable them to effectively prosecute pirates.

We concur with the goal, as stated in the report,
that it ultimately must be in Somalia that pirates are
tried and imprisoned. To reach that goal, we have to
support the establishment of adequate structures in
Somalia.
The activities of the Contact Group on Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia and, in particular, the Trust Fund
supporting its initiatives, are a very useful contribution

in that regard. A number of projects of the law
enforcement sector in Somalia were funded by the
Trust Fund. Germany was among the first contributors
to that effort, and we invite others, including the
shipping industry, to participate and commit funds.

Setting up an extraterritorial Somali court in a
third country in the region, with the perspective of
transferring it to Somalia, could be an essential part of
a solution. It could constitute an important element of
support to a nascent Somali legal and judicial system,
with active international support and the recruitment of
qualified lawyers, for instance from the Somali
diaspora. It would combine Somali, regional and
international efforts in a truly joint endeavour. We
should further explore that proposal.

We have to acknowledge that the Somali judicial
system and its prisons still face a number of
challenges, as pointed out by the Secretary-General in
his most recent report on Somalia (S/2010/394). The
system must be improved so that it meets international
standards and respects international human rights and
other applicable rules of international law. Germany
commends and actively supports all activities in that
respect, especially those of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the United Nations
Development Programme.

In the meantime, broader and stronger regional
efforts and international support for them are required.
States of the region are most affected by the scourge of
piracy. Increased cooperation among them would
considerably strengthen the fight against piracy. It
would also be of benefit to their judicial systems in the
fight against crime in general. We look forward to
continued cooperation among partners in the Security
Council and in the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia to address piracy in Somalia and the
factors contributing to it.

In conclusion, I should like to once again thank
the Special Adviser for his impressive report. He has
rightly pointed out the urgency of the matter. The
Security Council should take up the many thoughts and
issues he has raised and discuss them in the near future
as part of the Council's larger strategy on Somalia.

