Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation): We also are
happy to welcome Mr. Holmes to the Security Council
meeting today. We are grateful to him for his briefing
thorough, as always, on the results of his trip to
Ethiopia, the Sudan, Somalia and Kenya. We see the
large amount of work he and the United Nations
humanitarian agencies are doing under his leadership,
and we very much appreciate that work. We believe its
continuation is a very important factor in easing the
humanitarian situation in the crisis regions, as well as a
factor in promoting the political settlement process. We
share the concern of the Secretariat regarding the
complex humanitarian situation in the region under
discussion.

With respect to Somalia, events of the past few
months have once again lead to an increase in the
number of internally displaced persons (IDPs). The
military clashes and tensions that have arisen have
undoubtedly had and continue to have a negative
impact on the civilian population. We are concerned
that access to humanitarian assistance for the stricken
population is still encountering serious obstacles.

We believe it is important to continue the
humanitarian work, first and foremost that taking place
in Somalia under United Nations auspices. Of course,
the security situation is constraining those efforts, but
we are hopeful that the situation will improve. For that
to occur, it is important that the peacekeeping
operation of the African Union, the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), be fully deployed. Of
course, the African peacekeepers must continue to
receive the necessary support.

I fully agree that the Security Council must
continue to follow events carefully in Somalia and to
provide support to the process of stabilizing and
normalizing life in that country, a process which
unfortunately continues to face serious problems. We
believe that we will, in due course, receive further
information from the Secretary-General as to how the
United Nations can be more effective in its efforts to
improve the situation in Somalia, first and foremost by
strengthening its peacekeeping efforts. Of course, we
will be prepared to consider such proposals, taking into
account developments on the ground in terms of
security and in the political and humanitarian areas.

Unfortunately, the humanitarian situation is very
complex in the Sudan, particularly in Darfur. While the
information that we have received indicates some
recent progress, the overall situation remains alarming.

We highly appreciate the efforts of United
Nations agencies and other humanitarian organizations
in the Sudan, which are ensuring the delivery of
humanitarian supplies and supporting the civilian
population in very complex circumstances. As we have
recently discussed this situation in the Security Council
several times and will continue to do so, I will not
discuss it in depth. I would only reiterate that the
peacekeeping efforts of the African Union (AU) -
and, we hope, the future joint efforts by the AU and the
United Nations in the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) - should help
to improve the humanitarian situation. That is a very
important aspect of the peacekeepers' mandate, and we
will continue to do our utmost in the Security Council
to resolve all remaining problems that could prevent
full deployment of UNAMID. We are convinced that,
since the dialogue with the Government of the Sudan
must continue, those outstanding issues must be

resolved very swiftly, so that United Nations and AU
peacekeepers can establish their authority in the very
near future - in early 2008, if possible.

Of course, the humanitarian situations in the
hotspots to which Mr. Holmes referred, particularly
Somalia and the Sudan, have their own specific
characteristics. But one thing that they have in
common is the fact that they cannot be resolved
without substantial progress being made towards a
political settlement. In turn, such a settlement would
help to improve the security situation.

These are all related aspects that we have
discussed repeatedly, but we continue to believe that
they work together. Accordingly, the international
community and the United Nations, including the
Security Council, must make robust efforts in all three
areas - political, peacekeeping and humanitarian. At
the same time, we must not forget about establishing
infrastructure and creating the conditions necessary for
post-conflict restoration and recovery in this devastated
region.

We believe that, in order to facilitate the
Council's work, it would be useful for Mr. Holmes to
provide us with regular assessments of the
humanitarian situation. I should like to reiterate that
the humanitarian area is an important component in our
work; it is an aspect that we will be considering on a
daily basis.

