Mr. Vucic' (Serbia): First of all, I am very honoured
to be here. I thank the Council for the opportunity to
present the perspective of the Republic of Serbia on
the situation and events in Kosovo and Metohija in the
period from July to October.

More than anything else, Serbia wants
stability - political and economic - in the entire
Western Balkans. That is the condition for the survival
and progress of our Serbia, as well as of all others. It
is precisely for this reason that Serbia is committed
to peace and life and that, independently and without
pressures from outside, it has commenced difficult
and comprehensive reforms aimed at bringing about a
healthier and more competitive economy and freer and
richer citizens.

We do not invent problems outside the borders of
our country and we do not raise nationalistic tensions
in the region because we have enough courage to
face and solve our own problems courageously.
Serbia therefore has stayed away from conflicts in
the region - even verbal ones - for only weak and
irresponsible politicians, whenever they have internal
problems, open old nationalistic wounds and confuse
issues, turning the region backwards. We have no
part in that and we are not weak because of it; on the
contrary, it is the sign of our strength and long-term
strategic thinking.

All who are present in this forum know well the
importance of Kosovo and Metohija to my country
and all its citizens, as well as the attention with which
the Republic of Serbia follows developments in its
southern province administered under resolution 1244
(1999) by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Our genuine and long-
term commitment to a peaceful solution of the conflict
in Kosovo and Metohija is well known to all members
of the international community, both those who share
our views on the status of Kosovo and Metohija and
those who think otherwise. I believe that all Council
members recognize just as well the resolve in the steps
that the Republic of Serbia has taken lately to give
momentum to reconciliation among the people living
in Kosovo and to improve the living conditions of all
its residents alike: Albanians, Serbs, Gorani, Roma and
the members of other non-majority communities.

Serbia welcomes the efforts made by the United
Nations and UNMIK, the European Union (EU), NATO
and its presence in Kosovo and Metohija, and the Kosovo
Force, as well as the efforts made by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe that are aimed
at achieving the same goals of reconciliation, economic
progress and security for all residents of Kosovo and
Metohija.

Serbia trusts the United Nations. If it were not
for UNMIK, the world would be without much of the
data on the events in Kosovo and Metohija. We salute
the activities of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Mr. Farid Zarif, Head of UNMIK, who presented
the report on UNMIK for the period from 16 July to
15 October (S/2014/773).

Council members know that Belgrade is firm in
its position not to recognize the secession of Kosovo
and Metohija and its self-proclamation of statehood,
carried out by force and contrary to international law.
Yet that firm position is not an obstacle to negotiations
or the ever more lively communication with Pristina
today. That is so because Belgrade, the Government of
the Republic of Serbia, wants peace and stability in the
entire region; it wants dialogue and a solution, as well
as the ability of people, goods and ever more positive
ideas to circulate freely throughout the region.

It is therefore right to say that our efforts - the
new, positive approach of Serbia to the difficult Balkan
questions - have eased the tensions in the region,
where there is less and less fear among neighbours and
more and more acceptance of the initiatives coming
from Serbia. We have proved by our actions that we
want, more than anything else, peace in the Balkans
as the basis of development. We want a normal, decent
and ordered Serbia and are well aware that it is possible
only in such an environment.

Likewise, we know that dialogue is the only way to
achieve that goal and we shall do all we can to ensure
that it continues in the way that Serbia has promoted it
by taking decisions that improve the lives of the people
in Kosovo and Metohija. Surely that will not prevent
Serbia from continuing to insist on its position that the
unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo and
Metohija is illegal; yet, probably for the first time in
many years, the position of the Government of Serbia
does not impede life in the province. On the contrary,
we are dedicated to that life, putting it before any other
interest. At the same time, it gives us the right to request
for the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija exactly what we
want for the Albanians - the possibility to live, work,
be safe, communicate and move around normally.

We therefore believe that everything that Serbia
has done in the past two years towards spreading
and promoting those positions deserves attention,
recognition and support. We do so primarily because
our desire for peace and cooperation in the entire
Balkans is the only way to make that region an equal
part of Europe in a manner that will ensure that the
Balkans region is in no way different from the rest
of Europe. We do so also as we are demonstrating,
day in and day out, that centuries-old conflicts, vast
differences and completely opposed positions do not
have to obstruct dialogue and solutions. We only need
to promote dialogue and solutions as our supreme value
and most important goal. That is exactly what this
Government of Serbia has done.

The report is regular, yet far from routine for
the Republic of Serbia. The fact that a document is
submitted regularly must not mean that it is drawn up
lightly. We are therefore convinced that the authors of
the report wrote it with special attention, well aware
of its importance for the people of the province, the
Republic of Serbia and the environs. We read the report
carefully, not to maliciously find fault with it, but to
present, with it in mind, proposals for the improvement
of the situation in the province. The report is important
to us; it is being heeded by the entire world today, while
the Serbs of Kosovo and Metohija look to it, just as they
look to our response, for the confirmation of their just
demands. I shall therefore touch on a number of issues
brought up in the document.

It is said in the introductory part of the report
that "The priorities of the Mission remain to promote
security, stability and respect for human rights"
(5/2014/773, para. 2) in Kosovo and Metohija. Well, if
the said areas were all right, they would not be priorities.
Yet, regrettably, not even the basic preconditions for
normal life have been created in Kosovo and Metohija
so that today, more than 15 years after the arrival of
international presences, the Security Council needs to
discuss how to ensure in the first place the elementary
living conditions for Serbs and other non-Albanians
in Kosovo and Metohija. We therefore believe that the
role of UNMIK should continue to be strengthened in
the areas of the current competencies of the Mission,
whereas the weakening of the role it has been entrusted
with would lessen its capacity to fulfil its mandate,
particularly in areas of vital importance for Serbs and
other non-Albanians living in Kosovo and Metohija.

We must not disregard the importance of the trust
that the Serbian and other non-Albanian populations
in Kosovo have placed in UNMIK, either. That trust
underscores the need for a more active and visible
presence and engagement of the Mission in Kosovo and
Metohija. Today, in the second decade of the twenty-
first century, there are still people in one part of Europe
who cannot tend their fields or frequent and pray in
their places of worship without fear, while their children
go to school in fear. That dark picture is the defeat of
modern civilization and, sadly, a daily occurrence in
the life of many Serbs and non-Albanians of Kosovo
and Metohija.

In addition to the so-called northern Kosovo,
which was singled out at one point as a separate area
for monitoring, attention should also be accorded in
accordance with the basic priorities of UNMIK, such
as promoting "security, stability and respect for human
rights", the lives of Serbs and the numerous difficulties
they encounter every day in the so-called south of the
Ibar River area and other parts of Kosovo and Metohija.

The lives of Serbs in enclaves all over the province
are quiet, modest and difficult; they live in today's
ghettos, to the shame of Europe and the world. That is
the common knowledge of all UNMIK members who
have been there, and it is the obligation of each and
every righteous servant of the United Nations to report
the plight and predicament of those Serbian towns and
villages to the world. That is why the regular UNMIK
reports should focus special attention on the harsh
realities in which Serbs south of the Ibar River live. We
must - and we want to - defend their life and their
right to work, to move freely, to be free, to go to school,
to receive medical treatment and to be able to protect
themselves.

It is precisely for those reasons that nobody can
speak of Serbian chauvinism, a new Republika Srpska
or hegemonistic aspirations today. The right to life is
universal and untouchable. Serbia, too, has the right to
fight for this right. That is all the more so as, this time,
Serbia does not demand of its people anything that it is
not ready to give to other peoples. Life, as a foundation,
calls for solutions like this, because, after all, we were
given life to preserve, protect and respect - our lives
and other peoples'. Serbia and its Government have
decided unequivocally to respect each and every life in
Kosovo and Metohija and requests that the term "each
and every life" encompass the lives of the Serbs in
Kosovo and Metohija as well.

That is why today, as we await and seek a solution
to the Kosovo knot, we have nothing to be ashamed of
and have no reason to respond to all the conditions that
have been set, overtly or covertly, in any other way than
the way in which we have already responded. Because,
through our attitude and platform, we have done
precisely every single thing that the world has asked us
to do over the years. We have normalized relations with
Pristina. We talk to Pristina, We seek joint solutions
with Pristina. We respect the demands of Pristina, and
our attitude towards Pristina and the Albanians is not
the attitude that we would have towards anyone who did
not have the same rights that we demand for our people.
After a century of conflicts, wars and victims, this
Government has made a step towards the Albanians
that, surely, can be called historic. Instead of conflict,
this Government chose agreement and solutions instead
ofproblems and, most importantly, life instead of death.
That is the life and the rights that we demand for Serbs
as well.

The Republic of Serbia is firmly committed to
continuing its active and constructive participation
in negotiations with Pristina at all levels and to
implementing the agreements reached thus far. We
are ready to continue the process. Yet our willingness
to negotiate does not mean that we are weak; our
constructiveness does not mean that we acquiesce
easily, and our belief does not mean that we are naive.
Unfortunately, we are lacking an interlocutor on the
other side of the table. The administrative organs of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in Pristina
have not been formed yet, half a year after the elections.
We expect that they will be formed in the coming days.

However, without waiting for a Government
to be formed in Pristina, the Republic of Serbia
has implemented a whole range of measures that it
committed itself to under the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations,
reached in Brussels. We have amended the Law
on Higher Education and adopted a new Cadastre
Regulation to make the implementation of the relevant
agreements possible. With respect to the freedom of
movement, we have given permission to the bearers
of identity documents issued by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Pristina to cross the
border crossings at Nikola Tesla and Nis Constantine
the Great airports, in Belgrade and Nis respectively, and
the four busiest crossings to Hungary, Croatia, Bulgaria
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Also,
a number of high-ranking officials from the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government attended important
regional conferences and other events in Belgrade
during the reporting period.

We regret the lack of progress in the implementation
of the key segment of the Brussels Agreement related
to the establishment of a community of Serbian
municipalities in Kosovo and Metohija. Prior to the
dissolution of the Parliament in Pristina, no preparations
were made for a legal framework for the effective
implementation of the competencies of the future
community in the field of economic development,
education, health and urban and rural planning in the
community's territory, as provided for by article 4 of
the Brussels Agreement. For its part, the community's
management team has drawn up a draft statute and is
ready to send it to the Committee on the Implementation
of the Brussels Agreement.

Let me highlight in this context the problem of
the integration of 30 former members of the Ministry
of the Interior of the Republic of Serbia from Kosovo
and Metohija into the Kosovo police service in the
municipalities in northern Kosovo and Metohija.
Although the Government of the Republic of Serbia
has fully implemented the relevant agreements and
terminated their employment, those members have
not yet been advised of the status of their applications,
let alone admitted or fully integrated into the Kosovo
police service. Likewise, the integration of the former
administrative staff of the Ministry of the Interior and
the firefighters has not begun either.

The Republic of Serbia cannot accept the part of
the report related to northern Kosovo and Metohija
in which the situation in the locality of Brdjani,
in northern Kosovska Mitrovica, is presented in a
fragmentary manner and therefore inaccurately. To the
disappointment of my country, that part of the report is
silent on the basic problem in the area, which is the fact
that, through land usurpation and illegal construction,
the Kosovo and Metohija Albanians continue to press in
every possible way for changes to the ethnic structure
of northern Kosovska Mitrovica.

According to information provided by the officials
of the municipality of Kosovska Mitrovica north,
the Albanians plan to build 172 housing units in the
locality of Brdjani for the veterans of the so-called
Kosovo Liberation Army, who never - and I repeat
never - lived there prior to 1999, and a small number of
Albanians who did. That serves to put into perspective
the actions of the local Serbian population, which
were taken, rightly, in protest against the attempts
to artificially change the demographic picture on the
ground and paint it in negative colours as unfounded
and unconstructive. On the other hand, it would be
very easy to prove exactly what the previous situation
was and take measures to prevent politically motivated
changes to the demographic structure in northern
Kosovo and Metohija.

Let me also point out here that the criminal
proceedings against Zubin Potok mayor Stevan Vulovic
and other Serbs from the municipality of Zubin Potok
serve to bring political pressure to bear on - and
prevent the running of - the municipality as a local
institution of self-government with a Serbian majority.
The prosecutions also serve to derail the implementation
of the First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations between Belgrade and
Pristina, providing for the unencumbered running of
municipalities with Serbian majorities in Kosovo and
Metohija.

With respect to the security situation, the report
does mention problems in the implementation of laws,
in particular at the local level. The Serbs and their
property are targeted in the majority of ethnically
motivated attacks, while personal and property
insecurity remain the main obstacles to the sustainable
return of the Serbian population to localities from
which they were expelled.

I have to bring to the attention of the Council the
tragic death of Gendarme Stevan Sindelie. He was
shot and killed by members of armed illegal logging
gangs from Kosovo and Metohija in the Ground Safety
Zone along the administrative boundary line between
Kosovo and Metohija and central Serbia on 28 August.
It is impermissible that groups of civilians armed with
automatic rifles roam freely, cut wood illegally and
attack the security forces of the Republic of Serbia as
the latter attempt, quite legally, to prevent them from
doing so.

It is also my duty to bring to the attention of the
Council that, on 28 August, the Feast of the Dormition,
once celebrated by the townspeople of Dakovica as their
patron saint's day, the displaced citizens of that town
of Serbian nationality were prevented once again from
visiting the holy places in their place of birth because
they had been told that international forces could not
guarantee their security. The people of Dakovica had
the same problem on Christmas Eve, when Albanians
stoned their buses, while on All Souls' Day they were
prevented from visiting the graves of friends and
relatives.

The Serbs from Suva Reka were also prevented
from marking the same religious holiday in a dignified
manner. A few hundred Albanians in the village of
Musutiste blocked the passage of displaced Serbs to
the local Orthodox church in which they intended to
celebrate the Feast of the Dormition. The extremists
blocking the passage carried Albanian flags and
posters with offensive messages. If the displaced Serbs
cannot visit the towns and villages in which they were
born or the graves of their relatives on even one day a
year without fearing for their safety, the sincerity of the
call of the provincial institutions to displaced Serbs to
return is very much in doubt, as is the capacity of those
institutions to ensure personal and property security
for all residents of Kosovo and Metohija.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia is
also deeply worried that a flag of the Republic of

Serbia was removed from the fortress at Zveean in
the night between 14 and 15 October, and that another
Serbian flag flown over the building of the Treasury
Department in northern Kosovska Mitrovica was
burned on 16 October.

The Republic of Serbia calls on all responsible and
active actors in the international community to pay
maximal heed to the conclusions of the Chief Prosecutor
of the European Union's Special Investigative Task
Force, Clint Williamson. He stated that compelling
evidence has been found to file an indictment against
senior officials of the so-called Kosovo Liberation
Army for the persecution of Serbs, Roma and Kosovo
and Metohija Albanians. The campaign of persecution
included murders, abductions, disappearances, illegal
detentions in camps in Kosovo and Metohija and
Albania, sexual violence and other forms of inhumane
treatment, such as forced displacement and the
destruction of churches and other religious sites. Those
responsible for the most heinous crimes must not be
acquitted due to a lack of evidence caused by the brutal
intimidation of witnesses.

Oliver Ivanovie, leader of the civic initiative
Serbia, Democracy, Justice, was apprehended at
the end of January and indicted at the beginning of
August. The first hearing was held in the Mitrovica
Basic Court on 26 August in a case consolidated with
those of Dragoljub Delibasie, the retired Head of the
Police Department of Kosovo and Metohija, Ilija and
Nebojsa Vujacie and Aleksandar Lazovic', indicted for
grave criminal offences and war crimes committed in
1999 and 2000. All the indictees pleaded not guilty
on all counts of the indictment. The custody of Oliver
Ivanovic' was extended until 26 October 2014 and then
for another two months.

Yet only two days after the Prosecutor of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) raised the indictment against Ivanovie and
requested extension of custody for him, the Court
released on bail Ismet Haxha, one of the indictees in the
Drenica Group case, charged with war crimes against
civilians committed at Likovac in 1998 and 1999. Haxha
was absent for the rest of the trial, hiding in the Pristina
Clinical Centre. The instances of double standards
evident in the Kosovo and Metohijajudiciary's practice
instil fear and a sense ofinsecurity in Serbian and other
non-Albanian communities in the province.

Telling evidence of the corruption and dysfunction
of the Kosovo and Metohija justice system includes
the striking from the record of key witness testimony
in the so-called Klecka case because of changes in
criminal laws; the acquittal of Fatmir Limaj and his
co-defendants, who had been charged with murder,
torture and threats to the health of Serbian and Albanian
civilians and prisoners of war; the subsequent reopening
ofthe case and the Pristina officials' untoward reactions
to Limaj's and his co-defendants' arrests, which gave
rise to a request for revision of the EULEX mandate
being introduced in the Kosovo Assembly; and, finally,
Limaj's release from prison to house arrest.

It is clear that the local justice system, like the
international presences in the province, is under the
strong influence of the political elites in Pristina. The
Government of the Republic of Serbia's concern about
the work of the judiciary in Kosovo and Metohija is
relevant in the light of disclosures that bribes have been
given to cease proceedings in dozens of cases against
Kosovo and Metohija Albanians and that evidence has
been fabricated in the increasingly senseless case of
Oliver Ivanovic', all of which casts serious doubt on
whether EULEX is immune to corruption.

To fully implement the Brussels Agreement and
the previous agreements in the technical dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, the Republic of Serbia
has fulfilled its obligations. Pristina, however, has so
far failed to take the necessary steps to comply with its
obligations in such key areas as addressing inadequacies
in the Amnesty Law, the Law on the Budget and the
Law on Local Self-Government. Nevertheless, I would
have to say the authorities have also taken a lot positive
steps as well.

In assessing the constitutionality of the Amnesty
Law, the so-called Constitutional Court of Kosovo
found unconstitutional the articles of the Law that
grant amnesty to perpetrators of acts of destruction or
damage to the property of others or to movable property,
arson, damage to items belonging to others, document
forgery and special cases of document forgery, with the
result that such acts are now excluded from amnesty.
Acts that are also excluded from the Amnesty Law are
those that can be used by the judiciary organs of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government (PISG)
to prosecute persons of Serbian nationality in Kosovo
and Metohija. In this context, we would point out that
international judges of the Constitutional Court of
Kosovo, Judge Robert Carolan, from the United States,
and Judge Almiro Rodrigues, from Portugal, wrote in
dissent from the decision the Court that the amnesty for
the aforementioned acts is not unconstitutional.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia
expresses its deep concern over members of the
majority community in Kosovo and Metohija regularly
provoking incidents that prevent Serbs and other
non-Albanians from returning to their homes from
which they had been expelled. I would like to cite a few
sad examples, which are indicative of kind of attacks
that are being carried out on returnee houses and other
property.

On 22 August, unknown perpetrators fired at the
home of Tomislav Dabetic' in the village of Saljinovica,
in the municipality of Istok. Fortunately, the returnee
family was not at home at the time of the attack. Upon
their arrival at their home, however, they noticed
damage to the house - a bullet had gone through a
window and a door and ended up in the bathroom. The
incident spread fear and anxiety among the people of
Saljinovica, as well as among all those intending to
return to that village, all the more so as the victims of
the attack were a family who had never done any harm
to anybody.

At the end of August, five houses were demolished
in the centre of Dakovica. These houses belonged
to the Serbian Stefie family, who were the original
settlers who literally built the town from scratch.
The demolition was carried out at the direct order of
Municipal President Mimoza Kusari Lila, whereby a
clear message was sent to the Serbs that they are not
welcome back. In that regard, I recall that 12,000 Serbs
lived in Dakovica prior to 1999; today, only four elderly
ladies remain, living on the monastery premises.

In the night between 7 and 8 October, unknown
perpetrators broke into the houses and appendant
buildings of the Serbian returnee families of Miletic',
Konie and Tosie in the village of Grabac, municipality
of Klina, stealing much of their movable property and
causing considerable material damage. There is no
doubt that these acts were motivated by the intention
to intimidate potential returnees and discourage them
from returning to Kosovo and Metohija.

Accordingly, it may be noted that the overall trend
of decelerating the returns of displaced Kosovo and
Metohija Serbs continues and that the PISG in Pristina
have not done enough to fulfil their obligations and
facilitate the return of the expellees. The return of the
internally displaced persons (IDPs) is being prevented
by numerous administrative obstacles, with the return
procedures adopted being insurmountable practical
barriers to Serbs and other non-Albanians returning to
their centuries-old homes. They are also catalysts for
lasting changes in the demographic picture of the entire
province.

It is my duty to remind the Council that the
Republic of Serbia is the country that has the greatest
number of IDPs in Europe, with 230,000 people having
that status, 18,000 of whom are in Kosovo and Metohija
itself. Even 15 years after the expulsion, only 2,000
out of 4,000 lDPs who have returned home realize
their right to sustainable return, as the lack of basic
security, economic and social preconditions are a major
impediment to it.

Of particular concern is the situation with respect
to the protection of cultural and religious heritage
in Kosovo and Metohija in the reporting period,
as Mr. Farid Zarif has already mentioned. At the
beginning of September, unknown persons removed
the plaque on the Velika Hoea-Zociste road, which had
been unveiled on 21 August by members of the Serbian
Association of Journalists to honour the memory of
abducted colleagues Dura Slavuj and Ranko Perenie at
the place where the two Radio Pristina reporters were
kidnapped in 1998. It is most likely that plaque and
the concrete pedestal were uprooted with a tractor or
a construction-type vehicle; the removal was noted on
11 September. It is the third time that the plaque has
been vandalized and removed since it was first put in
place.

The threat to the security of, and the pressure
being constantly brought to bear on, the monks of one
of the holiest Serbian places of worship, Visoki Decani
monastery, which is included in the UNESCO World
Heritage List, is particularly worrisome. In the night
between 11 and 12 October, red and black graffiti was
scribbled on the walls of the appendant buildings on
the monastery estate. The graffiti included the words
"ISIS", "The Caliphate is coming", "UCK" - the
Albanian-language acronym for the Kosovo Liberation
Army - and "AKSH" - the Albanian-language
acronym for the Albanian National Army; two of the
pieces of graffiti were written in Arabic. The Kosovo
Police and KFOR were notified of the incident and they
carried out an investigation. During the investigation,
a group of Albanian extremists congregated in front of
the monastery, provoking and intimidating the Serbian
monks as they shouted "UCK". As early as the next
evening, the graffiti "ISIS" and "AKSH" were scribbled
on the monastery gate all over again.

There is no doubt that, if allowed, the authors of
the graffiti would conduct in Kosovo and Metohija
the same policy of evil, hatred and death that is much
in evidence these days in parts of Iraq, Syria and
Lebanon, the so-called realm of the terrorists of ISIS,
even though it is condemned by the entire civilized and
justice- and freedom-loving world. The experience of
decades past and the present practice frighten Serbs in
Kosovo and Metohija. Ifthe United Nations is unable to
provide protection to a site that its specialized agency
put on the World Heritage List, how safe then are the
houses, schools and places of worship of non-Albanian
residents of the province?

In our View, the report is deficient in the segment
related to the protection of the property rights of the
residents of Kosovo and Metohija. Apart from a short
account of the work of the Kosovo Property Agency
and information on the number of cases dealt with in
the reporting period and the number of unsolved cases
before the Agency, the report is silent on the situation
of the property of Serbs and other non-Albanians.
No mention is made of the manner in which property
cases are solved by this Agency, that is, whether the
expropriator has left the property in question, whether
the owner has entered into possession of his or her
property or whether the request for the restitution
of property has been rejected. Also, in line with
previous reports, no mention is made of the fate of the
abandoned property of Serbs and other non-Albanians
in Kosovo and Metohija, which is liable to renewed
expropriation by Albanians as a result of fraudulent
transactions between Albanian buyers and alleged
owners and exposed to destruction and damage, as well
as unfounded expropriation by municipal authorities
without proper compensation or with no compensation
at all.

The fate of the 18,500 complaints of Serbs and
non-Albanians for compensation for destroyed or
damaged property is mentioned nowhere in the report.
Those complaints have been rejected en masse by the
courts on account of the complainants' failure to pay
high litigation fees -despite the fact that they are IDPs
in a difficult financial situation and had requested to be
excused by the courts from paying the fees.

The report for this period also does not provide
anything more than an accounting of the number of
completed cases before the Kosovo Property Agency: it
indicates the number of decisions rather than the number
of enforcement actions - the number of owners who
entered into possession. A property restitution decision
in Kosovo and Metohija still falls far short of the actual
restitution of the property: an original owner's entry
into possession. In addition to personal insecurity, this
is one of the main reasons that IDP returns to Kosovo
and Metohija are far from satisfactory.

The privatization process conducted by the
Kosovo Privatization Agency continues to evolve
in contravention of international and European
conventions on human rights. Public and socially owned
companies in Serbian communities are privatized much
more frequently. Their sale to persons of Albanian
nationality deprives those communities of economic
resources, thereby providing an additional impetus for
the exodus of the Serbian population from Kosovo and
Metohija.

Let me recall that in its reply of 22 April 2013 to
the letters of the Office for Kosovo and Metohija of
the Government of the Republic of Serbia, in which it
was requested that an end be put to the privatization
conducted contrary to resolution 1244 (1999), UNMIK
stated that indeed the privatization through the Kosovo
Privatization Agency was contrary to the resolution
and UNMIK regulations, as the Agency was not a legal
successor of the Kosovo Trust Agency and it was not
established on the basis of a law that was in force in
Kosovo and Metohij a in accordance with the resolution.

A specific problem has been created by the decision
of the Kosovo Privatization Agency to liquidate Hotel
Junior in the municipality of Strpce. The hotel is the
site of a collective accommodation centre for 85 IDPs.
Should it be sold, those persons would be displaced
once again, which would be morally unacceptable from
a humanitarian point of view.

I must also inform the Council of the serious
intention of the PISG in Pristina to expropriate the
immovable property of physical persons and legal
entities in the territory of the municipality of Strpce,
under the pretext of the construction of a tourist centre.
The property is owned by more than 820 physical persons
and legal entities * including the Inex ski centre in
Brezovica - preponderantly of Serbian extraction and
the majority population in the municipality.

Bearing in mind that almost all owners and
property holders are of Serbian nationality, we are
of the opinion that the intended expropriation is
discriminatory and that confiscating land from persons
of Serbian nationality will result in an exodus of the
remaining Serbian population and a change in the
ethnic structure of the municipality of Strpce. The
actions of the PISG are violating the rights of the Serbs
from Strpce guaranteed by the European Convention
for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms.

Also, the PISG in Pristina are attempting to
appropriate the property of the Republic of Serbia in
Kosovo and Metohija in an unlawful way, in disregard
of the fact that the question of the property of the
Republic of Serbia and of the economic entities in the
territory of Kosovo and Metohija will be the subject of
the negotiation process conducted by the Republic of
Serbia with the PISG, with mediation provided by the
European Union.

Serbia looks forward to the resumption of
negotiations with Pristina, because it brings peace and
stability to the entire region. Serbia is committed to
reforms and will make no compromises in that regard.
Count on Serbia as a pillar of stability and, very soon, a
modern and successful country.

I would just like to say a word in reference to what
was said by Mr. Farid Zarif with regard to the drone
incident that happened during a football match between
Serbia and Albania. Serbia had nothing to do with that
incident. We reacted very appropriately. Fourteen days
after the incident, a flag made by Albanian supporters
was placed in the centre of Belgrade. One can imagine
what would have happened in some other countries
under similar circumstances. I daresay as well - as
Mr. Zarif also mentioned, and I thank him for doing
so - that we received and were great hosts to the
Albanian Prime Minister, who visited for the first time
in 68 years.

