Mr. Sychov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): First of
all, I wish to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for organizing a discussion in the Security
Council on "Justice and the rule of law: the United
Nations role". We believe that the discussion of this
item is important and timely. We would also like to
express our gratitude to the Secretary-General for
preparing a report for today's discussion. It is very
important that, in that report, the importance of
observing the international norms set forth in the
United Nations Charter is emphasized.

The Security Council and the United Nations as a
whole make a valuable contribution to the re-
establishment of national legal systems in post-conflict
societies, particularly in the field of transitional justice.
The participation of the Security Council in the
exercise of international justice with respect to persons
who have committed crimes during conflicts
substantially influenced the development of the system
of international criminal tribunals and international
humanitarian law.

At the same time, this participation has generated
many critical observations by members of the
international community. These critical observations
mainly relate to the correlation between Council
activities and national efforts to restore justice and
achieve national reconciliation in post-conflict
societies. The lessons learned through the functioning
of the international tribunals for the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda confirm that transitional justice systems
must be based to a greater extent on national
foundations. The United Nations peacekeeping
missions are also a key aspect of the Organization's
involvement in establishing the rule of law and
rebuilding a justice system in conflict and post-conflict
societies. The Security Council should focus greater
attention on the issue of the safety of the personnel
engaged in those missions.

The Republic of Belarus understands the topic for
consideration during today's open meeting to be much
broader than simply "Justice and the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict societies". The Security
Council plays a considerable role in strengthening the
rule of law in international relations, mainly in the area
of its primary responsibility, the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is the principal
United Nations organ legitimizing the use of force for
resolving situations posing a threat to international
peace and security and the application of other
enforcement measures against States under Chapter VII
of the Charter. Belarus does not accept any legal
conceptual innovations aimed at sidestepping or
limiting the power of the Security Council to authorize
or limit the use of military force. There should be no
double standards in such an important realm of
international law as the law of international security.

New global challenges have appeared in the
twenty-first century and the Security Council has had
to respond to these new challenges. A number of
important resolutions on suppressing terrorism and
preventing non-State actors from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction, in particular resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004), have been adopted. These resolutions
show that the Council has been going beyond mere
political enforcement and has been making a genuine
impact on setting up norms of international law.
Belarus believes that the involvement of the Security
Council in forming rules of international law can be
justified only by exceptional and extraordinary
circumstances that constitute a threat to international
peace and security.

It is important for the Security Council to become
a more democratic and representative organ of the
United Nations and to ensure general consent of States
with respect to its setting of norms. In this connection,
we call upon the members of the Security Council to
make a comprehensive examination of its decisions to
define the compliance of those decisions with the
provisions of universal treaties and other norms of
international law. The practice of including in
resolutions political elements that contradict existing
international law challenges the idea of the supremacy
of law.

We note in this connection the need for more
constructive and comprehensive action on the criteria
to be used for the imposition of sanctions by the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council.

In conclusion, allow me to say that I support
continuing the practice of holding open Security
Council debates on the United Nations role in ensuring
the rule of law and strengthening justice. In
considering this issue, major emphasis should be
placed on the issues of the rule of law in international
relations and the role of the Security Council in
securing this rule.

