Mr. Strommen: The Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations conducted a total of eight
formal meetings in 2002, including one meeting with
troop-contributing countries to the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) - commonly
known as the new mechanism - which was held on 28
August.

By means of a note by the President of the
Security Council of 14 January this year (S/2002/56),
the Council adopted the mandate of the new
mechanism for cooperation with troop-contributing
countries, set out as an integral part of the mandate of
the Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping.
This represented the culmination of a year-long process
aimed at strengthening cooperation and consultation
between the Security Council, the Secretariat and
troop-contributing countries.

Following the adoption of that note, the Working
Group was not given any immediate tasks by the
Council. Consequently, no meetings were held before
the end of May this year. The Working Group then met
to discuss two non-papers, introduced by the United
Kingdom and the Russian Federation respectively, on
how to improve military advice to the Security
Council. The need for enhanced and improved military
advice to the Council was acknowledged by members
of the Group. However, it was not possible to reach any
agreement on the recommendations put forward in the
non-papers.

Given a couple of incidents relating to actors
wishing to participate in troop contributors' meetings
in accordance with resolution 1353 (2001), the
Working Group was tasked to elaborate an approach
aimed at avoiding such incidents in the future. The
response by the Working Group, adopted in the note by
the President (S/2002/964) of 27 August, was an
attempt to establish a coherent and inclusive practice in
this field. The note outlines that actors listed in annex
II.B of resolution 1353 (2001), which do not have an
automatic right to participate in the mentioned
meetings, should make a request for participation to the
President of the Council, and that the President,
following consultations with Council members, should
extend an invitation as appropriate and instruct the
Secretariat accordingly. It now rests on all actors
involved to implement that new procedure.

I will now turn to the meeting of the so-called
new mechanism for cooperation with troop-
contributing countries held on 28 August. As Council
members will recall, this was the first meeting held in
this new format. As Chairman of the Working Group,
Iam pleased to note that the meeting was generally
appraised in positive terms by Council members and
troop contributors alike. It was pointed out that the
meeting gave rise to a more substantive debate
compared to the consultation meetings under resolution
1353 (2001), and that the smaller format and the
specific, well-defined agenda item contributed to a
fruitful exchange of views among Council members,
troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat.

The experience gained so far suggests that such
meetings are not likely to overburden the Council or to
interfere with its prerogatives. On the contrary, in my
view, the new format has its merits, and efforts should
be made towards its further improvement. I would
therefore encourage close contact and consultations
among Council members, troop-contributing countries
and the Secretariat with a view to organizing further
meetings of the mechanism when this is deemed
appropriate. This will, not least, serve the important
purpose of strengthening the much-needed partnership
between those who design and those who implement
the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
Towards the end of the year, the Working Group
informally discussed possible topics which should form
the basis for future elaboration, with the overall aim of
improving practices within United Nations
peacekeeping. In that regard, challenges relating to
command and control in peacekeeping operations,
lessons learned, and disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation have been raised by
members. However, it has been underlined that before
any debate can be launched, the specific challenges to
be addressed should be clearly defined, taking due
account of the mandate of the Working Group as well
as the mandates of other relevant bodies in order not to
duplicate efforts. This preparatory work is currently
ongoing, and the Working Group might therefore wish
to revisit it under its new Chair.

The Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
is a standing organ under the Security Council
mandated to consider both generic and mission-specific
aspects of peacekeeping operations. As the outgoing
Chairman, I take the view that the Security Council
would benefit from continued input from the Working
Group in both these areas as a means to strengthen
United Nations peacekeeping capacity.

