Mr. Yousfi (Algeria) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Algeria would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting. We
would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, for his briefing on the most
recent developments in the tormented region of the
Middle East.
The entire world looked on impotent as tragedy
struck Lebanon. It expressed its indignation at the
indiscriminate bombings and attacks that killed
hundreds of civilians. It expressed its horror at the
massacre in Qana and asked whether the true motives
of the Israeli army's systematic destruction of Vital
basic infrastructure were not to make life impossible

for hundreds of thousands of displaced persons. The
world was rightly distressed by the large-scale
Violations of basic human rights and of international
humanitarian law perpetrated by the aggressor, which
did not hesitate to use destructive weapons, some of
which are prohibited.

Neither could the world understand why it took
so long for the Security Council to put an end to the
tragedy, the destruction and the massacre of civilians.
The rumblings that we are hearing suggest that,
unfortunately, this is not yet over. It is certainly urgent
that, in order to avert the risk of further violence,
everything be done so that the necessary measures can
be taken, including through the strengthening the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, within the
framework of resolution 1701 (2006), in order to put
an end to Israeli aggression and to restore peace to
Lebanon.

If the situation in Lebanon is a real tragedy and a
scandal in the eyes of the international community,
what can be said of the situation preventing in
Palestine? What can be said of the suffering that the
Palestinian people has been experiencing for more than
60 years? What can be said of the secret killings and
the massive violations of human rights that the Israeli
army is daily carrying out in the occupied Palestinian
territories? What can be said about the deplorable
living conditions of an entire people deprived of its
fundamental rights?

My delegation firmly condemns these repeated -
and unpunished - violations of human rights. It
expresses its grave concern at the occupying Power's
continued kidnappings of elected members of
democratic institutions, most recently the Deputy
Prime Minister and the Secretary-General of the
Palestinian Legislative Council, and it demands the
immediate, unconditional release of all those who have
been kidnapped in defiance of international law and in
the face of the protests of the international community.

The force, violence and terror being used against
the Palestinian people will not resolve this conflict.
They will not address security concerns and will not
put an end to the determination of the Palestinian
people to build a State of its own and to live in dignity,
peace and security. These condemnable acts will only
further exacerbate tension and provoke more violence.

It is time for these troubles to come to an end. It
is time for the international community to intervene,
first and foremost to protect the Palestinian population
from the ferocious occupation, from oppression and
from the terror being imposed upon it, and then to
bring about peace. Such peace was offered by the Arab
Summit in 2000, but that offer was never taken up. It is
time for the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council to be respected, and for an end to bombings
and war in the Middle East region, a region that has for
so long sought renewed peace and prosperity.

