Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing
on the Secretary-General's report on the evolution of
the Da'esh threat to international peace and security
(S/2017/467). The report also gives an account of the
United Nations activities in support of Member States
for the purposes of combating this threat.

The report refers to the geographical presence
of this terrorist group and its affiliates, its growing
transnational character, its constant adaptation to new
circumstances, and the variety of methods it uses to
perpetrate its attacks. It also refers to the initiatives
carried out by the United Nations, its Member States and
international, regional and subregional organizations
to deal with the rapid evolution of the threat posed
by Da'esh.

However, the recent attacks in Tehran, London,
Kabul, Adwa, Baghdad, Manila, Manchester and Paris
indicate that everything that is being done is not enough
to protect innocent civilians from the barbarism of
Da'esh and its affiliates. Uruguay views with concern
the systematic execution of terrorist acts and reaffirms
its absolute rejection of the use of violence against the
civilian population, the use of intimidation aimed at
disrupting the way of life of societies, shattering their
basic principles and values, and undermining freedom
and respect for the fundamental human rights that
underpin peaceful coexistence.

We are aware of and thankful for the unceasing
work of the United Nations through its bodies to prevent
and combat terrorism in various key areas, as well as
the work of many States and regional and subregional
organizations. We would like to highlight some elements
that we consider fundamental to succeeding in the fight
against terrorism, which the international community
must continue to strengthen and bring together.

The first of the elements is cooperation. More and
better cooperation is needed. There is no doubt that
cooperation and coordinated action in different areas
and levels are necessary to combat the multiple facets
of this complex terrorist phenomenon. This includes
greater interaction between public and private actors
and different sectors of civil society.
A second element we wish to mention is the
primary responsibility of States to combat terrorism
and the political will they must unambiguously have to
achieve that goal. The development of national counter-
terrorism strategies, while respecting the obligations
of the United Nations Charter and international
law, including international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, is a fundamental
aspect of this commitment, particularly in the countries
most concerned.

A third element to highlight is technical assistance.
It is essential that countries lacking the necessary
capacities to prevent or combat such a complex and
changing phenomenon, and particularly those most
affected, can receive technical and financial assistance.

A fourth and last element that we wish to emphasize
is prevention. In this regard, I would like to mention
the recent resolution 2354 (2017), on a comprehensive
international framework to counteract the discourse
of terrorist groups, reflecting an effort to prevent and
combat violent extremism that can lead to radicalization
and terrorism. This element is part of the struggle in
the field of ideas to which Uruguay attaches particular
importance, and for whose sake it is necessary to seek
and foster channels of dialogue between Governments
and various non-State actors.

In addition, promoting tolerance and peaceful
coexistence and bolstering respect for international
law, the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
human rights and fundamental freedoms are the
responsibility of States as members of the international
community and contribute to preventing and combating
terrorism and violent extremism.

