Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, for his briefing. We would also like to express
our gratitude to the new Ambassador and Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Mr. Mahmoud Saikal,
for his first briefing to the Council.

We reiterate our condemnation of the terrorist
attack in the vicinity of the Embassy of Spain in Kabul
on 11 December and convey our condolences to the
families of the victims and to the Governments of Spain
and Afghanistan. We note with deep-rooted concern that
the security situation in the country has deteriorated
over the past few months, owing to the increase in
the number of attacks perpetrated by the Taliban and
other insurgent groups. The seizure of the city of
Kunduz represents a worrying setback in the situation.
Against that backdrop, we welcome the provision of
security assistance to support the Afghan National
Security Forces. The cooperation of the international
community in the areas of development, infrastructure
and the peace process has been significant and reflects
an essential multi-dimensional focus for supporting
the Government and the people of Afghanistan. All
such support must be accompanied by national efforts,
and we therefore hope that the Government will soon
appoint a Minister for Defence and an Attorney General
as soon as possible.

The humanitarian situation cannot be ignored. The
security situation has profoundly impacted the civilian
population, and the earthquake of 26 October has further
exacerbated the humanitarian situation, causing the
mass displacement ofpersons, particularly in the north-
east of Afghanistan. The international community must
stand ready to respond favourably to humanitarian
appeals and support the process of development in that
country. We would like to underscore the importance of
Afghan-led initiatives aimed at promoting inter-ethnic
and interreligious dialogue. For that reason, we attach
particular importance to the convening of the first
Ulema National Conference in Kabul on 12 October.
The Ulema Conference brought together leaders from
all parts of the country to discuss the peace process and
issues of national interest. We hope that that conference
will develop into a standing body, promoting national
reconciliation and contributing to fighting violent
extremism. We are grateful for the support and
assistance provided by UNAMA to the holding of the
conference, which was a UNAMA-led initiative for the
consolidation of peace.

The ceasefire agreement between the Government
and local stakeholders in Baghlan province also
deserves our support and backing. We would like to
express our wish that that agreement will last and even
be replicated in various other regions of the country.
Interaction and dialogue with local representatives
is one way of contributing to building and fostering
trust and of disseminating messages of tolerance and
understanding, which we believe to be core elements,
if progress is to be made in the peace process and if
stability is to be promoted in areas affected by the
conflict.

We hail President Ghani's decision to adopt the
recommendation of the Special Electoral Reform
Commission, which seeks to re-establish the quota of
seats set aside for women at 25 per cent in elections
to provincial and district councils. We firmly believe
that it is essential to increase the participation and
leadership of Afghan women in society, in order to
establish a lasting peace.

The emergence of the self-styled Islamic State
in Afghanistan as a new armed non-State actor has
rendered the security situation even more complicated
and dangerous, representing a serious obstacle to the
peace process, the protection ofcivilians and the delivery
of humanitarian assistance. It goes hand-in-hand
with the destabilizing effect of the growing clashes
between the various factions of the Taliban. We hope
that the adoption today of resolution 2555 (2015) and of
resolution 2253 (2015) last Thursday will complement
national efforts aimed at appropriately addressing the
actions of those individuals and organizations that seek
to profit from the aforementioned destabilization.

The United Nations system, and the Council in
particular, must be untiring in its commitment to the
people and the Government of Afghanistan, so that
we can comprehensively address together the various
challenges facing Afghanistan. Chile will seek to
contribute, in various bodies, to the efforts of the
United Nations aimed at peacebuilding and fostering
stability in Afghanistan, so that that nation can advance
in achieving inclusive and sustainable development.

Given that this is the last time that we will speak on
this topic in our capacity as a non-permament member
of the Security Council, we would like to convey
Chile's gratitude to the staff and leadership of UNAMA
for the work that they carry out. We hope that we have
contributed to that work in our activities in the Council,
particularly with regard to the role of women and the
eradication of the practice of the recruitment of child
combatants.

