Mr. Mansour: On behalf of Palestine, I
congratulate you, Sir, and your friendly country South
Africa on your assumption of the Security Council
presidency and on your wise stewardship of the
Council. We are honoured by your presence as you
preside over this important meeting today. We also
express appreciation to the Russian Federation for its
very skilled leadership of the Council in December.

I thank the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Oscar F ernandez-Taranco, for his briefing today.

Today, I also wish to renew Palestine's warmest
congratulations to the new Security Council members,
the friendly countries of Azerbaijan, Guatemala,
Morocco, Pakistan and Togo, which are also members
of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), joining the
current members of the NAM. caucus on the Council.
We are confident in their commitment to upholding the
Charter, international law and the Security Council's
resolutions, and we wish them all success in fulfilling
their high responsibilities.

I also convey Palestine's deep appreciation to the
members whose terms ended in December - the
friendly countries of Brazil, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Gabon, Nigeria and the Arab representative on the
Security Council, Lebanon - which all served with
dedication to the pursuit of peace and security,
including with regard to the question of Palestine.

We are grateful for the efforts exerted during
their tenure in support of the rights of the Palestinian
people and aimed at reaching a just, lasting and
peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
That includes their efforts in connection with
Palestine's legitimate and worthy application for
United Nations membership, which remains before the
Security Council awaiting recommendation after the
rendering of the report of the Committee on the
Admission of New Members on 11 November 2011. In
that regard, I reaffirm our conviction that recognition
of the State of Palestine constitutes a genuine
investment in the two-State solution for peace. We
reiterate our deepest gratitude to all States that have
recognized Palestine, including those that most
6
recently extended recognition from different corners of
the globe.

The start of a new year brings new hopes and
renewed commitments. Despite all odds, the resilient
Palestinian people remain hopeful that this year will
bring long-awaited freedom, justice, peace, dignity and
security in their homeland. With international support,
they continue to strive for their inalienable rights,
including to self-determination and return. They
remain convinced that justice and the rule of law will
prevail, and they hope that this will be the year that
brings an end to the Israeli occupation and that also
brings the independence of the State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

The Palestinian leadership continues to spare no
effort to achieve peace. Despite the many obstacles
placed by Israel, the occupying Power, in the path of
peace, Palestine has fully cooperated with the current
efforts of the Quartet aimed at advancing the two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders, and has
submitted comprehensive proposals on borders and
security, as called for by the Quartet. We express
appreciation to Jordan for the initiative of His Majesty
King Abdullah II to revive the ailing peace process,
and we affirm that Palestine has engaged in good faith
in that effort, based on positions of historic
compromise rooted in international law and justice.

Moreover, we continue our efforts to promote
Palestinian reconciliation based on our legitimate
national interests and aspirations and the commitments
of the Palestine Liberation Organization. We hope soon
to restore the unity of our people and land, and we are
grateful for the support being given in that regard by
Egypt, our Arab brethren and other concerned members
of the international community.

However, despite those positive developments,
the situation on the ground remains appalling and
totally contradictory to all legal norms, undermining
any peace efforts. Rather than acting to bring the
occupation to an end, Israel is entrenching it, causing
more human suffering and prolonging the conflict.
Especially destructive has been its settlement
campaign, deliberately waged in violation of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, United Nations
resolutions, the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice and the Road Map, and in defiance of
global demands for complete cessation.
12-21354

In 2011, as revealed by the Israeli organization
Peace Now, Israeli settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, actually
exceeded that of all past years, creating thousands of
illegal facts on the ground. From the expansion of
existing settlements to the construction of new ones;
from the construction of the wall and Israeli-only roads
to the confiscation of land and the demolition of
homes; and from the establishment of hundreds of
checkpoints and roadblocks to the displacement of
Palestinians and permitting the vile aggression of
settlers against Palestinian civilians and property -
none of that has stopped, not for a single day.

Recent reports by Peace Now, confirmed by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and highlighted during the important briefing to the
Council last week by the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Valerie Amos, attest to the
intensity and vastly detrimental impact of Israeli
settlement policies on the Palestinian people, the
contiguity of Palestinian land, humanitarian conditions
and the prospects for peace.

In fact, Israeli settlement activities increased by
at least 20 per cent in the past year, with construction
initiated on 1,850 units and at least 3,500 units under
construction in 2011 in 142 illegal settlements and so-
called outposts in the West Bank. The settlement drive
has been most flerce in and around East Jerusalem and
in the Jordan Valley deep inside the territory, as well as
in other areas referred to as "Area C" 4 an area
amounting to at least 62 per cent of the land where the
occupying Power prohibits an official Palestinian
presence.

The occupying Power continues its illegal
measures aimed at Judaizing East Jerusalem and to
alter its Palestinian, Arab, Muslim and Christian
demography, character, identity and heritage.
Settlement activities, home demolitions, the revocation
of residency rights, the closure of Palestinian
institutions, the transformation of Palestinian
neighbourhoods into walled ghettos, excavations and
countless other measures are deepening the crisis in
East Jerusalem, further isolating it from its natural
Palestinian environs to the north and south, impairing
its socio-economic and cultural fabric, and fuelling
tensions and religious sensitivities in the City.

In the Jordan Valley, Israel continues to seize vast
tracts of Palestinian land, to demolish homes, water

wells and farms, and to displace hundreds of
Palestinian families, in addition to the hundreds of
thousands already displaced. Since 1967, it is estimated
that the population has been reduced from more than
300,000 people to only 56,000 today. Such
displacement is otherwise known around the world as
ethnic cleansing. The Palestinian Bedouin community,
an indigenous population the majority of whom are
refugees and whose livelihood and sustenance are tied
to the land, has been especially hard hit by those illegal
actions. It is no coincidence that much of the land from
which the Bedouins are being forcibly removed is
linked to planned settlement expansion and other
colonization activities aimed at advancing Israel's
illegal, de facto annexation of Palestinian land.

Terror and crimes by Israeli settlers are also on
the rise, with a record 40 per cent increase in attacks in
the past year and a 165 per cent increase since the year
2009. Most recently, wilful attacks and provocations
have included the beating, killing and injury of
Palestinian civilians, including children and elderly
shepherds; the destruction and vandalism of homes,
vehicles, farmlands and olive orchards; and the
vandalism and burning of numerous mosques and
churches.

All of this is being perpetrated under the watch
and protection of the Israeli occupying forces, with
nearly zero accountability for such crimes. Those
deplorable attacks are not isolated incidents, but rather
part of the deliberate agenda of extremist settlers and
their supporters in the Government to terrorize the
Palestinian people, make their living conditions
unbearable, and remove them from their land.

In the Gaza Strip, the Palestinian civilian
population continues to suffer from the occupying
Power's illegal policies, particularly the grave effects
of the Israeli blockade by land, air and sea.
Humanitarian conditions remain critical, with the most
vulnerable plagued by poverty, high unemployment
and food insecurity. Moreover, it has now been three
years since the military aggression against Gaza, and
Israel continues to evade responsibility for the massive
crimes perpetrated against the Palestinian people and to
obstruct the reconstruction and rehabilitation needed to
rebuild the communities, infrastructure, economy and
lives destroyed by that aggression. In that connection,
we recognize the remarkable effort by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East to assist the Palestine

refuges in the Gaza Strip and in all other areas of its
operation at this critical time. We reiterate our call for
Israel to be held accountable for the crimes it has
committed against the Palestinian people, and we call
again for the full lifting of the Israeli blockade of the
Gaza Strip.

In that regard, while Israel, as an occupying
Power, is obliged under international humanitarian law
to protect the Palestinian civilian population in the
occupied Palestinian territory, it seems clear that it is
forfeiting that responsibility. In addition to the
colonization and collective punishment measures I
have mentioned, that stance is reflected in the
occupying Power's violent military raids and
continuing arrests of Palestinian civilians, including
children, as a result of which thousands of Palestinians
remain unjustly imprisoned in Israeli jails, including
several elected officials, some of whom were recently
rearrested. It is also evidenced by Israel's use of
excessive force against peaceful protesters, killing and
injuring innocent Palestinians who are defending their
land and their people's rights, including 28-year-old
Mustafa Tamimi on 9 December 2011.

We therefore call on the international community,
in particular the high contracting parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention, to protect the Palestinian people
in a manner consistent with its obligation to ensure the
protection of all civilians in armed conflict. In that
regard, I wish to inform the Security Council that the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) has mandated its
Chair to request Switzerland, in its capacity as the
depositary State, to undertake the necessary measures,
in line with the relevant resolutions, to convene a
conference of the high contracting parties to ensure
respect for the Convention in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. We stress the value
of such a conference in determining measures to
uphold the law and pressuring Israel to cease its illegal
practices and comply with its obligations.

The two-State solution is withering with every
inch of Palestinian land that is seized by the occupying
Power, every settlement unit constructed, every Israeli
settler transferred, every wall erected, every home
demolished and every Palestinian family displaced.
Israel's colonization and oppressive collective
punishment of the Palestinian people are rapidly
eroding hopes and beliefs that peace is possible on the
basis of the two-State solution, to which not only the
Palestinian side has committed, but also to which the
international community has committed and greatly
invested in.

Yet, the Israeli Government wildly insists that its
settlement enterprise is not the main obstacle to peace,
as reiterated days ago by the Israeli Ambassador to the
United Nations, who illogically and insensitively
insisted that it is the Palestinians' call for freedom,
justice and their human rights - mainly the right to
return - that is the main obstacle. That begs the
question: how is the illegal colonization of Palestinian
land conducive to the realization of the two-State
solution, by which an independent, sovereign,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, is to coexist with Israel on the
basis of the 1967 borders? What kind of two-State
solution for peace does Israel envision as it continues
its settlement and theft of Palestinian land beyond the
Green Line? It is surely not the same vision of peace
articulated and pursued by the Council, the Quartet and
the international community as a whole, and not the
vision that brought us to the table in Amman.

If not ceased, what Israel is doing in the occupied
Palestinian territory will ensure that the two-State
solution never comes to be and will give further
validity to alternative options. The urgency of stopping
that illegal campaign therefore cannot be overstated.
That would not only be an act of good faith that would
lend credibility to peace efforts, but is also obligatory
for Israel under the law and the road map, with which
it cannot continue to selectively comply and to which it
must be held accountable.

The truth of Israel's commitment to peace cannot
be measured by empty lip service to peace or the mere
presence of its negotiators at the table. It must be
measured by Israel's deeds. When negotiators come to
the table absent good faith and genuine peace
proposals and when the Israeli Government continues
its deceitful, belligerent conduct in the occupied
Palestinian territory, we must truly question whether or
not Israel is interested in the just and lasting peace that
we seek to achieve - a peace based on United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the road map.

For decades, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has
invoked the Security Council's responsibility under the
Charter. Yet, the Council remains paralysed, failing to
uphold its duties and allowing the conflict to fester,
with broad political, security and humanitarian
consequences. We remain convinced that holding Israel
responsible for its crimes will be the only way to bring
those illegal actions to a halt, prevent the further
deterioration of the situation and salvage the prospects
for peace. We therefore call again on the Council to
take serious measures that will send a clear message to
compel Israel, the occupying Power, to immediately
cease all of its illegal actions and to commit to the
long-held parameters of the peace process.

The Palestinian people and their leadership
remain committed to a peaceful solution and to peace
negotiations. Moreover, we have not given up our
conviction in international law and the United Nations
system as central pillars in our efforts to achieve a just
solution to the question of Palestine in all its aspects,
including the Palestine refugee problem, to bring an
end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and to achieve
our freedom and rights. We will therefore continue our
efforts to mobilize the Security Council, as well our
efforts in the General Assembly and all other relevant
United Nations organs, to make that a reality. In that
regard, we appeal for the strong and valuable support
of all Member States.

