The President: The Security Council will now
proceed to the election of a member of the International
Court of Justice, in accordance with Article 14 of the
Statute of the International Court of Justice, to fill the
seat that became vacant on 31 December 2011 with the
resignation of Judge Awn Shawkat Al-Khasawneh
(Jordan).

Judge Al-Khasawneh's term of office would have
expired on 5 February 2018. Article 15 of the Statute
of the Court provides that a member of the Court elected
to replace a member whose term of office has not
expired shall hold office for the remainder of the
predecessor's term. The member elected to replace
Judge Al-Khasawneh will thus serve until 5 February
2018.

The list of candidates indicating the national
groups by which each candidate was nominated is
contained in document S/2012/212.

I should like to inform members of the Council
that I have received a letter addressed to me by the
Legal Counsel, dated 25 April 2012, informing me, on
behalf of the Secretary-General, that after the
established deadline for the filing of nominations,
namely, 2 April 2012, national groups submitted
nominations to the Secretariat. I should like to draw the
Council's attention to the fact that all such additional
nominations relate to a candidate already nominated by
other national groups and whose name therefore
already appears in document S/2012/212.

The Legal Counsel recommended that, in
accordance with established practice, I inform Council
members orally on the day of the election about the
decisions of the aforementioned national groups. I am
also informed that the Legal Counsel made a similar
recommendation to the President of the General
Assembly.

The nominations of the aforementioned national
groups are as follows: for Mr. Dalveer Bhandari, Chile
and Slovenia.
I should like to inform Council members that, in
a note by the Secretary-General dated 20 April 2012
(S/2012/212/Add.1), the Secretary-General wrote that
by a note verbale dated 18 April 2012 the Permanent
Mission of Lebanon informed the Secretary-General
that its national group had decided to withdraw its
nomination of Mr. Ghaleb Ghanem for election to the
International Court of Justice. Since Mr. Ghanem was
nominated only by the national group of Lebanon, his
name is not included on the ballot papers.

The Security Council has before it a
memorandum by the Secretary-General, contained in
document S/2012/211, describing the present
composition of the Court and setting out the procedure
to be followed in the conduct of the election.

I should like to remind the Council that, under
Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the
International Court of Justice,

"Those candidates who obtain an absolute
majority of votes both in the General Assembly
and in the Security Council shall be considered as
elected."

The required majority in the Security Council is eight
votes.

The voting will be held by secret ballot. When we
proceed to the vote, members of the Council will
receive a ballot containing the names of all the
candidates. No withdrawal will be accepted once the
ballot papers have been distributed. However, it will be
possible to withdraw between ballots.

Members of the Council will be requested to
place an "X" in the box next to the name of the
candidate for whom they wish to vote. Only those
candidates whose names appear on the ballot are
eligible for election. I should like to remind members
of paragraph 14 of the Secretary-General's
memorandum, which specifies that "[e]ach elector may
vote for only one candidate" (S/2012/211, para. 14).
Any ballot paper containing votes for more than one
name will be considered invalid.

I should like to inform Council members that, in
accordance with established practice, the ballot papers in
the Security Council will not be counted until it has been
verified that the ballot papers in the General Assembly
have also been collected. The Council will remain in
session pending the receipt of that information.
1232199

Only when one candidate has obtained the
required majority of votes in the Security Council shall
I communicate the result to the President of the
General Assembly, and I shall request the Council to
remain in session pending the receipt from the
President of the General Assembly of the result of the
voting in the Assembly.

The Council will now proceed to draw lots to
select two delegations to serve as tellers. The
delegation of India will not be considered to serve as a
teller because a candidate of that nationality has been
nominated. Because my delegation this month occupies
the Council presidency, it will also be excluded from
serving as a teller.

The President: The names of the delegations of
France and South Africa have been drawn. I request
each of them to appoint one of their members to serve
as teller.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Lardon
(France) and Mr. Crowley (South Africa) acted as
tellers.


The President: May I take it that the Council is
now ready to proceed with the election of a member of
the International Court of Justice?

It is so decided.

I request the Conference Officer to distribute the
ballot papers.

Members of the Council should place an "X" in
the box next to the name of the one candidate for
whom they wish to vote.

>l<'.<*


The President: I take it that all the members of
the Council have now voted and I ask the Conference
Officer to collect the ballot papers.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. I should like to remind Council members
that, in accordance with the established practice, the
ballots will not be counted until it has been verified
that the ballot papers in the General Assembly have
also been collected. The Council will remain in session
pending the receipt of that information.

>l<>l<>l<
1232199


The President: I have now been informed that
the ballot papers have been collected in the General
Assembly.

The counting of the ballots in the Security
Council will now begin. The tellers will now count the
ballots and there will be two independent countings of
the ballots, one by each teller. I should like to remind
Council members that in accordance with established
practice, I shall wait for the General Assembly to
complete its count before I announce the results of the
voting in the Security Council.

The Council will remain in session.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Number of abstentions: 0
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:

Mr. Dalveer Bhandari 13

Mr. Florentino Feliciano 2

A candidate obtained the required majority in the
Security Council. Mr. Dalveer Bhandari has accordingly
received the required majority of votes in the Security
Council.

I shall communicate the result of the vote to the
President of the General Assembly in writing.

I request the Council to remain in session while
we wait for the President of the General Assembly to
inform the Council of the result of the voting in the
Assembly. In accordance with established procedure,
the Presidents of the Security Council and of the
General Assembly will simultaneously read out the
results of the vote in the other body.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have just received from
the President of the General Assembly the following
letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
107th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing a member
of the International Court of Justice, the following
3
candidate obtained an absolute majority of votes
in the General Assembly: Mr. Dalveer Bhandari."

As both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have agreed on the same candidate, the
distinguished jurist Mr. Dalveer Bhandari has been
elected a member of the International Court of Justice
to hold office for the remainder of the term to which
Judge Al-Khasawneh was elected, namely 5 February
2018.
I should like to congratulate him and wish him
every success in the high office to which he has been
elected.

On behalf of the Council, I would like to thank the
tellers for their assistance in the conduct of the elections.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.
12-32199

