Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks Poland for convening this open
debate on a topic that, although often addressed
within the United Nations, remains highly relevant. In
that regard, allow me to draw the Security Council's
attention to the following five recommendations.

First, we witness almost daily violations of
international law, perpetrated in numerous armed
conflicts worldwide. Faced with such crimes, the
Security Council has a responsibility to take action to
prevent atrocities and, if they cannot be prevented, to
bring the perpetrators to justice. We welcome the fact
that 116 Member States, including nine members of
the Security Council, have signed the code of conduct
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group. We encourage the other members of the Council
and all other Member States to follow suit.

Secondly, it is essential that the Security Council
establish a coherent policy on resolutions referring
situations to the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
ensure an effective follow-up. Switzerland calls once
again on the Council to refer the situation in Syria to
the ICC. After seven years of conflict, accountability is
more important than ever for a return to lasting peace.

Thirdly, we invite the Security Council to welcome
the fact that, from 17 July, the ICC will havejurisdiction
to prosecute the crime of aggression, thereby
contributing to the enforcement of the prohibition of
the use of force set out in the Charter of the United
Nations. More than 70 years after the Nuremberg trials,
a permanent international tribunal now has jurisdiction
to hold those who lead wars of aggression to account
for their actions. We hope that, from 17 July, the
Council will be ready to refer situations to the ICC to

ensure accountability and discourage future crimes
of aggression.

Fourthly, Switzerland calls on the Security Council
to carefully consider the consequences of its sanctions
for the integrity of international humanitarian law. The
Council's decisions to impose sanctions have, in some
instances, been interpreted as restricting the activities
of humanitarian organizations that provide impartial
assistance to affected populations, regardless of which
side they belong to. The Council should consider ways
to avoid such undesirable consequences.

Fifthly, and as will be explained in the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Belgium, it is
essential that an ombudsperson be appointed as soon as
possible to head the Office of the Ombudsperson to the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning
ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities. The post has been
vacant for nearly 10 months, which undermines the
credibility and legitimacy of United Nations sanctions
and could constitute an obstacle to their uniform and
universal implementation. The lack of procedural
safeguards is all the more striking in relation to the
other 13 sanctions regimes, which also require the
creation of independent mechanisms to receive and
process delisting requests.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to make one
last remark. Since 2011, together with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Switzerland has led an
inter-State process aimed at establishing a regular,
non-politicized and, above all, constructive dialogue
among States to strengthen respect for international
humanitarian law. While we call on the Security Council
to assume all its responsibilities, we are also striving to
contribute to better compliance with international law.

