Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
pretense is now over. The world can see that Russian
military forces have taken control of the Crimean
peninsula, part of the sovereign territory of Ukraine.
That action is against the express wishes of the
legitimate Ukrainian Government. It is a clear and
unambiguous violation of the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Ukraine, and is a flagrant
breach of international law.

We can see absolutely no justification for those
actions. We have heard from Russia that their forces are
in Ukraine to protect minorities from armed radicals
and anti-Semites. We hear claims of interference in
the affairs of the Orthodox Church. We hear claims
of hundreds of thousands of refugees. But Russia has
provided no evidence of any of that. It is clear that the
claims have simply been fabricated to justify Russian
military action.

In assuming control ofa sovereign part of Ukraine
on a trumped-up pretext, the Russian Federation
has contravened its obligations as a member of the
international community. It has violated Article 2 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which prohibits the threat
or use offorce against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State. It has failed to honour its
international commitments as a founding member
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and as a signatory to the 1975 Helsinki
Final Act. It has reneged on its obligations under the
1997 bilateral Treaty on Friendship, Cooperation
and Partnership between Russia and Ukraine and the
1994 Budapest Memorandum.

The Russian representative claims that
Mr. Yanukovych has called for Russian military
intervention. We are talking about a former leader
who abandoned his office, his capital and his country;
whose corrupt governance brought his country to
the brink of economic ruin; who suppressed protests
against his Government leading to over 80 deaths; and
whose own party has abandoned him. The idea that his
pronouncements now convey any legitimacy whatsoever
is far-fetched and in keeping with the rest of Russia's
bogus justification for its actions. The Government
in Kyiv is legitimate and has been overwhelmingly
endorsed by the Ukrainian Parliament.

In the twenty-first century, no country should be
acting with such blatant disregard for international
law. Those actions will be met with a strong and united
response from the international community. Russia
should not be surprised that its political and economic
reputation have already suffered. The ruble has fallen
and the Russian stock market is now down more than
10 per cent.

Just as we condemn the Russian Federation for its
confrontational acts, we commend the Government of
Ukraine for refusing to rise to provocation. That is a
wise decision. We urge the Ukrainian Government to
continue to act calmly and to avoid actions or rhetoric
that would inflame tensions or provide a further pretext
for further military action.

We call on the Russian Federation to immediately
cease all military action in Crimea and to refrain
from any interference elsewhere in Ukraine. Russia
should withdraw its forces to their bases and return to
force levels previously agreed with the Government
of Ukraine, as part of the Black Sea Fleet basing
arrangements.

If Russia is genuinely concerned about protecting
minority groups and upholding the human rights of
Ukrainian citizens, then armed intervention is not
the way to address those concerns. Instead, Russia
should open up a direct dialogue with the Ukrainian
Government in Kyiv and not simply pick and choose
individuals with whom it wishes to engage. It should
respond to requests by Ukraine and other signatories of
the 1994 Budapest Memorandum to hold consultations,
as specified by paragraph 6 of that Memorandum. It
should engage constructively in the debate taking
place in the OSCE and other institutions concerning
the deployment of a fact-finding mission and an
international observer mission to Ukraine. Such a
mission could establish the real facts on the ground,
monitor the situation and, indeed, provide any necessary
reassurances and guarantees through peaceful means.

We welcome the Secretary-General's decision to
send the Deputy-Secretary-General to Kyiv today.
I hope that he will also go to the Crimea and eastern
Ukraine. We call on the Secretary-General to use his
good offices to their fullest extent to help to de-escalate
the current situation.

This is not 1968 or 1956. The era in which one
country can suppress democratization in a neighbouring
State through military intervention on the basis of
transparently trumped-up pretexts is over.

We stand ready to work with Ukraine, Russia and
all our international partners to support a stable, united,
inclusive and economically prosperous Ukraine. The
United Kingdom urges Russia to uphold its obligations
under international law, including under the Charter
of the United Nations; to act in a way that promotes
stability, rather than to destabilize the region through
the promotion of new frozen conflicts; and to support
democratic processes and the rule of law, not to subvert
or suppress them.

