Mr. Kulyk (Ukraine): I would like to join others
in expressing our thanks to Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his comprehensive and interesting
briefing. I would also like to thank him for his answers
to the questions that have been asked by previous
speakers, which resulted in substantially shortening my
remarks.

The briefing proved that, over the period under
review, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in general has continued
to make progress. We support the priorities set out by
its head. My delegation welcomes the meeting between
Yugoslav President Kostunica and UNMIK's head, Mr.
Haekkerup, recently held in Belgrade, as well as its
reported results. We are encouraged by the news that
the Yugoslav authorities agreed to encourage the
Kosovo Serbs to participate in finalizing the legal
framework for provisional self-government for the
province. We believe that the full participation of
Kosovo Serbs, represented and assisted by legal
experts from Belgrade in the activities of the relevant
working group, would facilitate the solution to the
important issue of the Yugoslav authorities'
engagement. It is also essential for enabling the
Mission to move forward the process of preparing the
Kosovo-wide elections, with a view to holding them
when all necessary conditions are met.

For its part, UNMIK should redouble its efforts to
determine the fate of missing persons in Kosovo-
almost one third of them Serbs - as well as to ensure
the improvement of security conditions for Serb
returnees. The idea mentioned by Mr. Guehenno of a
joint committee is an interesting one and could be
supported as an important confidence-building step
forward.

Through media reports, it has come to our notice
that, at the meeting between the Yugoslav President
and UNMIK's head, the prospects for signing an
agreement on cooperation between Belgrade and the
United Nations Mission in Kosovo were addressed. In
this regard, it would be useful for Mr. Guehenno to
give us some more details on this matter, in particular
what subjects would be covered by the agreement.

Concerning UNMIK's priority to promote an
effective law enforcement and judicial system, we
support the idea of concentrating the Mission's efforts
in this field under a new, separate pillar. Special focus
should be given to measures aimed at combating
organized crime, illicit drugs and arms trafficking, as
well as money laundering. We thank Mr. Guehenno for
the comments he has just provided on practical
measures to that end. We consider that these measures
should be strengthened.

We note that the briefing and our discussion so
far have not focused only on the situation in Kosovo,
but have touched on developments in the whole region.
This testifies to the need for an effective regional
approach of the international community to the existing
problems. The specific remedies needed for Kosovo,
the Republic of Macedonia and southern Serbia are
different, notwithstanding the importance of general
basic principles. In this context, we consider that the
initiative of the Russian Foreign Minister, as referred
to by Ambassador Lavrov in his statement earlier, on
the signing by the countries of the region of a legally
binding instrument on their commitment to the basic
principles of international law, in particular the
inviolability of the borders and territorial integrity,
deserves careful study.

We are encouraged by the tendency of the overall
security situation in southern Serbia towards
stabilization. However, the continued attacks and
provocations against the Serbian police, which
jeopardize the further negotiation process, are a matter
of serious concern.

As far as the situation in the Republic of
Macedonia is concerned, we note its gradual de-
escalation and look forward to progress in the process
of negotiations among all parties, including those
representing the ethnic Albanians, to be launched by
the Macedonian Government and hope that it will build
a momentum for national consensus, which will also
positively influence the development of the situation in
the entire region.

