Mr. Jessen-Petersen: Mr. President, thank you
for giving me this opportunity. I am very pleased to
address the Security Council three and a half months
after beginning my mission in Kosovo.

When I arrived in Pristina on 15 August, I
expressed my belief that there could be no
normalization and no stabilization in the Western
Balkans without a resolution of the Kosovo issue. I am
more than ever convinced of this. I outlined the
following five mission priorities at the start: security as
the basis of all action; prioritizing standards and
accelerating their implementation; further transfer of
competencies to the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government with increased capacity-building, but also
accompanied by greater accountability; protection of
minorities, including freedom of movement and returns
of displaced persons, as key components of the
standards; and, finally, moving aggressively on the
economy, an overarching priority.

Guided by the recommendations in Ambassador
Eide's report and based on meetings the Secretary-
General had with the Contact Group last September,
we have agreed on a way forward in implementing the
five priorities. Let me say a few words about each of
them.

First, on security, the violence last March showed
just how fragile the security environment in Kosovo
can be. Since then, the security situation has improved
significantly. The last eight months have seen only one
serious ethnic-related incident. The recent election
campaign, and election day itself, were peaceful.
Cooperation with the Kosovo Force (KFOR) is
excellent. There is close coordination between the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) police, the Kosovo Police Service,
and KFOR at all levels. Command, control,
communications and liaison arrangements have been
strengthened, including the establishment of joint
operations centres. The Kosovo Police Service now has
its own special unit to respond to unrest, in addition to
the three United Nations special police units already
deployed.

We are also addressing security through various
consultative mechanisms. The Kosovo Security
Advisory Group, established last July, brings together
representatives of all communities to build confidence;
we very much hope that the Kosovo Serbs will soon
rejoin the Group. We have also established local crime
prevention councils in all municipalities, bringing
together all ethnic communities and international
representatives in order to tackle security issues at the
grass-roots level.

Finally, concerning the presence of the Kosovo
Force (KFOR), I would like to add that I appealed to
NATO ambassadors in an address on 10 November to
stay the course and maintain the current force size. We
are entering a crucial phase in Kosovo, and it is more
than ever essential that we closely synchronize our
political strategy with the right level of military
preparedness and ability to respond.

I now turn to standards. Standards remain the
central plank of the international community's policy
in Kosovo. At the same time, it is - and must be -
the overriding priority of the new Government to
implement standards prior to the planned formal
assessment of progress in the middle of next year. As
members are aware, UNMIK is now assessing
Kosovo's progress in quarterly technical reviews
annexed to the political reports of the Secretary-
General. Our first assessment - covering the period
through September of this year - shows that, although
progress has been made in some areas, it has been
uneven, and that there is still much work ahead for the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government.

Achieving progress on all eight standards remains
our basic policy. At the same time, against the planned
timeline of a review in mid-2005, one cannot expect
the more than 400 detailed indicators laid out in the
Standards Implementation Plan to be fulfilled. But one
can expect - and one must demand - real progress in
the implementation of those standards that together
contribute most to the establishment of a multi-ethnic
Kosovo.

Therefore, in agreement with the Secretary-
General and with the support of the Contact Group, I
am placing particular emphasis on key priorities in the
areas of the rule of law, freedom of movement, returns
of displaced persons, functioning local institutions and
security. We are addressing issues on which Kosovo
failed in March, and we are insisting that significant
progress be made on them by mid-2005 at the latest.
Clear criteria, measurable indicators and joint UNMIK-
Provisional Institutions working groups are now in
place. Progress is achievable, and I believe that a
determined new Government could achieve it in the
time available.

We have also moved forward on the further
transfer of competencies to the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government. I recently agreed to establish
three new ministries: one on returns and communities,
one on energy and mining, and one on local self-
government. That is in line with our strategy that all
competencies not directly involving sovereignty should
be transferred as soon as possible. I intend to go ahead
with further transfers, notably in the area of the
economy and also, in due course, in areas linked to
justice and security.

The transfer of competencies must be
accompanied by more effective capacity-building. To
that end, we are re-energizing donor efforts to help the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to build
capacity. In a recent meeting, the Provisional
Institutions and donors agreed to work together on a
comprehensive strategy and implementation plan to
ensure that we not only identify, but also address, gaps
in capacity at the central and municipal levels. The
transfer of competencies must also be accompanied by
greater accountability on the part of the Provisional
Institutions. To that end, I have been looking closely at
my powers to intervene and, as necessary, to impose
sanctions. Allow me to come back to that subject in a
few minutes.

A vital aspect of our work revolves around
protecting the rights of minority communities, which is
now the main focus of the standards. The authorities
must ensure that all communities feel safe and secure
and that they are able to live normal lives, free of fear
and intimidation.

One key way of reaching out to the communities
is through decentralization or reform of local
government to form a basis for the successful
integration of Kosovo's minority communities into the
fabric of society. With the assistance of UNMIK, a
Provisional Institutions working group, with the
participation of Kosovo Serbs and with the support of
the Council of Europe, formulated a decentralization
plan during the summer. It is a practical programme
aimed at building links between local authorities and
citizens, giving all citizens equal access to all rights.

Let me be clear: territorial division is neither
desirable in principle nor workable in a relatively small
territory where only one third of the Kosovo Serb
population is concentrated north of the Ibar River and
the remaining two thirds is scattered across the rest of
Kosovo, mostly in rural areas. However, it is exactly
because of their isolated and exposed locations that
their security, as well as their economic and social
rights, must be ensured through the plan on meaningful
self-government developed by the working group in
Kosovo.

We have also, in agreement with the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government, invited Belgrade to
provide advisory support for the meetings of the
working group as well as elements from a plan
developed in Belgrade that could enrich the Provisional
Institutions decentralization plan. The working group
met just last Tuesday to work on the criteria for pilot
projects. We are moving forward, and I very much
hope that the Kosovo Serbs will join. It is in their
direct interest to participate, and it is in our interest
that they do so.

Dialogue at various levels is key. I hope that, in
addition to the principal Pristina-based dialogue
between Kosovo's majority and minority communities,
we can resume and reinforce the direct dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade. I have visited Belgrade
twice since assuming office, and I have had good,
constructive talks. We now need to move forward on
direct dialogue. The four working groups established
by my predecessor one year ago are dormant, and we
are looking into ways in which to resuscitate them.

Most important, we must make progress on the
issue of missing persons. I recently suggested to Prime
Minister Kostunica that we restart the dialogue on
missing persons under the auspices of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and I very much hope for
a positive reply. Not moving forward on that issue or
linking it to other issues would mean adding further
pain to the agonies of the families of missing persons,
who have a right to know as soon as possible what has
happened to their loved ones. Too much time has
already passed by with respect to that unbearable
uncertainty.

While I am speaking about dialogue, let me
underline the importance of maintaining a regular
dialogue with the region. I have already visited Tirana,
Skopje and Podgorica, and I will continue that regional
dialogue.

Let me now address returns of displaced persons.
Improved security and freedom of movement are the
pivotal factors for accelerating the return of displaced
persons to Kosovo. UNMIK and KFOR are now better
positioned to provide protection, but only Kosovo
Albanian leaders and Kosovo society can and must
effectively dispel the need for such protection and
create true security.

We have revisited our returns strategy, and we are
looking at a combination of more specific initiatives on
security and freedom of movement; incentives or
disincentives for cooperative or obstructive officials,
respectively; and more targeted use of sanctions. If
action is taken, this spring could see a significant
increase in returns. The Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government are aware that, without such
progress, one of the key priority standards will remain
unmet. The progress made in recent weeks
demonstrates that returns can move forward, even in
relatively difficult areas where local authorities have
moved from obstruction to support of returns.
Although the March violence marked a huge setback,
work intended to begin last spring is now moving
forward in a number of areas in Kosovo.

Let me say few words on reconstruction
following the March riots. The Provisional Institutions
immediately recognized their responsibility to
reconstruct damaged or destroyed property and set up a
commission that has made substantial progress. Work
on the majority of the more than 900 affected homes
has been completed. However, more than 2,000 people
who were displaced in March have not yet returned to
their reconstructed homes.

The momentum we saw in August and September
slowed in the period leading up to elections and
afterwards. The new Government must immediately
focus on completing the unfinished work.

The Government's obligation to reconstruct
extends also to religious sites. Assessments have been
carried out in cooperation with the Council of Europe.
The Provisional Institutions have allocated €3.7 million
from the Kosovo Consolidated Budget, and I have
allocated €500,000 for immediate reconstruction on all
35 religious sites. More money could be made
available. However, a disagreement with the Orthodox
Church over the tendering process and its withdrawal
from the implementation commission have temporarily
halted reconstruction of church property.

Prosecution of crimes related to the March riots
has also proceeded. More than 270 persons have been
arrested for criminal acts related to the riots, and both
international and local prosecutors are handling the
cases. A number of indictments are being or will be
filed, and some verdicts have been rendered. The
judicial process will be pursued rigorously to make
sure that no crime goes unpunished.

The very bad economic situation, which is the
Mission's fifth and overarching priority, is possibly the
biggest threat to stability and reconciliation. At the
same time, the bad economic situation is the most
obvious consequence of the lack of certainty on the
issue of status. Work has been under way for some time
to elaborate a national economic development plan.
This work must and will be accelerated. I expect the
European Union to play an increasingly active role in
that effort.

While we work on longer-term measures to
improve the economy, we have undertaken short-term
efforts to address joblessness. Last August, UNMIK,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Provisional Institutions launched an employment
project aimed at creating jobs and encouraging
employers to hire more young people in the short term,
thus improving social conditions. We hope to build on
that initiative by working on other employment-related
quick-impact projects at the municipal level.

Meanwhile, we must move on privatization now
in order to stimulate the economy. As noted in the
technical assessment, the privatization process has
moved forward in line with the objective of completing
the process by mid- to late 2006. However, outstanding
legal issues remain, and illegal seizure of socially
owned enterprise land by municipalities is an ongoing
problem. We still have blockages due to unclear
ownership issues. We are, however, close to finding a
possible solution that would ensure that privatization
goes ahead without delay.

Let me come back now to a subject I mentioned
earlier. I am closely examining how I can help to
ensure progress in implementing standards by actively
enforcing accountability. UNMIK is prepared to deal
with officials - at both the central and municipal
levels - who fail to carry out their duties responsibly
or who block attempts to make improvements in key
areas. Those areas include, but are not limited to,
minority rights, freedom of movement, the return of
displaced persons, equal provision of services,
responsible media and security.

There are a number of tools and measures at my
disposal, based on Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), to help ensure compliance. The use of
disciplinary measures must, of course, be
commensurate with offences and employed only as a
last resort. The Government has a primary
responsibility here in taking all measures to ensure
progress. I hope therefore that I will not need to use
sanctions, but I am fully prepared to do so in the
interests of progress towards standards and status in
Kosovo. Such sanctions would be applied regardless of
party affiliation and regardless of ethnicity.

Let me turn finally to the recent developments
linked to the Assembly elections of 23 October -
elections which were determined to be free and fair by
the Council of Europe observation mission. The
elections were also monitored by over 13,000 local
observers from political entities and non-governmental
organizations representing all communities in such a
way as to ensure transparency and acceptance of the
results.

The elections were conducted with considerable
success and for the first time by a local body, the
Central Election Commission, under the oversight of
UNMIK's Democratization Pillar, and were managed
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. No significant incidents of a political or
security nature interrupted polling, which generally
took place in a completely safe and secure environment
that allowed people to vote freely.

While the overall turnout was good, I regret very
much the disappointingly low turnout of the Kosovo
Serbs. Certainly, many of the Kosovo Serbs are
dissatisfied with their living conditions, including
inadequate freedom of movement and concerns about
security and the economic situation. It is also true that
Kosovo Serb politicians registered late, following the
much appreciated call to participate by President Tadic
of Serbia, and therefore they had very little time to
mobilize voters. Belgrade was divided, and there were
calls by leading authorities in the Serbian Government
and the Serbian Orthodox Church for a boycott.
Another reason for the low turnout was intimidation
and antidemocratic pressure not to vote, with the
resulting fear of retribution.

Following the elections, I urged the parties to
proceed with all speed in constituting the Assembly
and forming a new Government. I also urged all parties
to reach out to improve the living conditions of the
Kosovo Serbs as a necessary first act once the new
Government was formed.

Although it might well have been preferable at
this stage to have a broad coalition in place, a narrower
grouping of political parties - the Democratic League
of Kosovo (LDK) and the Alliance for the Future of
Kosovo (AAK) - decided, in full accordance with
democratic principles, to form a coalition and prepare
for government. The coalition agreement, and the
possible appointment of Mr. Ramush Haradinaj as
Prime Minister, has raised some questions and
concerns in view of continuing reports that the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) is pursuing a case related to him.
However, the international community has supported
my decision not to intervene or block the democratic
process. Indeed, what we are seeing right now is
democracy at work. If the ICTY proceeds with its case
against Mr. Haradinaj, I trust it will be based, in
accordance with its mandate and responsibility, on
justice. And should this occur, I am confident that
Kosovo will show the world and the region an example
of compliance with the judiciary process, just as they
have shown respect for democracy.

Meanwhile, I am continuing consultations to
ensure the establishment of functional institutions
capable of implementing standards with the necessary
speed and of the necessary quality. We are looking
closely at the coalition's programme and its list of
proposed ministers. We need to help ensure that the
new Government is as capable as possible of tackling
the difficult tasks ahead.

Kosovo will for the first time also have a strong
parliamentary opposition. I trust that the opposition,
when playing its legitimate and democratic role, will
show mature political judgement in the interest of
Kosovo's move towards a review of standards and
status talks.

I hope it is clear from all I have said that we face
a challenging and at times difficult way ahead in
Kosovo. Over the last four months, we have taken
significant steps forward in close partnership with the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, in
dialogue with Belgrade and with strong support from
the Contact Group and from our partnership with the
European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and NATO's International
Security Force in Kosovo. We have developed a
comprehensive, integrated strategy, a clear and
consistent plan of action, and a tight - but not
impossible - timetable.

After almost five years of managing a holding
operation in Kosovo, we may be moving towards the
end game, that is, talks on final status. The political
leaders and the people of Kosovo know that only
action, implementation of priority standards, and hard
work will get them to that goal. In return, they will
expect - and we will continue to need - strong
international support. I am confident that we can count
on the Security Council's full backing as we move
forward.

