Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
and presiding over today's briefing. We also thank
Mr. Maurer, President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC), and Ms. Ghelani, Director for
Operations and Advocacy of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for
participating today, and we commend their teams for
their critical work in addressing the global challenge of
missing persons. The ICRC has brought a much-needed
international spotlight to the issue in recent years.

All too often, we hear stories of people going
missing in times of armed conflict, including notably
in the Balkans and Kuwait, and most recently in Iraq
and Syria. As we have heard from other speakers,
after eight years of conflict many thousands of Syrian
civilians are still missing, the vast majority of them, we
believe, forcibly disappeared by the Al-Assad regime.
Those who are still unjustly detained in Syria must be
released. Their families deserve information from the
regime about the fate of their loved ones. Taking such
basic humane steps would be helpful in building the
foundation necessary for a successful political process
in Syria, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).

Since 2005, the United States has consistently
funded efforts to support the identification, security
and excavation of mass graves in Iraq, as our colleague
from the United Kingdom noted. More than 6,000
Yazidis were kidnapped by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) in 2014, of whom approximately
3,000 remain unaccounted for, along with hundreds
of Christians and Shia Muslims. We strongly support
the International Commission on Missing Persons in
providing training to Iraqi ministries in the scientific
investigation of mass graves and providing support
to victims' families. The United States also supports
the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in collecting,
storing, and preserving evidence of atrocities carried
out by ISIS. We recently committed $2 million in
support of its first exhumations, in Sinjar.

More than 20 years after the war in the Balkans,
approximately 10,000 people there are still missing, a
figure that should give us all pause. We welcome the
partnership between the ICRC and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals to support
the humanitarian search for missing persons in the
former Yugoslavia.

Kuwait's own experience regarding the whereabouts
and fate of its own missing persons is one that none of
us should forget. Nearly 28 years have passed since the
end of the first Gulf War, but it remains important to
address the issue and bring some measure of closure to
the families of those still missing. The United States is
working diligently to provide satellite imagery to assist
in the identification of remains from the conflict.

Families separated by conflict may face the
anguish of not knowing what happened to their loved
ones, and that pain can prevent surviving relatives
from grieving, reconciling, and recovering. The
uncertainty also negatively affects a society's ability
to seek justice and reconciliation. Joint efforts to
address the outstanding issue of missing persons by
Kuwait and Iraq together exemplify how countries can
emerge from conflict to work in a spirit of cooperation
and friendship. It is an example that the international
community should applaud as a positive step towards
justice and reconciliation.

As today's unanimous adoption of resolution 2474
(2019), with its 62 co-sponsors, makes clear, all the
parties to an armed conflict should enable families
to clarify the fate and whereabouts of the missing,
including prisoners of war. In an illustration of our
own national commitment to addressing this critical
issue, the United States Department of Defense has
established the Defense Prisoner of War/Missing in
Action Accounting Agency. Its purpose is to fulfil
a national promise to provide the fullest possible
accounting for our missing United States personnel to
their families and our fellow citizens.

While it is clear that much work remains to be done
to bring closure to the families ofmissing persons around
the world, we remain committed to participating in that

and partnering with the ICRC and others to do what we
can to support humanitarian efforts to recover remains.

It is essential to account for the missing so that
families can have some certainty about the fate of
their loved ones. Today's adoption marks the Council's
first collective call to address this global humanitarian
priority. Let us now turn our words into actions together.

