I would like to thank Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo and Lacroix for their very informative and insightful briefings. Like other members of the Security Council, France strongly condemns the attack and assassination attempt on Sudanese Prime Minister Hamdok last month. I will be brief and limit my remarks to expressing two concerns and two hopes. My first concern is the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis on the Sudan. Prior to this moment, the Sudanese transition already had multiple challenges to deal with - a deep economic and humanitarian crisis, high expectations from the Sudanese people, the need for political and economic reforms and an ongoing peace process - so the COVID-19 pandemic is an additional challenge that requires strong support from the international community. France expresses its solidarity with the people and the Government of the Sudan in this regard. It is necessary that the Sudan have full access to international support mechanisms to deal with the pandemic and its consequences. I would add that I hope that the pandemic's negative impact on the activities and movements of the African Union-United Nations Mission Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) can be mitigated effectively. My second concern is the protection of civilians in Darfur. As Council members are discussing how and when to close UNAMID and deploy a special political mission, there remain some 2 million internally displaced persons in the country and serious human rights violations continue to be reported. The peace process is ongoing and needs to address the main conflict drivers. The security sector and local institutions must be reformed and rebuilt. In this context, the protection of civilians in Darfur should remain one of the Council's key priorities in the Sudan. However, the Sudan of today is different from that of yesterday. As the Sudanese people celebrate the first anniversary of the fall of Omar Al-Bashir this month, there is much to hope for. The first pillar of hope is the fact that the political transition has established a new relationship between Khartoum and the Sudan's international partners, one that is based on trust, dialogue and mutual commitment. We are determined to keep supporting the political transition in the Sudan, including the ongoing peace talks. As Council members discuss the modalities and timing of the closure of UNAMID and the planning and establishment of a new mission, the dialogue with the Sudanese authorities is key. We have taken note of the letters sent by Prime Minister Hamdok and propose to continue engaging the Sudanese authorities in this respect, including on how to address the protection of civilians in a post- UNAMID Darfur. The second topic that is a reason for optimism is the mobilization of the African Union (AU) in the Sudan, which France fully supports. Last year, the AU's mediation efforts played a critical role in negotiating the establishment of a civilian- led Government. We cannot succeed without a strong partnership with the AU. We have to be creative and find a way to design an ad hoc partnership between the follow-on mission and the African Union, taking into consideration the added value each institution provides. France is ready to engage with the penholders and hopes for a united Security Council in agreeing a resolution that will serve peace and the best interests of the people of the Sudan.
