I would like to begin by thanking Ms. DiCarlo, Mr. Lacroix and Mr. Khare for their briefings. I would like to emphasize three points. First, France's priority remains supporting the democratic transition in the Sudan. I pay tribute to the political will that the transitional Government continues to demonstrate in a context of increasing difficulties. That is reflected in the pursuit of institutional, economic and financial reforms, as well the efforts to begin the implementation of the Juba peace agreement. I refer in particular to the Government's efforts to engage in discussions with all parties. We call on those who remain outside the peace process to join it without further delay. We further welcome the Sudan's efforts to tackle impunity and ensure respect for human rights, particularly through cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the International Criminal Court. The planned ratification of two important conventions, including the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, is extremely encouraging. Those advances must of course be followed up by tangible action. We hope that the procedure for removing the Sudan from the United States list of State sponsors of terrorism will be completed as soon as possible. That is indeed a crucial step towards achieving a successful democratic transition. As President Emmanuel Macron has promised, France will organize a high-level conference to support the Sudanese transition as soon as the Sudan is removed from that list. The event could be held in the first half of 2021. A number of challenges further compound the difficulties of the transition itself. The acceptance of reforms has been weakened by economic difficulties, and the humanitarian situation has worsened in connection with the persistence of insecurity in Darfur, the effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the effects of the floods and the situation in Ethiopia. As such, we welcome the Sudan's efforts to host nearly 50,000 Ethiopian refugees in eastern Sudan. The mobilization of humanitarian assistance from all United Nations agencies and the Sudan's international partners is absolutely necessary. France, together with its European partners and the European Union, will of course play its full part. In that context - and this will be my last point - France supports the swift operationalization of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) and the appointment of a Special Representative of the Secretary-General to continue United Nations support on the ground. In Darfur, the transition from the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to UNITAMS should be carried out in an orderly fashion. France recognizes the willingness of the Sudanese authorities to assume full responsibility for the protection of civilians in Darfur and encourages the Government to continue implementing its national plan for the protection of civilians, with the assistance of UNITAMS. Yet civilians, particularly women and children, continue to face violence on the ground. The continuation of peacebuilding activities is also indispensable for building trust among populations who remain traumatized by the level of insecurity. Lastly, it is necessary to accelerate capacity-building and support the implementation of the peace process. In that regard, the participation of women is of course a major issue, as many speakers have stated. It is the responsibility of the Security Council to ensure that UNAMID's withdrawal takes due account of the reality on the ground and all of its challenges, as it has always done for its peacekeeping operations. In that regard, I would like to thank Mr. Lacroix and Mr. Khare for setting out in detail the prerequisites of a process that the Security Council must now identify.
