Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations
confers upon the Security Council the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security. In
the light of the very purposes of our Organization,
established in Article 1, this is a proactive and
comprehensive responsibility, never reactive or limited, for
it states that the United Nations should take effective
collective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to the peace.

This constitutional foundation would be a sufficient
argument to justify the raison d 'etre of the multidisciplinary
operations authorized by the Security Council aimed at
promoting peace-building. It has nevertheless been
experience and reality themselves that have been
responsible for promoting this new concept of peacekeeping
that today is part and parcel of the abundant set of values
that the Council has progressively established in carrying
out its primary responsibility under the Charter.

The lessons learned by the international community,
especially from conflicts in developing countries, have
motivated the United Nations to approach these situations
from a larger perspective that facilitates and promotes
solutions to the economic and social problems that are at
the root of most situations that threaten international
peace and security.
The situation in Haiti constitutes a clear example of
the need for organized international participation from the
standpoint of guaranteeing and building peace and thus
preventing a return of conflict and instability. We are all
aware of the statistics on human development in Haiti: a
life expectancy at birth of 54 years; a literacy rate of 44
per cent; a school attendance rate of 39 per cent; and a
real gross domestic product of $896 per capita. These
cold but dramatic numbers show us that there is sufficient
reason to justify the obligation of the international
community to continue comprehensively assisting the
people of Haiti in the laudable effort they have been
carrying out for several years to promote a new political,
economic and social model.

In this context, the role of the United Nations in
Haiti goes beyond the simple and traditional concept of
assistance to development. Its role is to ensure and
promote the establishment and consolidation of efficient
and democratic institutions of judicial security that can
evolve into a stabilizing factor to guarantee that there will
be no regression and that authoritarianism and division -
possibilities that can become odious realities when we
note the lack of will among some sectors of the Haitian
political leadership - will not re-emerge in society.

The report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti points out the
important work that that body is carrying out in that
country and its significant contribution to guaranteeing
and promoting the establishment and consolidation of the
National Police and judicial institutions as professional
democratic institutions entrusted with guaranteeing the
judicial security necessary for the reconciliation of the
Haitian people.

From another standpoint, that report also shows us
the need for all bodies and specialized agencies of the
United Nations to continue to provide their active
cooperation on a multidisciplinary, coordinated and
integrated basis in this major effort at peace-building by

 

establishing efficient democratic institutions and just and
sustainable economic and social conditions.

It is for this reason that Costa Rica, in keeping with
the position jointly stated by the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States, supports the extension of the
Mission's mandate on the terms set forth by the Secretary-
General in his report. We will consequently vote in favour
of the draft resolution before us, which we are honoured to
co-sponsor.
