Mr. Kobler (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I
should like to convey my warmest congratulations to
Spain on its accession to the presidency of the Security
Council. My mandate as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is approaching its end. It is therefore an
honour for me to present the Secretary-General's report
(S/2015/74l) for the final time, to inform the Council
on the latest events in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and to present an overview of what we have
achieved and what remains to be done.

Today, I would like to address three specific issues:
the domestic situation and the electoral process, the
security situation in the east, and the strategic dialogue.

(spoke in English)

At the end of my more than two years in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, I depart with a
feeling of satisfaction and pride, but also with a sense
that our mandate has not yet been fulfilled. I cannot
say with certainty whether the progress attained is
sustainable or whether the specter of violence can erupt
again and reverse what has been achieved so far.

The political situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is increasingly marked by the electoral
process. Political tensions are running high ahead of
the 2016 elections, and that will have an impact on
the security situation, on the strategic dialogue and,
ultimately, on the fulfillment of our mandate. The
conduct of peaceful, timely and credible elections in
November 2016 would send a clear message to the
world that the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
nation that respects its Constitution, a nation keen on
a peaceful transition of power, and a nation that will
consolidate peace.

I am, however, concerned by the increasing number
of human rights violations related to the electoral
process, particularly violations of freedom of peaceful
assembly. Reducing political space ahead of the
elections will undermine the credibility of the electoral
process. I urge the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to take all necessary measures
to ensure that the legislative and presidential elections
slated for November 2016 are transparent, credible and
inclusive.

I appeal to the authorities to decisively and

immediately address open questions related to the
sequencing of the electoral calendar, while respecting
the constitutional deadlines; the electoral budget; and
the update of the voter registry to include eligible
individuals who turned 18 since the elections of 2011.
Nothing should be done to impede the timely holding of
legislative and presidential elections in November 2016,
as foreseen by the Constitution. The United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) will continue
to play its good offices role in support of all political
stakeholders and the people of the Congo.

The human rights situation warrants our attention
as well. On 29 September, the Human Rights Council
in Geneva expressed its concerns regarding the state of
human rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
where more than 2,200 human rights violations affecting
5,400 victims have taken place this year so far. Half of
these abuses were committed by State agents. Despite
repeated calls, there has been only limited progress in
bringing senior perpetrators to justice.

I turn now to the situation in the east. When I
first arrived in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in August 2013, Goma was still recovering from the
takeover by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23). In
August 2015, I flew into a newly renovated airport in
Goma with a major international commercial airline.
The slow return of investors is a sure sign of improving
stability and security in the city. In some islands of
stability in the east, the State has demonstrated its ability
to enhance the presence of the army and police, while
a justice system is being established and basic services
are delivered. In some parts of the east, displaced
persons are gradually returning home. However, the
population remains wary of a fragile peace that still
needs to be consolidated. As a consequence, many
Congolese continue to call on MONUSCO to protect
them.

I am proud that the performance of the force has
improved in recent years. This is due to the relentless
efforts of the Force Commander and his Deputy. Foot
and night patrols are now routine activities of the force.
Though preventive action is difficult to quantify, I
have no doubt that our presence and our early-warning
mechanisms regularly protect the most vulnerable
populations.

In the past two years, the M-23 has been militarily
defeated, but military success alone is not durable.
M-23 eX-combatants still sojourn in camps in Rwanda
and Uganda. All efforts towards reintegration on the
basis of the Nairobi Declaration have not succeeded
thus far. This is a time bomb that must be urgently
defused. The Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) has been
weakened while the area of its activities has shrunk.
Last month, I Visited Kamango, a town not far from the
Ugandan border. For years, the town was terrorized by
the ADF. Close to 120,000 people - 90 per cent of its
population - fled out of fear for their lives in 2013,
turning Kamango into a ghost town.

However, the brave combat of the Forces armees
de la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC)
and the deployment of United Nations peacekeeping
forces have resulted in the gradual return of 80,000
refugees since early 2014. I have seen a revitalized
town centre with a flourishing market and vibrant
economic activity. And the one consistent message I
heard repeatedly during my visits is that MONUSCO's
presence remains critical.

But this is ultimately not sufficient. It is the State
that is needed to provide protective, judicial and
administrative functions. FARDC and police capacity
is still limited in the territory due to a lack of resources
and personnel. We are indeed looking forward to
seeing the Congolese forces taking over more and more
of these crucial responsibilities from us, and we will
remain available to support such a progressive, even
tentative transfer.

Further West in the Beni area, however, the
population continues to experience the anguish of
armed conflict. The figure of 440 terror victims in
one year alone speaks a clear language. The ADF is
far from being defeated. I must admit that we should
have done better. One victim is one too many. But still,
through active patrolling and proactive action, we have
prevented numerous killings.

The existence of the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) remains one of the most
important hindrances to peace in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Nearly 12,000 FDLR
ex-combatants have been repatriated over the past
12 years, but the last mile is always the most difficult.
I welcome the criminal convictions and long prison
terms recently handed down against two FDLR leaders
by a court in Germany. I was particularly gratified
by that court's designation of the FDLR as a terrorist
organization. There is no question about it; still 1,100
FDLR elements continue to carry out numerous acts of
murder, rape, mutilation and cruel treatment, among
other crimes. They have been oppressing the residents
of eastern Congo for years. We must put an end to
this reign of terror. I welcome the joint declaration of
Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo of
24 September that they will cooperate in the eradication
of the FDLR. Neutralizing the FDLR in eastern Congo
remains the single most important political/military
objective.

The only efficient solution to address the security
situation is joint MONUSCO-FARDC operations. In
my most recent briefing to the Council (see S/PV.7484),
I urged President Kabila to give the green light forjoint
operations. Unfortunately, the green light has not yet
been given. I again call on the President to instruct the
FARDC to resume cooperation, which produced so
many positive results in the past. Only united can we
ensure sustainable peace. Only united can we ensure
that women and men attend to their fields. Only united
can we ensure that children go to school.

MONUSCO has to gradually withdraw and exit
from the Congo. The United Nations commitment to
the people of the Congo, however, remains steadfast, as
MONUSCO's exit strategy hinges on continued tangible
progress on the ground. We cannot and must not exit
hastily. The strategic dialogue between the United
Nations and the Government is a forum specifically
created to discuss and jointly agree on a progressive
reduction of the Mission in the context of a mutually
agreed exit strategy. Regrettably, our most recent joint
assessment revealed that the security situation has not
improved or even deteriorated in 21 territories out of 28
territories affected by armed conflicts.

Based on resolution 2211 (2015), I have proposed
to the Congolese Government a three-phase process
that would set in motion MONUSCO's exit strategy.
Achieving our shared goal of a gradual withdrawal,
without jeopardizing the gains already attained, will
require further structured discussions between the
Government and the United Nations and the broader
international community. The Secretary-General has
taken note of the Government's position in the context
of the strategic dialogue and has indicated readiness to
have a fresh look at the achievements presented by the
Government.

I thank the Congolese Government for its support
and its faith in MONUSCO. I am confident we will
resolve the remaining problems in a constructive spirit.

The United Nations weight partly lies in the values
that it upholds and defends on a daily basis. Sexual
exploitation and abuse cases not only tarnish our
reputation, but also add to the suffering and burden
of the most vulnerable populations. They break that
fundamental trust that people have in us. To echo the
Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy, I, along with
the Force Commander and the Police Commissioner
sensitized thousands of civilian and military
peacekeepers in the last weeks. Moving forward,
prevention and accountability should become ingrained
in our modus operandi.

The implementation of the Addis Ababa agreement
needs to be invigorated. Key reforms in the security
sector, police, justice and corrections are essential for
the long-term stability of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The lack of good governance, the absence of
State authority, is one of the root causes of the conflict.

I commend my colleague Special Envoy Said
Djinnit for his work, in particular I wish the private
sector investment conference early next year plenty of
success. To bolster private investment, foreign direct
investment and Congolese investment, we must spare
no efforts to ensure continued stability, security and the
rule of law. The engagement of the team of the special
envoys has been crucial throughout my tenure. I thank
all colleagues for their unwavering support.

At the end, because this is my last meeting, allow me
to mention one important topic beyond MONUSCO'S
mandate. This is my deep concern about the degradation
of the environment and the deforestation of the
Congolese rain-forest. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo's natural resources are a blessing. The country's
unique natural heritage must be preserved for future
generations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in Africa and in the world.

I wish to thank the Security Council for its
unwavering support and for giving the Democratic
Republic of the Congo the attention it rightly deserves.
I also want to express my gratitude to Headquarters
colleagues, in particular Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations Mr. Herve Ladsous and his
team for the continuous support and valuable guidance
in difficult times. To Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui for her commitment
and tireless efforts in getting children out of the hands
of brutal armed groups. For Special Representative
Zainab Bangura for her engagement and support to
the Mission in stopping the scourge of sexual violence
and easing the pain of thousands of women and girls
victims in the Congo.

Allow me also to thank all military, police and
civilian colleagues in MONUSCO in the United Nations
country team for working to fulfil our promise to the
people of the Congo. The friendship of the team was
one of the most rewarding experiences I have had in my
professional life.

(spoke in French)

For the past two years, I have travelled throughout
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I have actively
tried to listen to all segments of Congolese society
to truly understand and respond to the people's
expectations. I met with representatives of women's
and youth organizations, villagers in markets, former
child soldiers and many others whose lives have been
forever altered by war. They are a daily reminder of
the thousands of people who are counting on us. We
have the duty and responsibility to ensure that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is secure and stable,
and that the progress that has been achieved thus far
will not be lost.

Allow me here to commend the perseverance
and resilience of the Congolese who have witnessed
the horrors of war, the women who have suffered the
horrors of violence and the children who have lost their
innocence at the hands of brutal combatants. They
are the reason why MONUSCO stands firm and calls
for the respect for human rights. They are the reason
why we are calling for a gradual drawdown, and not a
hasty one, of the Force. They are the reason why our
civilian, police and military staff are working tirelessly
in the pursuit of peace. Allow me to warmly thank the
Congolese people for the hospitality that they have
always shown us as guests in their country. I have great
admiration for their strength and deep aspirations for
peace and progress.

The seeds of a stable, secure and resilient Congo
have already been planted. I will be following their
journey from afar with the hope that we will see them
bloom and prosper in the years to come. It was an
honour to serve the United Nations.

