Mr. Santos (Mozambique): I would like to join
previous speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council and
on the excellent manner in which you are conducting the
affairs of the Council. Allow me also to pay a special
tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Jagne of the
Gambia, for the excellent work he did during the difficult
month of June.

I would also like to express our appreciation to the
Deputy Secretary-General for her statement and for her
presence here today.

We commend your initiative, Mr. President, in
introducing today's topic to the agenda of the Council.
We salute members of the Council for agreeing to give
this issue the priority it deserves. Indeed, not only is the
theme of the maintenance of peace and security and post-
conflict peace-building and the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants in a
peacekeeping environment relevant and timely, but it also,
and perhaps more important, falls under the core
competency of the Security Council.

We therefore welcome the opportunity to share our
views and lend our modest contribution to the debate, in
the hope that this body will play a more effective role in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

Recent experience reminds us that the maintenance
of international peace and security in post-conflict
situations requires the timely adoption and implementation
of adequate measures to consolidate peace and prevent the
re-emergence of conflict. In this regard, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
should be given the highest priority for, without them,
peace will be in constant jeopardy.

 

Mozambique is today considered a success story in
United Nations peacekeeping history. While we take great
pride in the achievements made by the Mozambican people
with the invaluable assistance of the international
community, we are conscious of the challenges that lie
ahead in our war-torn society.

The 1992 General Peace Agreement for Mozambique,
signed in Rome, provided for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration. Indeed, mechanisms were set up to deal
with these delicate areas. As a result, the cantonment of
combatants and their disarmament and demobilization was
carried out without major incident. The Reintegration
Commission provided for under the Peace Agreement had
the mandate to deal with the immediate needs of the
combatants. Clearly, providing combatants with cash
payments for a few months following the cessation of
hostilities will not suffice. They need continued assistance
and they need to be empowered to generate their own
means survival and to lead normal lives as working people
so that going back to war will no longer be a viable option.
The inclusion of these provisions and mechanisms in the
Peace Agreement had a very positive impact in the
consolidation of peace in Mozambique.

My Government has spared no effort to address the
problem of the reintegration of former combatants,
including those who fought for the independence of the
country. As Ambassador Greenstock mentioned this
morning, different strategies were experimented with,
ranging from vocational training to job placement and self-
employment. The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) has supported those efforts by the Government and
has studied the impact those programmes. Support from
cooperating partners has been vital in this process.

Reintegration means also reconciling combatants with
communities that were victim of atrocities. Thus it requires
the participation of communities and civil-society
organizations in the process. And reintegration has to be
such that former combatants will identify more with the
community than with their former roles as fighters. At some
point they should cease to be considered a special group of
citizens, but rather be part of the communities they live in.

Of particular importance in this regard is the delicate
issue of the demobilization and reintegration of child
soldiers. While Governments can be held accountable for
the use of children as soldiers it is often difficult to induce
change in rebel groups and to have them admit that they
make use of children. The magnitude of the problem cannot
be overemphasized. In the African continent alone, about
120,000 children under 18 years of age are currently
participating in armed conflicts.

Therefore, there is a need to recognize and highlight
the specific difficulties encountered when disarming,
demobilizing and reintegrating child soldiers. Traumatized
children will find it difficult to reintegrate into their
communities or even into new communities. They need
long-term measures emphasizing education, family
reunification and psycho-social support. The United
Nations Children's Fund has gathered experience in this
field and can assist in developing guiding principles for
action. The Graca Machel study, documents A/51/306 and
A/51/306/Add.l, offers useful recommendations in this
regard. The follow-up actions by the Secretary-General's
Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Olara Otunnu, are equally relevant, and the briefs given
to the Council by Ambassador Otunnu should be
continued and be more action-oriented.

One important aspect to be taken into account is the
total disarmament of combatants: making sure that all
weapons are handed over. Seven years after the General
Peace Agreement, the Mozambican authorities, in
coordination with neighbouring South Africa, have been
discovering caches of weapons that were supposed to
have been handed over at the time of demobilization.
Therefore, provisions in agreements will not be sufficient;
close monitoring of the process will be required in the
mandate of peacekeeping missions.

The presence of large numbers of small weapons in
unlawful hands will remain a constant danger to peace
and stability in post-conflict areas. Regional and
international efforts under way in this area should be
strengthened and expedited. Practical disarmament
measures should be pursued whenever and wherever
possible. The Panel of Governmental Experts on Small
Arms, of which I am privileged to be a part, has produced
valuable recommendations and is currently discussing
their implementation and updating. The subsequent reports
by the Secretary-General should merit due consideration
by the Security Council.

The first meeting of States parties to the Ottawa
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel Mines and on
Their Destruction, held in Maputo, Mozambique only two
months ago, once again highlighted the impact of
landmines in post-conflict areas. While this problem
cannot be completely solved by peacekeeping missions,
mission mandates should include provisions for assisting

 

local authorities in building the necessary capacities to deal
with the different aspects of the problem, including mine
awareness, victim assistance, stockpile destruction and
technology for mine action.
The United Nations has accumulated a wealth of
experience, and important lessons can be learned. We
should therefore use our innovative capacity to develop
concrete guidelines and a framework for action in future
peacekeeping operations. The usefulness of today's debate
will be judged to large extent by the level of improvements
that the Security Council will be able to introduce. The
resources committed to peacekeeping operations and to
post-conflict peace-building also reflect the level of
commitment to finding durable solutions.

We recognize that solutions to these problems lie
primarily in the willingness of the parties to participate and
in the political will to reach a positive conclusion. But, as
the experience in Mozambique and elsewhere has shown,
this readiness has to be backed by the international
community if it is to last. And the end of a peacekeeping
operation should not mean the end of international
community support.

An integrated approach to these issues will certainly
be required so that post-conflict peace-building can lead to
lasting peace and stability. The entire United Nations
system is called upon to play a role in devising the most
effective strategies that will ensure future success. The
expectations are high, and the Security Council bears great
responsibility as provided in the Charter of the United
Nations.

We look forward to the outcome of this meeting and
to the deliberations and actions that will follow.

