Mr. Kerim (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): Allow me to begin by expressing my great
satisfaction at seeing you, the representative of
Ukraine, presiding over this very important meeting of
the Security Council, which was requested by the
Government of the Republic of Macedonia. I also want
to thank you for your prompt response in organizing
this meeting.

I am here to inform the Council on the disturbing
developments on the northern border of the Republic of
Macedonia. In the past few weeks, my country has
been confronted with a serious problem caused by
unidentified extremist militant groups stationed on the
northern border of the Republic of Macedonia. These
groups have occupied the village of Tanusevci, and
from this stronghold they have continuously provoked
armed incidents for some time now. On 4 March of this
year, three soldiers of the Macedonian army were
killed.

The extremists have not put forth their demands
or their requests. They are consciously holding the
local Albanian population hostage, and in view of the
fact that the border belt with Kosovo is inhabited
mostly by ethnic Albanians, they are also affecting the
inter-ethnic relations in my country. Tanusevci is a
serious warning that the Macedonian border area with
Kosovo can be used constantly for provoking these
kinds of incidents, thus threatening the peace, security
and stability of Macedonia and the entire region.

The problem we are facing requires political,
diplomatic and security measures. The Government and
the President of the Republic of Macedonia are
undertaking numerous activities with the aim of finding
a peaceful solution, in close cooperation with the
international community. The coalition Government of
Macedonia, including the Democratic Party of
Albanians, speaks with one voice and has condemned
all attempts made to disrupt the inter-ethnic balance in
the country. The Republic of Macedonia undertook a
measured security response to the provocations, and
only when provoked. The Government of Macedonia
appreciates very much the clear signals of support it
has received in the statements made by the Security
Council, the United Nations Secretary-General, the
European Union Presidency, the North Atlantic
Council, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and other international forums. The activities
of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in the initial stage were
not as effective as necessary, thus causing additional
problems for the operations of our security forces. In
the meantime, the lack of cooperation between

Macedonian security forces and KFOR has been
overcome.
With the aim of resolving this situation, the
Government of the Republic of Macedonia adopted an
action plan. Its main elements are, in fact, preventive
measures against a spillover of the conflict from both
sides of the border. The action plan proposes the full
observance of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999);
the immediate establishment of a ground safety area
along the entire Kosovo side of the Macedonian-
Yugoslav border, by KFOR and by countries willing to
make their contribution if necessary; the undertaking of
urgent actions by KFOR for strict compliance of the
provisions related to the movement of military and
paramilitary formations, arms shipments and a ban on
the movement and gathering of larger groups in the
ground safety zone; strengthening the permanent
coordination of activities between the armed forces of
the Republic of Macedonia and KFOR, for the purpose
of dealing with the conflict situation in the border area,
disarming paramilitary extreme groups and bringing
them to justice; and creating conditions for the return
of the inhabitants of the village of Tanusevci to their
homes.

The action plan also proposes the strengthening
of the existing measures and the undertaking of
additional ones by the Macedonian Government on the
border in order to prevent a spillover of the conflict, in
particular by reinforcing police control with new
border police units.

The seriousness of the problem I have just
elaborated on and the timing of its occurrence demand
that we act preventively. In this case, to act
preventively means to act promptly. We believe that
this plan can work, and that is why we are advancing it
before the Security Council.

For the last decade, Macedonia has affirmed itself
as a factor of stability in the region, in spite of the
challenges presented by the regional crisis. Now that a
new page is finally being written in the history of the
region, the new climate of cooperation and regional
integration is again under threat. This new approach
was best articulated at the Skopje summit of heads of
State and Government of South-eastern Europe, at
which the leaders of the countries of the region
committed themselves to a new era of development,
cooperation and stability in their relations.

In that context, the Republic of Macedonia signed
the agreement with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
on the demarcation of the border. All countries in
South-eastern Europe and the international community
as a whole strongly supported this agreement. They
have acknowledged its important contribution to the
peace and stability of the region.

However, it is evident that there are persons and
forces in the Balkans who still believe that the time for
creating so-called greater national states and drawing
ethnic border lines has not passed. The incident in
Tanusevci and in the border area of the Republic of
Macedonia with Kosovo must be understood also in
this light - as a warning for all of us to react and
oppose these kinds of activities without hesitation.

The Security Council should be aware that the
incident in Tanusevci must be seen in a broader
context. This is not just about Tanusevci or about the
Republic of Macedonia. This is about the region of the
Balkans and its transformation into a peaceful, stable,
democratic and prosperous European region.

Some say that Macedonia is being tested once
again, particularly as regards its inter-ethnic relations,
which are a crucial element of its stability. But they
should not forget that this time the international
community is also facing a serious test. Nobody today
can claim to have been caught by surprise. The spill-
over mission of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe was established almost 10 years
ago. I can assure the Council that Macedonia will pass
this test in these difficult times, in spite of the fact that
a group of people - whom some call guerrillas and
others extremists or terrorists - has tried to take
hostage not only the local Albanian population but
inter-ethnic relations in Macedonia in general.

But in order to be effective, Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) must be fully implemented, and
KFOR has to act according to its basic mandate, to
prevent spill-over effects and to secure the northern
border of Macedonia from the Kosovo side. In this
context, I am pleased to note the conclusions reached
today by the North Atlantic Council on measures to be
undertaken in regard to my country.

Before I conclude, I would like to emphasize
once again the role of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo and of KFOR in the
period ahead of us. The eyes - and hopes - of the
Macedonian population are turned towards KFOR and
the measures it will undertake. It should be clear that at
this time we are endeavouring to protect not only the
stability of our northern border, but also the values we
share with the peoples of the countries represented
here- peace, freedom and democracy, in a multi-
ethnic and multicultural country like the Republic of
Macedonia.

I call upon the Council to support the measures
we are proposing. In this fashion, we can work together
in reaffirming the preconditions for a peaceful and
democratic development of the Balkans, with
inviolable, stable and transparent borders. The support
of the Council for the case I have had the honour to
present to it, on behalf of the Republic of Macedonia,
is of crucial importance at this moment. I strongly
believe that today's endeavours and the message that
the Security Council will send will serve as a basis for
undertaking adequate measures for the stabilization of
the northern border of my country - the Republic of
Macedonia - in the period to come.

I stand ready to answer any questions Council
members might have.

