Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset, on behalf of the Moroccan
delegation, to congratulate the presidency of the United
Kingdom for its excellent work this month to
strengthen international peace and security. I also wish
to thank Mr. Roed-Larsen. I listened with interest to his
comprehensive and objective briefing on the situation
in the Middle East, including Palestine.

This is a critical time. The Council is meeting at a
time when we are witnessing an unprecedented
aggravation of the situation in Palestine with violence
and destruction increasing. The Palestinian population,
in addition to its daily insecurity, is enduring all
manner of restrictions. In this situation, when the
international community is appealing for more
channels for the Israeli-Palestinian dialogue, the Israeli
authorities decided in principle last Thursday that they
would deport President Yasser Arafat.

That decision has been taken in flagrant disregard
of the most elementary rules of international law.
President Arafat is the legitimate leader of the
Palestinian Authority and was democratically elected
by the Palestinian people. Furthermore, President
Yasser Arafat, who enjoys unquestioned historical
legitimacy, symbolizes the deep aspirations of the
Palestinian people to liberation and a decent future for
their children.

The decision to banish President Arafat can only
strike the final blow to the peace process, particularly
to the efforts deployed by the Quartet to craft the stages
and processes for a fair and lasting solution, in keeping
with Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 1397 (2002), which call for putting an end to
the Israeli occupation and creating the conditions for
establishing a sovereign Palestinian State that will
coexist side by side in peace with Israel.

In the light of this alarming situation, His Majesty
King Mohammed VI, President of the al-Quds
Committee, immediately appealed to the members of
the Quartet to intervene without delay in order to
prevent Israel from carrying out its illegal decision. His
Majesty also conveyed a message to the Israeli
authorities expressing his profound disquiet and grave
concern about the serious consequences of expelling
President Arafat or of any attack on his person or
security.

The Kingdom of Morocco firmly believes that the
resolution of this conflict requires a dialogue and the
return of the parties to the negotiating table. That
should take place as soon as possible, without
preconditions or unilateral initiatives that might
accelerate an escalation of the spiral of violence and
retaliation.

As for us, we have often condemned terrorism, as
did the representative of Palestine this morning. We
have condemned terrorism, regardless of its origin and
motivations. Yet we have always insisted that every
effort be made to eliminate the causes of this scourge.

Wisdom, moderation and dialogue remain the
best guarantors of a fair and lasting solution to the
Middle East crisis. It is in that spirit that the Kingdom
of Morocco reiterates its full readiness to multiply
efforts and contacts in order to restore the momentum
of the road map co-sponsored by the Quartet and
supported by the international community as a whole.
We keenly hope that, through the Security Council, the
international community will send Israel a clear
message to reconsider its decision. We appeal for an
end to all forms of violence.
We must not allow the circle of violence and
reprisals to lead us off the path of peace, security and
regional stability. The United Nations, in particular the
Security Council, must shoulder its responsibilities
with respect to the deteriorating situation in Palestine.

The goal is clear. The creation of a Palestinian
State is the only way to ensure security for all the
children of the region. It is certainly not by eliminating
the legitimate Palestinian interlocutor that the Israeli
authorities will make progress towards greater security
and tranquillity.

