Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): Sir, we are delighted to
see you presiding over this important meeting of the
Council. We are sure that you will be able to guide the
deliberations of the Council in your usual effective and
able manner. We also appreciate the way in which
Ambassador Lavrov conducted the Council's
proceedings last month.

The situation in the Middle East shows no signs
of improvement. It is indeed a matter of concern to all
of us that despite repeated calls by this Council,
through its resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002), 1403
(2002) and 1405 (2002), Israeli military operations in
the Palestinian cities continue unabated. Numerous
Palestinian towns and cities are suffering under Israeli
military occupation, while civilian casualties are
continuing to mount. Today, we are no nearer to the
end of the violence than a month or even a year ago.

We are deeply concerned at the fact that Israel
persists in its defiance not only of the successive
resolutions adopted by the Council, but also of the
Secretary-General's initiative to send a fact-finding
team to Jenin. Israel's refusal to cooperate with the
fact-finding mission is indicative of a desire to cover
up the facts. The massacre in Jenin was as excessive as
it was inexcusable. Nothing could have justified such
wanton killing. Pakistan reiterates that a
comprehensive and impartial inquiry should be
conducted to find out what happened in Jenin. Fact-
finding missions to areas where gross violations of
humanitarian law occur, whether in the Middle East or
elsewhere, should be a matter of course, not an
exception. Such missions should not be allowed to be
held hostage to the whims of one of the parties.

Pakistan deplores the killing of innocent civilians
in that region. We have already voiced our strong
support for the Secretary-General's proposal to deploy
an international force to ensure safety and to provide
an opening for diplomatic moves. The Security Council
cannot remain unmindful of its special responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
It must not allow selectivity or double standards in the
implementation of its resolutions. The Council must
take decisive, effective and immediate measures to
ensure the immediate cessation of all Israeli military
action and the total withdrawal of its forces from the
occupied territories, in accordance with its own
resolutions. There has never been a time when the
Council's very credibility and moral authority were
more at stake.

Our objective, however, is not to achieve a
ceasefire and withdrawal only. It is actually the
attainment of a final peace settlement in the Middle
East. The framework for that settlement already exists -
in all the recent peace initiatives, in Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002),
and in the Beirut Declaration. Those who have the
responsibility to maintain international peace must
therefore act, and act now, to realize this objective and
to save what remains of the hopes for a durable peace
in the Middle East.
