Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
In recent days, violent clashes once again have
exploded between Israel and Palestine. We condemn
the fact that the Israeli army once again besieged
Ramallah and has destroyed Chairman Arafat's
headquarters, thus directly endangering his safety and
security.

We demand that the Israeli side put an immediate
end to this siege of Chairman Arafat and ensure his
dignity, as well as his safety and security. We also
condemn the incidence of suicide bombings within
Israel. We call on both Israel and Palestine to exercise
restraint, stop responding to violence with more
violence and collaborate with the mediation efforts of
the international community.

During the recent Vicious cycle of violence, both
Israel and Palestine suffered terrible losses, especially
Palestine, where the humanitarian situation has become
extremely serious. The Israeli authorities put blind
faith in force. However, their excessive, violent
retaliation has not obtained peace and security for
Israel. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict also
demonstrates that to put an end to violence and to
promote the peace process in the Middle East, the
active participation of international community is
indispensable.

Not long ago the Arab League Summit adopted
and endorsed a peace proposal for the Middle East put
forward by Saudi Arabia. Recently the Quartet put
forward a three-phase, three-stage plan. The reform and
election in Palestine have also been put on the agenda.
All of these developments are positive, but we also see
that the vicious cycle of violence between Israel and
Palestine has not been broken.
Without an end to violence, the reform in
Palestine cannot continue, and all the road maps and
programmes for the settlement of the problem between
Israel and Palestine will become mere dead letters.
Therefore, the international community must exert
greater efforts, and the Security Council should
shoulder its responsibilities all the more.

The Chinese Government attaches importance to
peace and stability in the Middle East and hopes to see
an early easing of the conflict between Israel and
Palestine. In order further to participate in and promote
the peace process in the Middle East, the Chinese
Government has already designated a special envoy on
the question of the Middle East. We will strengthen
contacts and consultations with all parties concerned
and make unremitting efforts for the realization of
peace in the Middle East.

