I will make this statement on behalf of Germany and Belgium, the humanitarian co-penholders. We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing. We would also like to thank the humanitarian workers in the country for their lasting engagement. They are at the forefront of every humanitarian disaster, and that is no different in the current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis. Their protection should be, and is, our constant concern. I will make three points. First, some claim that the situation in Syria has stabilized. Indeed, we are relieved to see that the situation in the north-west remains relatively calm, despite ongoing violence, and we - Germany and Belgium - call for the continued implementation of the Turkish-Russian ceasefire agreement. However, the humanitarian situation in Syria remains alarming. Eleven million Syrians remain in need of humanitarian assistance and protection. Moreover, the economic crisis and COVID-19 have added an additional burden to an already dire situation, and winter is coming. The war, mismanagement, corruption and oppression have resulted in an economic crisis without precedent, sharply limiting the purchasing power of Syrians all over the country. That has led to food insecurity for an additional 1.4 million people over the past six months. COVID-19 is claiming victims across the country. The number of cases has grown exponentially. That is alarming. Statistics are unreliable. The identified cases are only the tip of the iceberg. Testing capacity remains far too low everywhere in the country, including in the north-east and the north-west. Prevention therefore falls short. Treatment options are inadequate as this crisis is once again acutely showing the limitations of the Syrian health-care system. Health-care facilities that were deliberately bombed and destroyed during years of war are unable to cope with the current crisis. The shortage of health-care workers further prevents an adequate response. The coming of winter adds to the challenging humanitarian circumstances, especially for the 2.7 million internally displaced persons, including | million children, in the north-west. We remember the deeply dehumanizing circumstances last year under which many of them fled their areas of origin en masse and arrived in camps. We, Germany and Belgium, encourage the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and Syria's humanitarian partners to make every effort to prepare for winter. We know that, with limited access, that will not be an easy exercise. That brings me to my second point. Humanitarian access remains limited, which is intolerable and defies humanitarian logic. We, the penholders, call upon all parties to allow neutral and non-political access to all parts of the country, without limitations and fully in line with humanitarian principles. Administrative hurdles are not acceptable. Accordingly, Secretary-General Guterres and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock have consistently called for more cross-line and more cross-border access to all Syrians in need throughout this year. While the majority of the Security Council was in favour of supporting this request in the interest of the Syrian people, some members have chosen to deny it. They have blocked draft Security Council resolutions seeking adequate access to the north-east, via Al-Yarubiyah, and the north-west, via Bab Al-Salam. They claim that cross-line deliveries from Damascus and deliveries passing conflict lines from Bab Al-Hawa would compensate for the closure of cross-border posts. However, the sad reality is that the non-renewal of Bab Al-Salam has so far resulted in a more costly and riskier humanitarian operation in the north-west. So far, no crossline delivery has taken place, and we still have to see if the current planning transforms into reality. At the same time, access from Damascus to the north-east seems to have recently become further complicated, as Under-Secretary-General Lowcock mentioned, and gaps in medical access to this region are still far from being filled. What is also clear is that we cannot accept Damascus deciding who is to receive aid and who is not. Humanitarian action has to be neutral, independent and impartial. Thirdly, humanitarian access is not limited to the delivery of food or shelter. All parties should facilitate access to those who need protection, for instance, those in arbitrary detention. Access should also be guaranteed to those who are located in hard-to-reach locations, such as the Rukban camp. This access should be urgently and unconditionally guaranteed so as to keep civilian infrastructure fully functioning, for example, the Allouk water station, which provides the essential water supply to over half a million people, including to the Al-Hol camp. Each of these points illustrates the immeasurable human suffering that Syrian children, women and men are undergoing on a daily basis. We, Germany and Belgium - the humanitarian penholders - therefore once again call for sustainable, durable and unconditional solutions. Finally, to change the situation for the Syrian people for the better, action will be needed, and we reiterate our call for the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) and for accountability. We fully support the conclusions of the Board of Inquiry and the work of the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as justice initiatives on national and international levels.
