Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the Secretary-
General and the Permanent Representative of Spain,
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi, acting in his capacity
as facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), for providing comprehensive and substantial
reports, which contribute to raising general awareness
on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
and on the resolution itself. He has clearly explained
key tasks and interactions within new mechanism and
structures established pursuant to the resolution and
has given a detailed presentation of the work conducted
in this area during the last six months.

We highly commend the dedicated efforts of the
United Nations Secretariat, the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Facilitator's team
aimed at full and proper implementation of the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015), which inaugurated a new
stage with regard not only to the Iranian nuclear issue
but also to the non-proliferation regime in general.

Before going directly into the subject of today's
meeting, let me note that yesterday - 17 July - marked
the second anniversary of the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-l7 in the Donetsk oblast of Ukraine.
We reiterate our deepest sympathies and condolences to
the families of victims and to all grieving nations. Let
me recall the demand of the Security Council that

"those responsible for this incident be held to
account and that all States cooperate fully with
efforts to establish accountability" (resolution 2166 (2014), para. 11).

A more detailed press statement was distributed
yesterday by the Permanent Missions of the States
participating in the joint investigation.

As a country that demonstrated a proactive approach
and set an example for others to follow by abandoning
its nuclear capability and acceding to the Treaty on the
Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), Ukraine
remains a strong advocate of the NPT and emphasizes
the need for all States parties to that instrument to
comply fully with their relevant obligations.

Recalling the right of States parties, in conformity
with articles I and II of the NPT, to develop and
use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without
discrimination, Ukraine highly commends the
comprehensive, long-term and proper solution to the
Iranian nuclear issue that culminated in the JCPOA. Up
until now, we have witnessed positive developments in
the implementation of that crucial document. Ukraine
welcomes IAEA reports that prove Iran's intention to
use nuclear material and technologies exclusively for
peaceful purposes.
At the same time, while recognizing the inalienable
right of every State to protect its sovereignty and
territorial integrity, we share the concerns about the
launches of ballistic missiles designed to be capable
of delivering nuclear weapons, as mentioned in the
reports, as well as incidents of seizures of conventional
arms that were likely bound for conflict zones, without
the necessary authorization of the Security Council.
Those particular cases run counter to the provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015).

Ukraine acts in accordance with the importance
of diligently implementing both the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015). It is essential that all the
States engaged in the process interact constructively
to resolve outstanding issues for the sake of this hard-
won non-proliferation deal, the proper implementation
of which would be a key contribution to regional and
global security and stability. In that regard, we call on
all the parties to ensure that the concerns raised in the
reports of the Secretary-General and the Facilitator do
not serve to lay the groundwork for further disputes,
but rather that they be duly considered and resolved
through negotiations.

Proceeding from what I have said here, and taking
into account the current tense situation in the region,
we also stress the importance of refraining from
aggressive and war-like rhetoric, for the sake of the
progress achieved on this track.

To conclude my remarks, I wish to reiterate the
importance ofa united Council stance when dealing with
this sensitive issue, as well as our intention to ensure
the further implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

