Mr. Velayati (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council.

I wish to express my condolences to the Palestinian
people and the bereaved families over the loss of life of
the innocent people who have been killed by the Zionist
army during the past few days.

Today is a day of mourning for the entire world of
Islam and, indeed, for humanity at large. We all
witnessed the desecration of Islamic holy places and the
indiscriminate massacre of those whose only fault was
their religious devotion. Several Muslim worshippers -
elderly people, women and children who had gathered in
one of the most sacred places in the Islamic world -
were murdered just today. Nothing - not even the
distorted logic of Zionists and their supporters - can
justify this inhuman atrocity and assault on the entire
Muslim world. No one can conveniently label peaceful
worshippers as terrorists. No one can question the fact
that it is a crime against humanity to use helicopter
gunships to attack and murder in cold blood those who
had taken refuge in the House of God.

The recent developments in the occupied territories,
particularly in Al-Quds al-Sharif and the Islamic
sanctuaries, represent the most dangerous escalation of
Israel's inhuman behaviour against the Palestinian people.

 

The deliberate attempt of Israel to undermine the
holiest Islamic sites, held in highest reverence by the entire
Muslim world, represents an affront to the people of
Palestine and the Muslim world in general. It shows a
complete disregard by Israel for the basic rules of conduct,
to say nothing of the obligations it has undertaken during
the past few years. The indiscriminate killing of almost 100
Palestinian civilians, who were protesting blatant acts of
aggression against their beliefs and values, constitutes a
further illustration of the real face of the Zionist regime
disguised behind the facade of peace.

These developments represent yet another step in the
long series of intransigent acts on the part of the new
Israeli Government that have undermined the very
foundations of the so-called peace process, while at the
same time exposing the inherent deficiencies of a plan that
did not aim to address the real issue in a realistic manner.
The reneging by Israel on its commitment to land for peace,
the revival of the illegal settlement policy, and now this
blatant attempt to change the character of the Holy City of
Al-Quds al-Sharif cannot be seen independently. They are
elements in the general policy of continued occupation and
expansion and the step-by-step imposition of faits
accomplis.

These policies have met with the indignation of
individual members of the international community.
However, in the face of these consecutive acts of
intransigence, the international community as a whole,
particularly as represented in this Council, has been
prevented from reacting effectively by certain members
motivated by their own domestic agenda.

Such double standards and blind support have given a
sense of impunity to the Israeli regime. The worst it can
expect in the face of its continued illegal behaviour is
simply calls on both sides for restraint. Consequently, the
real outcome of the actions of Israel and the muted
reactions of the international community has been the
consecutive consolidation of the old agenda of further
expansion, further settlement and further de-Islamization
and de-Arabization of Al-Quds al-Sharif.

It is incumbent upon the Security Council to react
resolutely and decisively in the face of crimes being
perpetrated by Israel against innocent Palestinians in the
occupied territories. Anything less will not only be
interpreted by Israel as a green light for more aggression,
but will also further undermine the credibility of the
Security Council. It is high time for the Council to act. The
Islamic world cannot accept further indifference by the
Council to the plight of its brethren in Palestine.

