Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/492) on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) and Mr. Joao Vale de Almeida
for his briefing. We note the work of the Permanent
Representative of Belgium as Security Council
Facilitator for the implementation of the resolution's
provisions. We share the Secretary-General's position
on the withdrawal of the United States from the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and
the reimposition of unilateral sanctions against Iran,
which are contrary to the aims of both the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015), and undermine Iran's ability to
comply with their provisions. We want to remind the
Council once again that the JCPOA and the Council's
unanimous adoption on 20 July 2015 of resolution
2231 (2015) constitute a historic achievement of global
diplomacy and multilateralism in general. They have
proved that even the most acute problems and crises
can be overcome by political means if the will to do so
is there.

Iran is conscientiously fulfilling its obligations
under the agreements in the framework of the JCPOA.
Numerous reports of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency attest to that.
In that sense, the JCPOA has become an extremely
important instrument for ensuring the international
non-proliferation regime, and Iran is one of the most
verified countries in the world. Currently, the only
way to preserve the JCPOA is for all its remaining
States parties to fulfil their voluntary commitments in
good faith. In this context, we note that the Secretary-
General's report clearly testifies to Iran's strict
observance of all its nuclear-related commitments,
albeit in the face of considerable challenges.

In every international forum we have repeatedly
condemned irresponsible attempts to torpedo
agreements and expressed the hope that matters of global
security and stability will no longer be held hostage to
the domestic political intrigues of individual States.
Unfortunately our appeals have been ignored and the
unique potential of the JCPOA has been jeopardized.
Having unilaterally withdrawn from the JCPOA and
undermined its agreements, which are fundamental to
regional and global security, the United States is now
trying to shift the blame onto everyone else. Not only is
it refusing to implement resolution 2231 (2015), which
it endorsed, it is also trying to inflict worse punishment
on every other Member State for implementing Security
Council decisions. And from Iran, on the other hand, it
is demanding that Iran absolutely and unquestioningly
fulfil all obligations. However, there are many similar
examples of doublethink in the steps taken by the
American Administration. It proclaims that no one is
planning regime change in Iran while simultaneously
threatening obliteration and new sanctions. It calls
for dialogue and at the same time publicly declares its
intention to increase its military presence in the region.
Such signals, which are beyond the skill of even an
experienced cryptologist to decode, can only bring the
situation to a point of no return.

The only practical step that can be taken to save
the JCPOA is the remaining parties' implementation
of their obligations under the agreement. We must
abandon fear and selfish motives and prioritize the tasks
of maintaining the viability of the JCPOA. We believe
that constantly raising the stakes and one-upping each
other about who cares most about the agreement will
only result in extreme attitudes. The forces that believe
that the only way to resolve any international issue is
with political pressure, economic strangulation and
blackmail through military might must not be allowed
to gain the upper hand.
Since the very moment that the JCPOA was
concluded, its effectiveness has been defined by the
unity and political will of all its participants and their
joint focus on the end result. It means that today we
must also work together to create the conditions that
will enable us to confidently resolve the challenges
facing those who remain committed to the JCPOA. We
are in favour of preserving the JCPOA, and we want
Iran to remain committed to it. But we understand
Tehran's deep disappointment with the situation that
has developed, whereby its full compliance with its
obligations is demanded with nothing proposed in
exchange, which was why the deal was made in the
first place. On top of that, this is going on against the
backdrop of Washington's efforts to strangle Iran with
economic sanctions, not to mention military threats. All
of the parties to the JCPOA must make genuine rather
than token efforts to ensure that Iran understands what
it is implementing its obligations under the JCPOA for.
That is a legitimate demand from Tehran.

We are sorry to see that the report suffers from a
chronic lack of evidence in the parts concerning Iran's
missile programme, supposed arms shipments out of
Iran as well as various alleged violations that Tehran
has permitted ofthe provisions ofresolution 2231 (2015)
on assets freezes and travel bans on individuals. The
problem of amateur inspections by representatives of
the Secretariat who do not have the necessary skills or
mandate to conduct them persists. The language about
confidence in the Iranian origin of various missiles and
other weapons that representatives of the Secretariat
were allowed to study ultimately proves nothing. The
problem is compounded by the reservations about issues
that the Secretariat is not in a position to confirm, to
the effect that Iran sent the aforementioned missiles or
the wings of some military drones overseas after the
JCPOA had entered into force. Which leads one to ask
why, if the Secretariat cannot confirm or produce the
necessary expertise to show that there was a violation
of resolution 2231 (2015), does it constantly include
these subjects in its reports?

We can see that the situation in the Persian Gulf is
being artificially ramped up and is jeopardizing peace
and security in the region, as well as international
efforts to resolve the conflicts there. We are not
convinced by the so-called proofs presented of Iran's
guilt. In general, the impression we get is that a casus
belli is being conjured up. The loud rhetoric about
Iran's ties to Al-Qaida and the attacks on tankers,
which should be of less interest to Iran than anyone,
are increasingly reminiscent of the events of March
2003, when arguments were fabricated to justify an
invasion of Iraq. We all know what the consequences
of that were.

We believe that there is an alternative to those
provocative actions. We have to strengthen the general
atmosphere of trust in the region. We would like to point
out that in resolution 598 (1987), the Security Council
instructed the Secretary-General to work together with
the States of the region on measures to enhance its
security and stability. That work is now needed more
than ever. Russia is ready to support that by working
in contact with our regional partners and all interested
parties. The ultimate aim must be to form a genuinely
inclusive security architecture that encompasses every
State in the region. Our concept for strengthening
security in the Persian Gulf under international
guarantees remains relevant, and its implementation
could begin with the holding of a conference with the
participation of the States of the subregion with a View
to eventually including other States in the Middle East.
Needless to say, we support the Secretary-General's
call for taking every possible step that could lead to
de-escalation.

In conclusion, I would particularly like to emphasize
that the Russian Federation remains committed to the
unconditional implementation of the provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015) and the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action. We support the Secretary-General's call
in his report for refraining from provocative statements
and actions that could have a negative impact on regional
stability. We will continue to strive for dialogue aimed
at finding compromises and a balance of interests. That
is the only way. Only coordinated collective efforts can
bring the current situation back under control.

