Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate on post-
conflict peacebuilding and for your concept note
(S/2010/167).

At the outset, let me echo the Secretary-General's
assertion in his report last year on peacebuilding in the
aftermath of conflict. The imperative of national
ownership and the anchoring of international
peacebuilding efforts at the country level cannot be
overemphasized.

Security is a key pillar of peacebuilding. It is
equally important to focus on building economic
opportunity, particularly for young people, along with
political and social stability. This requires a holistic
approach that is sensitive to the economic, social and
political milieu of the post-conflict situation. It is also
critical to ensure that there is a real stake for the
country involved in the peacebuilding efforts. It also
means that, even in cases where it is difficult to locate
national ownership, international peacebuilding efforts
are geared towards strengthening the capacity of a
post-conflict State to govern effectively and to govern
well. Capacity-building also assumes importance
especially in instances where countries find it difficult
to completely utilize the financial assistance with
which they have been provided.

My delegation is therefore of the view that the
international community, acting through the
instrumentality of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), must always strive to ensure that there is
effective two-way dialogue between countries on the
agenda of the PBC and the Commission itself through
all stages.

Another key issue is that of financing. Let us be
clear and acknowledge the fact that the lack of funding
continues to be a major impediment to the success of
peacebuilding initiatives. It goes without saying that
other elements - such as human resources, technical
assistance, managerial assistance, assistance in kind
and other programmes of assistance through the
provision of appropriate technologies - are also
important.

Given the sensitive nature of such peacebuilding
tasks as security sector reform and development
administration, there must be a high degree of
coordination within the United Nations system. Work
in the country-specific configurations has been a
positive dimension. In particular, the Council would do
well to really consult major troop- and police-
contributing countries, both individually and through
the instrumentality of the PBC, while formulating and
revising the mandates of United Nations missions.

India has shared its unique nation-building
experience and expertise with a number of countries
transiting from conflict to peace. We are very happy to
continue to make available our capabilities in nation-
building to countries in post-conflict situations and to
cooperate with the United Nations in its various
peacebuilding activities.

Ever since the creation of the PBC in December
2005, India has actively participated in its work as a
member of its Organizational Committee and by
contributing to the resources of the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF). We will continue this active association with
the PBC and the PBF with a view to enabling those
institutions to fulfil in their entirety the tasks assigned
to them by the General Assembly and the Security
Council. Further, we are of the view that the Fund
should act as a catalyst for good governance. In this
regard, we note with approval the creation of the
Senior Advisory Group for the Review of International
Civilian Capacities, in fulfilment of the agenda for
action outlined by the Secretary-General in his 2009
report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict.

We need to be cognizant that peacebuilding is
still a concept in its infancy and is continuously
evolving. The international community has taken on
board the idea of peacebuilding to fulfil the important
need of handling post-conflict situations. It is therefore
imperative that we ensure that peacebuilding and the
institutions that constitute the peacebuilding
architecture are successful.

