Mr. Menon (Singapore): I am making this
statement on behalf of the 10 States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).

Today, we live in a more complex and
interconnected world, with many new actors on the
international stage and more variables and alignments
to consider. While the threat of global war has receded,
there has been an increase in the number of smaller
conflicts. Those are often asymmetric, low-intensity
and diffused. It has become a messier world. The
situation presents new challenges to global peace and
security. Obviously, the United Nations has a crucial
role to play, but in a globalized world regional
cooperation can also play a key role. Even the United
Nations Charter recognizes the role that regional
arrangements can play in helping the United Nations to
achieve its objectives.

ASEAN and the African Union (AU) are
examples of regional organizations that have helped to
build and protect regional peace and security. We note
that many ASEAN members have long-standing
historical ties with Africa. Since 1955, the Bandung
Asian-African Conference has promoted the Bandung
spirit of solidarity, friendship and cooperation between
Asia and Africa. That spirit was reaffirmed by
President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa on behalf of

the African Union at the eighth ASEAN summit in
Cambodia in November 2002. President Mbeki not
only recalled the historical roots of cooperation
between Asia and Africa, but he also commended
ASEAN's programmes in South-South cooperation and
its determined efforts to promote a region free of
nuclear weapons and terrorism.

In response, ASEAN leaders found much
common ground with African aspirations and
acknowledged the need for greater interaction between
ASEAN and the AU. They acknowledged the need for
greater interaction between the two regional
organizations, including a possible meeting between
the two secretariats. They also agreed to take steps to
promote stronger ties between Asia and Africa,
including convening an ASEAN-New Partnership for
Africa's Development conference.

That idea was soon followed by the Asian-
African Subregional Organizations Conference
(AASROC) process, which was initiated in Bandung,
Indonesia, in 2003. A second AASROC was held in
Durban, South Africa, in 2004. In 2005, an Asia-Africa
Summit was held in Bandung, commemorating the
golden jubilee of the Bandung spirit. At the Summit,
the leaders of the Asian and African countries adopted
a declaration on the New Asian-African Strategic
Partnership to serve as a framework for building
stronger links between Asia and Africa covering three
broad areas of partnership - political solidarity,
economic cooperation and sociocultural relations. The
Strategic Partnership would address issues of common
concern, such as armed conflicts, weapons of mass
destruction, transnational organized crime and
terrorism, which are fundamental to ensuring peace,
stability and security. In that respect, ASEAN looks
forward to the further strengthening of cooperation
with the AU.

As a regional organization, the AU serves as a
key forum for African States to interact and cooperate
with each other to promote such common objectives as
good governance, sustainable development, and peace
and stability. For example, AU peacekeepers have been
deployed to areas such as Burundi, Somalia, the
Comoros and Darfur. We note that a mutually
beneficial AU-United Nations partnership has grown
over the years and continues to serve as a good
example of how regional organizations can positively
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security. ASEAN supports all efforts to strengthen
the AU-United Nations partnership.

On our part, ASEAN has evolved into a
multifaceted organization with cooperation in many
fields. A shared sense of destiny and community
motivated us to conclude the ASEAN Charter last year.
The Charter reflects our common vision and
commitment to the development of an ASEAN
community as a region of lasting peace and stability,
sustained economic growth, shared prosperity and
social progress. It will remake ASEAN into a more
effective and rules-based organization in today's
rapidly changing global landscape.

ASEAN has always regarded economic
cooperation as a key factor to achieving peace and
prosperity in the region. In that regard, our leaders
adopted an ASEAN economic community blueprint last
year to integrate the 10 ASEAN economies into one
single market and production base. We will also be
developing similar blueprints for our other two
pillars - political security and sociocultural
cooperation. For example, within ASEAN, we have
recently instituted the ASEAN defence ministers
meeting to further enhance mutual trust and confidence
among our defence establishments and to explore
practical and concrete cooperation. That allows us to
actively address non-traditional and transborder
security concerns among our members and with
external partners.

In conclusion, allow me to express ASEAN's
appreciation to the AU and the United Nations for the
growing collaboration over the years. As observed by
President Mbeki in 2002, the potential for ASEAN and
the AU to enhance mutual understanding and
cooperation is significant. As for ASEAN-United
Nations cooperation, that has existed since our
establishment in 1967. We are pleased that ASEAN
acquired formal observer status in the United Nations
in 2006, and concluded a memorandum of
understanding on ASEAN-United Nations cooperation
the following year. Those moves reaffirm the mutual
commitment between our regional grouping and the
United Nations. ASEAN looks forward to enhanced
cooperation with both the AU and the United Nations
in working towards preserving international peace and
security and promoting sustainable development.

