Mr. Annabi: The report of the Secretary-General
dated 14 March which is before the Council is the third
quarterly progress report on the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) in its present
mandate period, which will expire next June. The report
describes how and in what areas UNMIBH has progressed
in the implementation of its mandate and also describes
those areas in which it is encountering resistance and
obstruction to the implementation of its mandate.

As described in the report, UNMIBH continues to
focus on five main priority areas within its overall
mandate of monitoring and restructuring the law
enforcement agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina. These
five areas are the following: first, minority recruitment in
an effort to change the mono-ethnic character of the
police and make it increasingly representative of the
community it is serving; secondly, the establishment of
the State Border Service, so as to strengthen the common
institutions of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
relation to the two entities (the Federation and the Republika Srpska); thirdly, the implementation of the
Brcko arbitration award, which will set an important
example and serve as a model for multi-ethnic
cooperation; fourthly, the provision of assistance in
judicial reform and the review of judicial appointments;
and fifthly, the setting up of a multi-ethnic Bosnian police
contingent for service in a United Nations peacekeeping
operation.

Perhaps the most important development in the last
three months, which are covered by this report, was the
official inauguration of the multi-ethnic Brcko district. As
indicated in the report, UNMIBH has fulfilled its part in
the international community's efforts in Breko by
downsizing the former separate police forces and
integrating them into one multi-ethnic police force
composed of 45 per cent Serbs, 37 per cent Bosnians, 16
per cent Croats and 2 per cent others. On 13 March, after
the Secretary-General's report was finalized, the
International Police Task Force (IPTF) Commissioner
handed out UNMIBH identity badges to all authorized
police officers in Breko. It should be noted, however, that
important practical aspects of the administration of the
Brcko District still need to be resolved, including the
issue of police legislation. At the present time, the district
police works on the basis of separate legal systems

 

governing the areas north and south of the inter-entity
boundary line.

Changing the mono-ethnic character of the law
enforcement agencies is a process that is progressing
slowly, mainly through the introduction of minority police
officers trained in the two police academies established in
an UNMIBH-led effort two years ago, in 1998. It is,
however, clear that the training and recruitment of relatively
small numbers of entry-level cadets is not sufficient to
significantly change the ethnic composition of the local
police forces. UNMIBH is therefore encouraging former
police officers among the refugee community to return to
Bosnia and Herzegovina, recruiting displaced former police
officers and arranging for the exchange of serving police
officers between the Republika Srpska and the Federation.
These efforts are difficult to pursue, since they encounter
all the obstacles that frequently meet returns by refugees
and displaced persons in Bosnia and elsewhere.

In the two cantons of the Federation - Canton 6
(Central Bosnia) and Canton 7 (Herzegovina-Neretva) -
where there are relatively equal numbers of Bosniac and
Croat police officers, their integration into a truly joint
police force, rather than two parallel forces, has been
hampered by obstruction and resistance. This is particularly
evident in Mostar. As detailed in the Secretary-General's
report, the authorities in the Croat-controlled western part
of Mostar consistently refuse even to allow Bosniac police
officers to work from the same building as their Croat
colleagues. During the past week, some small progress was
achieved when, accompanied by officers of the International
Police Task Force (IPTF), Bosniac policemen were allowed
to enter the building for the inspection of office space and
for training purposes. Even this minimal progress, however,
required an enormous amount of pressure not only from
UNMIBH, but also from the High Representative and the
Stabilization Force (SFOR).

As the Secretary-General indicates in his report,
UNMIBH will need the support of the Security Council and
member States with influence on the Bosnian Croat and
Bosnian Serb authorities to overcome resistance to minority
recruitment and integration of the police.

Turning to the State Border Service, there have been
some positive developments in that regard after the issuance
of the Secretary-General's report. The Joint Presidency has
approved an organizational structure which is transparent
and provides accountability of the Border Service through
the Council of Ministers to the Presidency. This fulfils the
minimum requirements set out by UNMIBH and the project
is thus back on track, although with considerable delay,
caused mainly by obstruction in Parliament.

Regarding the ongoing UNMIBH activities in
monitoring and training the local police and in
investigating human rights abuses, there is little to add to
the Secretary-General's report. UNMIBH continues its
practice of focused monitoring through the co-location of
IPTF officers in the local police stations and is shifting its
training activities increasingly towards specialized training
and the training of trainers. The basic training activities
of UNMIBH have practically been completed.

Finally, I am pleased to report that the first
contingent of Bosnia and Herzegovina police officers to
serve in a United Nations peacekeeping operation are
expected to be deployed to East Timor to serve with the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) next month.

Overall, the last three months can be summarized by
saying that, while progress has been achieved and while
UNMIBH has continued to make progress, that progress
has been slow. It is often based more on the efforts made
by UNMIBH to fulfil its mandate and on action by the
international community than on action taken by the local
authorities. In fact, significant resistance by entrenched
radical nationalist and backward-looking elements
continues to be encountered at every stage.

This shows that, more than four years after its
conclusion, the implementation of the Dayton Agreement
still remains a challenge and requires the continued strong
commitment and engagement of the international
community.

