Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): First of all, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
allowed us to participate in today's Security Council
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, given the serious deterioration
of the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. I
also thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
invaluable briefing.

There has been dangerous and unprecedented
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territories. At the end of 2009, there were more than
500,000 settlers, and that number is increasing. The
Israeli occupation of the occupied Palestinian territories,
the invasion of Palestinian territory by Jewish settlers
and their entrenchment within that territory run counter
to putting an end to the Israeli occupation and to the
establishment of an independent, viable and contiguous
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Israeli policies and practices seek to alter the physical
nature and demographic composition of the Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. This represents a
flagrant violation of international law and endangers
the situation in the region.
We are deeply concerned about Israeli policies
and actions in East Jerusalem. There were no Jews
there in 1967, when Israel occupied the area, but as of
the end of 2009 there were 190,000 Israeli settlers in
12 settlements, and Israel had confiscated 30 per cent
of the land in East Jerusalem for building settlements.

As stated by Israel, 250,000 Palestinians make up
only 35 per cent of Jerusalem's population while
650,000 Israelis make up 65 per cent. Despite this,
documents of the Jerusalem municipal authorities
indicate that plans to double the number of Jewish
inhabitants continue. In this demographic attack Israel
is using population policy to ensure its control over
East Jerusalem.

East Jerusalem is an integral part of the occupied
Palestinian territories. Since the beginning of the
occupation, in 1967, dozens of resolutions have been
adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly, all of which refer to the illegality of the
annexation of East Jerusalem. Israel continues with
impunity to destroy the houses of Arab inhabitants,
revoke their residence permits and expropriate their
property in order to Judaize the city and expel its Arab
inhabitants and establish more Jewish settlements in
and around East Jerusalem, in flagrant violation of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, international humanitarian
law and Security Council resolutions.

Jerusalem and the Al-Aqsa mosque are in grave
danger. The international community must not remain
silent in the face of Israel's practices which violate the
city's heritage, its attempts at manipulation and
Judaization, and its violation of Christian and Muslim
holy places. The excavations and archaeological work
under and around the Al-Aqsa mosque and in the
Silwan area could damage invaluable cultural and
religious heritage and the Al-Aqsa mosque itself, as
well as other sites. This could have very serious
repercussions in the Arab and Muslim world and could
result in endless conflict.

We call on the Council to shoulder its
responsibility and use means at its disposal to compel
Israel to respect international law and United Nations
resolutions, end its illegal plans to Judaize Jerusalem
and abide by the Fourth Geneva Convention in
Jerusalem and throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories.

We are concerned by the serious humanitarian
crisis affecting the Palestinian people in Gaza as a

result of Israel's aggression and siege against the Gaza
Strip. Israel is preventing the flow of humanitarian
assistance to the inhabitants and hindering the delivery
of fuel and building materials for Gaza's reconstruction.
Ensuring stability and a return to normalcy requires the
international community to make Israel open the
border crossings immediately and permanently and
permit access for all essential goods, including
medicines, food, fuel and commercial goods, in order
to prevent an increase in poverty in the Gaza Strip.

Israel's occupation of the Arab territories is at the
core of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. For the sake of
establishing peace and security, the countries of the
region call for an end to Israel's culture of occupation
in the Arab territories and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State within the pre-l967
borders with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
conformity with international resolutions, international
law, the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Road Map. This must be achieved
through negotiations with a clear mandate that would
begin with an immediate halt to settlement activity,
including natural growth, in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, and fruitful
negotiations leading to a just and lasting solution to the
Palestinian question and the Israeli-Arab conflict.

