Ms. Adamson (spoke in French): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

I would first like to commend Senegal, which has
long been committed to advancing the discourse on
water and peace, and thereby enabling us to work to
change global perceptions about water. In the wake
of the Arria Formula meeting held on the subject in
April, today's debate is a new opportunity to take
a closer look at the question of water as a potential
vector for conflict, particularly when the geography
of aquifer systems, lakes, rivers and watersheds does
not follow State borders. But it is also an opportunity
to reflect further on how to strengthen dialogue and
cooperation in order to resolve and prevent water-
related disputes and conflicts. Experience has shown
that inadequate water management, growing demand,
water stress, conflicts and natural disasters, and water
insecurity exacerbated by climate change are sources
of conflict both between and within States. Good water
management is essential not only to economic and
social development but also from the point of view of
preventing and managing risks.

The European Union believes that preventing
tensions and conflicts related to access to water
must involve managing the effects of climate change,
population growth, economic development, the various
uses of water resources and water-related transborder
challenges. Our collective recognition of water as
a priority issue and its designation as a goal, in the
form of Goal 6 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, represent a major step in that direction.
Since then, the Global High-Level Panel on Water
and Peace has been established, with an action plan
proposing new investments and initiatives that can
contribute to achieving Goal 6 on a global scale. The
Paris Agreement on Climate Change, which entered into
force on 4 November, was another key step, marking
the success of multilateralism and our collective
commitment to a transition to climate neutrality and
adaptation to climate change. The Agreement could
also have a significant positive impact on the security
of water supplies and usage.

The European Union and its member States have
been long and firmly committed to addressing water-
related challenges around the world, including through
our development assistance. Since 2007, in addition to
bilateral aid from member States, we have allocated
more than €2.2 billion to water and sanitation projects
in more than 62 countries all over the world. Europe is a
land where water resources are shared. Sixty per cent of
its territory is located in transboundary basins, and it is
that experience across the continent that is our guide in
terms of collaboration and regional cooperation.

(spoke in English)

Part ofthat commitment is supporting initiatives of
dialogue and cooperation aimed at reaching agreements
that enable common, collaborative and sustainable
management of the water resources shared by the
various actors involved. It is legitimate for States to
use their water resources for generating energy, but it is
equally legitimate for downstream countries to demand
a fair share for safe drinking water and the purposes of
sanitation and irrigation.

Development cooperation programmes are
supporting transboundary water management in
several basins where the potential for conflict exists.
They are also promoting an integrated approach within
the water-energy-food-security nexus, addressing
competing uses of scarce waters. Regional dialogues on
the nexus will be supported in Africa, Asia and Latin
America, and in the European neighbourhood.

The European Union is also fully supportive of
international agreements on water cooperation as a
basis for collaborative, sustainable and rule-based
solutions. We welcome the entry into force of the
1997 United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses
and encourage its implementation. We also welcome the
global aspirations of the 1992 Economic Commission
for Europe Water Convention, which has been able
to accept the accession of any country in the world
since March. Other relevant instruments and regional
agreements that promote the sustainable management
of transboundary river basins are also important.
The European Union and its member States are very
supportive of efforts to achieve the objectives of the
availability and sustainable management of water for
all and of integrated water resources management at all
levels, including through transboundary cooperation,
as appropriate.

It has long been known that preventing conflicts
is more efficient and effective than engaging with
crises after they break out. With the recent adoption
of the European Union Global Strategy on Foreign
and Security Policy, we have committed to redoubling
our efforts to prevent and monitor the root causes
of conflicts, where resources stress - and climate
change as a threat multiplier catalysing water and
food insecurity - go hand in hand with human rights
violations and inequality. Sustainable access to and
use of water are essential to societal resilience and to
stability and security around the world.

We will also keep working to address the direct
and indirect international security impacts of climate
change, including through climate-change risk
assessments and support for capacity-building. In
that context, the European Union looks forward to the
Security Council continuing its work on climate change.

Senegal's concept note (S/2016/969, annex) also
sheds light on the significance of the protection of
water during armed conflict. By reaffirming the
need to respect and ensure respect for international
humanitarian law, human rights law and the laws on
transboundary water resources, we may ensure better
protection of water during armed conflict. That will
contribute to strengthening the protection of that
natural resource during times when it is most at risk.

Today's debate makes clear the importance of
water for sustainable development and the preservation
of peace. The European Union and its member States
will maintain and strengthen their commitment to work
with partners around the world on water diplomacy in
support of those goals.

