The Secretary-General: I am pleased to join the
members of the Security Council for this timely debate,
and I thank the Republic of Kazakhstan for convening it.
Kazakhstan has a proud tradition of support for a world
free of weapons of mass destruction and for the global
non-proliferation regime. I thank President Nursultan
Nazarbayev for his personal leadership on this vital
issue. Kazakhstan's contributions include rejecting

the possession of nuclear weapons and founding the
International Day against Nuclear Tests.

The Council, too, is instrumental in preventing the
spread and use of weapons of mass destruction. As the
Council declared in 1992 at its first Head of State-level
summit on the issue (see S/PV.3046), the proliferation of
all weapons of mass destruction constitutes a threat to
international peace and security. Confidence-building
measures such as resolutions 255 (1968) and 984 (1995),
on negative security assurances, helped pave the way,
respectively, to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and to its indefinite extension.
However, despite the Council's efforts, the threat posed
by weapons ofmass destruction remains - and, indeed,
seems to be gathering force.

Global anxieties about nuclear weapons are at the
highest level since the Cold War. The situation on the
Korean peninsula is the most tense and dangerous
peace-and- security challenge in the world today. Iremain
deeply concerned about the growing risk of military
confrontation and the unimaginable consequences
that would result. I welcome the firm decisions that
the Security Council has taken in response to nuclear
tests and ballistic missile launches by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, in defiance of Security
Council resolutions. They must be fully implemented.

The Council's unity also creates an opportunity
for diplomatic engagement. As I said to the General
Assembly this week, I welcome the reopening of
inter-Korean communication channels, especially
military-to-military. That is critical to lower the risk
of miscalculation or misunderstanding and to reduce
tensions. I am also encouraged by the decision of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to participate
in the upcoming Winter Olympics in the Republic of
Korea. We need to build upon those small signs of hope
and expand diplomatic efforts to achieve the peaceful
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula in the context
of regional security.

Elsewhere, trust on nuclear and other issues
between the United States and the Russian Federation
continues to ebb. Vital strategic arms-reduction
measures established during and after the Cold War are
under threat. There seems to be no appetite to negotiate
new nuclear arms arsenal-reduction treaties after the
expiration of the Treaty on Measures for the Further
Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms,
in 2021. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, on the
Iranian nuclear programme, is also being questioned.

That multilateral agreement, which is in the interests of
the Iranian people and of the international community
at large, should be preserved.

In the Syrian conflict, the use of chemical weapons
seriously challenges the global taboo against those
weapons of mass destruction. If the use of chemical
weapons in Syria is once again determined to have
taken place, the international community will need to
find an appropriate way to identify those responsible
and hold them to account. Without such an avenue, we
would be allowing the use of chemical weapons to take
place with impunity. I hope the Council can return to
unity on that issue.

The threats posed by weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery are taking place in an
environment of increasing military budgets and the
over-accumulation of weapons - and they are coupled
with a serious growth in regional tensions. In such a
geopolitical context, confidence-building measures
that support arms control, non-proliferation and
the elimination of weapons of mass destruction are
extremely important. By increasing understanding of
others' positions and allowing information-sharing on,
for example, military budgets, strategic outlooks and
troop movements, they can help to decrease tension and
avert conflict

In the case of the Biological Weapons Convention,
which does not have a formal verification mechanism, a
system ofconfidence-building measures has contributed
to enhancing transparency. Those measures are intended
to "prevent or reduce the occurrence of ambiguities,
doubts and suspicions" through the provision of annual
information on national biodefence programmes, high-
containment laboratories, legislative frameworks, and
vaccine production. Unfortunately, participation has
been less than satisfactory, with fewer than half of all
States parties regularly providing information. For the
measures to be truly effective, States must take full
advantage of their benefits.

Trust is essential, but confidence can be undermined
by bellicose rhetoric, confrontational approaches, the
absence of communication channels, and inflexible
positions. Engaging in disarmament, non-proliferation
and arms-control measures are in and of themselves
confidence-building. By removing the threat posed
by weapons, arms-control and non-proliferation
mechanisms provide the breathing space for dialogue,
boost confidence in parties' intentions and lay the
groundwork for building the trust necessary to
end conflicts.

Nowhere was that more apparent than in the ground-
breaking arms-control agreements of the late 19805 and
early 1990s that contributed to the peaceful end to the
Cold War. It is therefore alarming to see historic accords
such as the Treaty on Intermediate Range Nuclear
Forces and the Open Skies Treaty under question.
Effective verification mechanisms have proved to
be some of the most successful and enduring types
of confidence-building measures. From the ground-
breaking verification protocols of the Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty to the invaluable work undertaken
by the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
verification builds confidence. In that context, I
welcome the establishment of a group of governmental
experts on nuclear disarmament verification.

Effective verification requires support for the
entities tasked with monitoring and verification, in
order to ensure that they can fulfil their duties in an
impartial and professional manner. It also requires
understanding that non-proliferation challenges are
not static. The measures we use to overcome them
need to evolve in tandem with the implementation of
disarmament commitments.

I believe that the United Nations can play a
central role in assisting Member States in developing,
augmenting and supporting confidence-building
measures. The United Nations position as an honest
broker allows us to act as a venue in which all parties
can engage in dialogue, whether for the development of
new norms and values or to resolve existing disputes
and promote understanding.

Going forward, the Security Council in particular
can provide leadership by demonstrating unity and
continuing to highlight the importance of dialogue
and diplomacy as an essential means for building
confidence. A measure that all Member States can
undertake is the universal and complete implementation
of all disarmament and non-proliferation obligations.
I appreciate the fact that, due to resource and other
constraints, the implementation of disarmament, arms
control and non-proliferation commitments can prove
difficult for some Member States. I therefore call on all
States able to do so to provide the necessary capacity-
building assistance.

The development of practical confidence-building
measures is an important means of achieving the
United Nations mandate to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. However, they are not an end
in themselves. Preventing, mitigating and resolving
conflict requires comprehensive political solutions
that include dialogue and negotiation and, in cases
involving weapons of mass destruction, verifiable
disarmament and non-proliferation. I believe that the
current international situation underscores the need
to reframe and modernize long-standing disarmament
and non-proliferation priorities. Deepening divisions
and persistent stagnation in this field are exacerbating
international tensions and creating new dangers.

As a contribution to reversing these trends, I intend
to explore opportunities to generate new direction and
impetus for the global disarmament agenda. I look
forward to engaging with stakeholders on these issues
in the months ahead.

