Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I too wish to join
colleagues in thanking Ambassador Qazi for his
presentation on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2007/330). I also wish to extend my thanks to His
Excellency the Foreign Minister of Iraq for joining the
Council to give a presentation on behalf of the Iraqi
Government. We are also grateful to Ambassador
Khalilzad for his presentation on behalf of the
Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I).

My Foreign Secretary earlier today strongly
condemned the attack on the holy shrines in Samarra
and I would like to echo that condemnation in this
Chamber, as have many other speakers today. We offer
our condolences to the Iraqi people and Government.
The attack was a blatant and crude attempt to ferment
further sectarian violence and division among the
people of Iraq.

The perpetrators of that attack have only one
purpose: to destroy the democratic process that the
majority of Iraqis clearly support. We welcome Iraqi
calls for restraint, and we urge Iraq's political leaders
to redouble their efforts towards national
reconciliation.

The United Kingdom is committed to the
improvement and maintenance of security in Iraq
through our military contribution to MNF-I and our
diplomatic and development efforts. That remains a
complex and challenging task. To accomplish it, we
will work closely with the Government of Iraq and the
Iraqi security forces to help deliver security to the Iraqi
people and to meet the objectives of Security Council
resolution 1723 (2006). We will continue to assist in
the progressive transfer of security responsibility to the
Iraqi security forces. We have now handed over
security responsibility for three of the four provinces
where the United Kingdom had previously shared that
responsibility. We expect to hand over the fourth,
Basra, in the second half of this year, should the
relevant conditions be met.

We welcome the Secretary-General's emphasis on
the launch of the International Compact and the Iraq
neighbours conference in Sharm el-Sheik on 3 and
4 May this year. Those events are important steps in
focusing the support of the international community on
Iraqi needs.

The United Nations and the Government of Iraq
have central roles to play in making the International
Compact a success. In that regard, I welcome the
formation of the Compact secretariat and look forward
to the delivery of timely assistance in close cooperation
with the International Reconstruction Fund Facility for
Iraq and with the donor community.

As we have emphasized in previous debates on
Iraq, the role of Iraq's neighbours remains crucial to
improvements in security, reconstruction and national
reconciliation - and that also is a point made by many
speakers today. I urge those neighbours to show their
support for the Government of Iraq through the three
working groups established by the neighbours
conference. Progress in each of the working groups'
remits - security cooperation, fuel imports and Iraqi
refugees - would directly help the Iraqi people. But
the United Kingdom would also urge the Government
of Iraq to take advantage of the window of opportunity
offered by the Baghdad security plan to deliver on
national reconciliation. The central pillar of that is
agreement by Iraq's leaders to a revised Iraqi
constitution that gives all communities a firm stake in
Iraq's future. We welcome the valuable contributions
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq
(UNAMI) to the constitutional review process.

I share the concern of other representatives today
that as part of the political process, it is essential that
there is early agreement on legislation governing the
future of the oil and gas sector, including how the huge
potential wealth generated by it will be shared
equitably among all communities in Iraq. Agreement
also needs to be reached on reform of the process of
de-Baathification. The United Kingdom encourages the
Iraqi parliament to pass legislation setting a date for
provincial elections, which will address the
representation of all parts of Iraqi society at the
provincial level.

Those are difficult issues where there are
conflicting views and interests, but for precisely those
reasons we encourage the Government of Iraq to be
ambitious. In support of those objectives we welcome
the clear request of His Excellency Minister Zebari for
UNAMI and the United Nations agencies to play an
enhanced role. As part of that, the United Nations has a
unique role in supporting the political process. We look
forward to discussion within the Security Council and
with the Government of Iraq on reviewing UNAMI's
mandate ahead of the expiry in August of
resolution 1700 (2006).
The United Kingdom remains concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Iraq and the increasing
numbers of people who have been displaced by
ongoing Violence. It is vital that the response from the
international community is clearly focused and
coordinated. We encourage UNAMI's Humanitarian
Coordinator and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to continue their efforts to put
into operational effect the United Nations strategic
framework for humanitarian action. The action plan
flowing from that should direct and coordinate the
efforts of the United Nations agencies, and we urge the
agencies to give their full support to that process.

The United Kingdom recognizes the security
difficulties that we all face when working in Iraq, and
we should like to pay tribute to the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
his team in the face of those difficulties. We support
the Secretary-General's proposal to fund the
expeditious construction of a new United Nations
building in Baghdad from within the budgeting
provisions for special political missions. We welcome
the possibility that the United Nations presence in Irbil
will expand, and we look forward to the United
Nations re-establishing its presence in Basra.

Finally, the United Kingdom welcomes the
Secretary-General's personal commitment to Iraq,
including his own visit to Baghdad earlier this year.
That will have sent a clear signal to the Iraqi people of
the priority the United Nations and the international
community places on helping Iraq.

