Mr. Lucas (Angola): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, for presenting the report ofthe Secretary-General
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2015/74). We welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and thank him
for his statement. We also welcome Mr. Hashim Thaci.

Angola's position is that resolution 1244 (1999)
continues to be the applicable legal framework for
reaching a comprehensive solution for Kosovo through
dialogue and negotiations on the basis of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the relevant Security Council resolutions. We therefore
support the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Serbia and understand the legitimate concerns of that
country on the Kosovo issue.

We would like to underline the fundamental role
played by the United Nations in Kosovo through the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in promoting security, stability and
respect for human rights, and its cooperation with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Kosovo Force and European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo.

I shall now focus on four main issues: the key
political developments, human rights, internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and missing persons.

On key political developments, the European
Union-facilitated dialogue at a high-level of leadership
between Belgrade and Pristina appears to be crucial
for moving forward in the implementation of the
outstanding provisions of the 19 April 2013 Agreement.
In that regard, we commend the Government of Serbia
for its readiness to engage in the dialogue. Some progress
has been achieved at the technical level in setting
arrangements for the travel of Serbian and Kosovo
officials. However, additional progress is expected once
political talks resume at a higher political level in the
implementation of agreements on the judiciary, energy,
crossing points and the freedom of movement. We share
Belgrade's concern over the announced intention of the
Kosovo authorities to transform the Kosovo Security
Force into the Kosovo Armed Forces in violation of
resolution 1244 (1999).

With respect to human rights, we welcome the
organization by UNMIK, supported by UN-Women
and the United Nations Development Coordinator, of an
"Open Day on Women, Peace and Security in Kosovo",
marking the International Day for the Elimination
of Violence against Women and the recognition of
survivors of sexual violence in the relevant Kosovo
legislation. Another relevant idea was the Common Voice
Forum, a multi-ethnic initiative that brings together
representatives from all of Kosovo's communities for
the advancement of inter-ethnic dialogue, conflict
prevention and civic awareness. However, the full
implementation of the legal framework continues to
be hindered, as the report underlines, by a range of
institutional factors, including inefficient coordination,
overlapping mandates, insufficient financial allocations
and limited accountability measures.

On internally displaced persons, we regret that by

the end of 2014 there were more than 17,000 internally
displaced persons in Kosovo and that the number of
voluntary returns continues to show a declining trend,
with the unresolved issues regarding property and a lack
of effective enforcement of the courts' decisions as the
key obstacle to the increase of returnees. We recall in
that regard the request made by the Special Rapporteur
on the human rights of the internally displaced persons
following its mission to Serbia, including Kosovo,
to the competent authorities of Kosovo, especially
the provision of protection, security and safety for
returning IDPs to their places of origin.

On the issue of missing persons, we commend
the responsible authorities in Belgrade and Pristina
for their continued efforts to pursue new sources of
information and carry out investigations with respect
to 1,655 remaining missing persons from 1988 to 2000.

In conclusion, we are encouraged that the overall
security situation in Kosovo remained stable during
the reporting period, thereby highlighting that UNMIK
continued to be active in its facilitation role between
communities and officials and with international
organizations, particularly focused on efforts aimed
at preventing and reducing tensions and promoting
cooperation between local authorities.

Finally, we commend the work carried out
by UNMIK under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, in the promotion of security, stability, the rule of
law and respect for human rights in accordance with the
Mission's mandate.

