Mr. Waszczykowski (Poland): I am honoured to
address the Security Council at this open debate on
conflict prevention and sustaining peace. I would like
to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
timely debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for outlining his vision for a renewed focus on
conflict prevention.

In recent years, we have witnessed a number of
increasingly complex and protracted conflicts and, at
the very same time, probably the worst humanitarian
crises since the end of Second World War. Given the
particularly fragile security landscape in many regions
of the world, we have to acknowledge that efforts aimed
at resolving existing conflicts are not enough. To ensure
durable and equitable peace for all, it is imperative
that the international community identify and tackle
the root causes of conflicts in a more accurate and
timely manner.

I therefore deeply believe that conflict prevention
should remain at the core of United Nations activities
to maintain peace and security around the world.
Despite the progress that has been made in the field, the
multiplication of conflicts and crises in the course of
the past 20 years clearly shows that prevention remains
critically underprioritized. That has to change in order
to allow conflict prevention to surface as a priority
tool in various United Nations policies and strategies
dealing with conflicts worldwide.

As one of the founding Members of the United
Nations, Poland has been involved in United Nations
peacekeeping operations since 1953. Since then, more
than 70,000 Blue Helmets from Poland have served in
diverse United Nations missions - from the shores of
Haiti, where Polish soldiers helped to rebuild a nation,
to the heights and deserts of the Middle East, to the
Balkans, where Polish Prime Minister and United
Nations human rights envoy Tadeusz Mazowiecki urged
the international community to stop the horrifying
ethnic cleansing and human rights violations taking
place there,
Poland has always been committed to bringing
assistance to those seeking reconciliation and the
restoration of peace. Driven by the universal values of
peace, stability and prosperity, which lie at the core of
Poland's foreign policy, my country does not want to
be considered a simple consumer of security, but as a
reliable security provider. Currently, we are making
efforts to increase our participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Conflicts can, and should be, prevented or
mitigated by early, well-suited political and diplomatic
engagement. In that context, we deeply believe that the
Security Council has a critical role to play in preventing
conflicts and sustaining peace. One of the reasons
we are gathered here at today's open debate is our
common willingness to address the question: How can
the Security Council fully capitalize on opportunities
for preventive action? Accordingly, I would like to
highlight some areas where Poland believes progress
and attention are particularly needed.

First, we believe that the Security Council already
possesses appropriate prevention tools for effective
action, but it is vital that those tools be used more
often. Horizon-scanning briefings by the Secretariat,
interactive dialogues, video teleconferences, and
briefings by the Department of Political Affairs
not only can contribute to the earlier recognition of
warning signs, but also facilitate taking action before
those signs deteriorate into open conflict.

Secondly, we think that the Security Council's
visiting missions should take prevention aspects into
consideration in a more effective way. With reference
to the regional dimension, Poland highly values
the dedicated work of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa.
The Working Group fulfils its mission and ensures
continued thematic focus on emerging situations prior
to the Council's consultations or formal meetings.
We would like to strongly advocate using such tools
more frequently and the broadening of their scope to
encompass other regions of the world.

Finally, Poland believes that the Security Council
should not be hampered by the use of the veto in taking
action aimed at stopping or preventing situations
involving war crimes or crimes against humanity.

Conflict prevention is an activity of a truly
comprehensive nature. First, it requires the involvement
of a wide range of actors - not only national, regional
or subregional actors, but also different components
of the whole United Nations system. In that regard,
we fully support the actions of the United Nations
Development Programme aimed at supporting national
dialogue processes, local peace committees and
confidence-building measures. In addition, we reiterate
our strong support for the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda.

We are also convinced that the United Nations
needs better and more coherent coordination of
work among the Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and various United Nations missions in
the field. In that context, we believe that enhanced
consultations between the Security Council and the
troop-contributing countries would contribute to the
adoption of a responsive stance towards unstable,
peace-threatening conditions. Moreover, I would
like to underline that conflict prevention requires a
cross-pillar and cross-sectoral approach. A coherent
implementation strategy across the human rights, peace
and security and sustainable development spheres
is essential.

I would also like to emphasize the importance of
effective national conflict-prevention policies based
on activities such as strengthening the transparency
and accountability of State institutions, fighting
corruption and promoting good governance. Good
governance in pre- and post-conflict settings is one
of the crucial factors that help to defuse tensions and
prevent escalation.

Finally, we have to remember that all United
Nations activities undertaken to maintain international
peace and security, such as conflict prevention,
mediation, peacekeeping, peace enforcement and
peacebuilding, need to go hand in hand. Those
activities cannot be undertaken in isolation, but must
be part of a truly comprehensive approach aimed at
ensuring the development of what Secretary-General
Guterres described in his visionary statement as the
"peace continuum".

As I mentioned at the beginning of my statement,
Poland welcomed the Secretary-General's declaration,
which highlighted conflict prevention as one of his
priorities. We believe that, through mediation, good
offices and shuttle diplomacy, the Secretary-General
can alleviate tensions and foster peaceful relations
between States. Under the Charter of the United
Nations, the Secretariat also plays a significant role
in the process, as it can bring both early warning and
in-depth analysis of emerging crises to the Security
Council for its attention.
We need to acknowledge that the maintenance of
international peace requires both bold decisions and
concerted actions. I therefore call for the enhanced
responsibility of all actors involved in the process.
Policy makers, representatives of civil society, experts
and the media should set all possible wheels in motion
to strengthen our current "peace" diplomacy. We should
jointly endeavour to ensure that every activity in the
field is based on a solid and realistic perspective.

