I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu for his presentation. I welcome the participation of Minister Blum de Barberi to this meeting. Belgium reiterates its full support for the peace process in Colombia and we once again welcome the continued commitment of the parties to the full implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We welcome the recent unanimous renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. Belgium remains deeply concerned by the continued threats, attacks and killings against human rights defenders, community and social leaders and ex-combatants. Violence in conflict-affected communities has increased. Violence against women, in particular, poses a challenge to women's active participation in the implementation of the peace agreement. Stronger measures to prevent and combat sexual and gender-based violence are needed. It is also necessary to make full use of the mechanisms for security guarantees, including early warning systems, individual and collective protection and the National Commission on Security Guarantees. The perpetrators of violence must be brought to justice. We also call on all parties to reach an agreement on the location of anti-personnel mines. Belgium pays specific attention to the situation of children. The Security Council unanimously adopted conclusions on the situation of children in armed conflict in Colombia. We look forward to progress in implementing its recommendations. Two important topics require special attention: child-friendly spaces in former concentration areas and the convening of the technical working group on children of the National Reintegration Council. The joint efforts of the Government and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun to ensure the sustainability of reintegration projects must continue. Access to land for the productive projects of ex-combatants remains an urgent necessity. We reaffirm our full support for transitional justice institutions in their mission to guarantee truth and restorative justice. We look forward to working with the Colombian authorities to broaden the mandate of the Verification Mission to play a role in verifying compliance with the sentences of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. We hope that this can be formalized as soon as possible. We note the increase in the budget for components related to transitional justice and call on the Government to allocate sufficient resources for the implementation of all parts of the peace agreement. I reiterate our hope that the Secretary-General and Security Council call for a global ceasefire in response to the coronavirus disease pandemic will lead all parties in Colombia to take steps to end the violence, allow humanitarian access and work towards peace. We urge all armed groups to end the violence and to seize this opportunity for peace. Today is the last time that my country will speak on the situation in Colombia during our present term on the Security Council. To Minister Blum de Barberi, I would say that her country serves as an inspiration all around the world. Regions affected by conflict see it as a model to overcome the past and choose a peaceful future. But peace in Colombia has been hard to obtain and cannot be taken for granted. I want to congratulate her and the Colombian people for the courageous decisions they have taken, and to call for those efforts to continue, with the parties to the Agreement, towards the comprehensive implementation of the final peace agreement. She can count on the support of Belgium.
