Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We wish at the outset to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month and to wish you all success in your
work. We would also like to extend our thanks to your
predecessor, Mr. Belinga-Eboutou, the Permanent
Representative of Cameroon, for the excellent way in
which he guided the work of the Council during his
presidency last month. We would also like to greet the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uganda, as well as
Ambassador Mahmoud Kassem and other members of
the Panel of Experts.

Our delegation has considered the report of the
Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2002/1146). The
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic believes that
it is vital to establish peace in the Great Lakes region,
and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
particular, through the implementation of all existing
agreements, starting with the Lusaka Agreement and
the Sun City, Pretoria and Luanda agreements.

In that regard, we call upon all the parties
involved in the inter-Congolese dialogue and upon the
neighbouring countries to speedily implement all those
agreements. That would lead to prosperity for the
region, put an end to the illegal exploitation of its
resources and ensure the enjoyment by all citizens of
the benefits of peace. After the complete withdrawal of
all foreign forces and the halting of all military actions,
a phase of reconstruction and the demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration or repatriation of ex-
combatants would begin.

We believe that the international community, the
international financial institutions and donor countries
should fulfil their commitments to help the region
attain sustainable development and the objectives of
the New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD), by promoting the institutions of the Africa
Union and supporting its programmes. In that regard,
we commend South Africa and the United Republic of
Tanzania for having facilitated the holding of various
meetings and the achievement of several agreements.
We also commend the representatives of the Secretary-
General in the region and hail the important role played
by the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

Having considered the report of the Panel of
Experts, we are a bit surprised by some of its contents
and by its failure to secure irrefutable evidence before
levelling blame and accusations against individuals and
companies; indeed, this has been done even without
prior contact with those individuals or with
representatives of those companies. In addition, we
reject conclusions volunteered by members of the
Panel when such conclusions were not required or
when they were based on reasoning that is difficult to
understand. Here, we would like to note the report's
political reference to a number of companies in Africa
and in the Arab region. As far as we know, the report
was not supposed to deal with the internal affairs of
other African countries or with political aspects related
to Arab countries. Therefore, we would like to express
our dissatisfaction at the levelling of accusations and
the description of some business people as members of
international criminal organizations. Is that not
somewhat exaggerated?

We also note that the report was based on
information provided by informers, be they companies
or competing traders. That affects the accuracy of the
report and the credibility of the Panel of Experts. My
delegation welcomed the efforts made by the Chairman
and members of the Panel during the Security Council
mission to the Great Lakes region and subsequent in
Council meetings. We understand the importance of the
Panel's work and the importance of providing it with
all the assistance it needs to collect documents that
would support its conclusions.

We have also endorsed the idea that the Panel
should meet with those mentioned in the report. But we
feel that the Panel failed to make such contacts or to
ask questions about the contents of a number of
paragraphs relating to some major countries in the
region and the relationship between those countries and
some of the companies mentioned in the report.

Levelling accusations against Arab cities and
countries such as Dubai and the United Arab Emirates
in some paragraphs of the report was out of place and
unacceptable. Our delegation believes that every
accusation against Arab individuals named in the report
can be answered and refuted, as the Permanent
Representative of Oman said this morning. We confirm
that these individuals and company representatives
possess the documents needed to refute all the
accusations levelled against them. They are entirely
right to be dissatisfied, since the Panel neither
contacted them nor gave them a chance to produce
documents proving their innocence.

In annex I of its report the Panel lists the
companies it recommends should be subject to
financial restrictions; annex II lists individuals for
whom the Panel recommends a travel ban and financial
restrictions. This includes Arab, African and European
business people. We believe that there is an urgent need
to re-evaluate the entire contents of the report.

My delegation reaffirms its keen interest in
revealing the whole truth behind the illegal exploitation
of natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. However, we also reaffirm the importance of
not undermining the reputation of individuals or
companies or exaggerating certain incidents in the
absence of the necessary irrefutable. The livelihoods of
thousands of families depend on the activities of the
accused business people and companies.

We reaffirm that all parties must be committed to
the implementation of agreements recently reached,
and to the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.
We reiterate that the only guarantee against the illegal
exploitation of natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is continued efforts to establish
a strong Government in that country that would ensure
regulated, legitimate and sustainable exploitation of
natural resources to the benefit of its people and of the
region in general.

Yesterday, my delegation reaffirmed that informal
consultations must be conducted to consider the
report's recommendations and conclusions. At the
same time, we reaffirm that we stand against any
illegal exploitation of natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we reiterate
the importance of taking the necessary measures to
ensure that the natural resources of that country and
throughout the African continent are used to benefit the
continent's peoples, and that the illegal exploitation of
wealth is brought to an end.

We reaffirm our keen interest in having the
Council consider the report in an objective manner, and
we support the idea that the Council should lay down
very clear and specific guidelines with regard to the
functions and work of any mechanism to be established
by the Council in the future.

