Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Since the Security Council adopted resolution 1402
(2002) on 30 March, the conflict between Israel and
Palestine has continued to escalate. Instead of
improving, the situation has deteriorated further. In
particular, the economic and social life of the
Palestinian people has been seriously disrupted, and the
humanitarian situation is in deep crisis. We express our
serious concern and worry over these developments.

A resolution to the question of the Middle East
can only be based on the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the principle of land for peace.
Resorting to military occupation and violence will not
bring peace to either side; rather, it will make the road
to peace more difficult.

The deterioration of the situation in the Middle
East in recent days has proven once again that Israel's
approach of achieving security through military high-
handedness will go nowhere. It must be pointed out
that Israel's continued siege of President Arafat and its
threat to force him into exile are very dangerous.
Should President Arafat be harmed, the consequences
would be extremely grave.

We oppose and condemn Israel's invasion of
Palestine, and we call upon Israel to immediately
implement resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002), to
unconditionally withdraw all its troops from Palestine,
to guarantee the personal safety of President Arafat,
and to lift the blockade and the relevant restrictions on
the Palestinian sides so as to create the necessary
conditions for the Palestinian side to be able to stop the
extreme and Violent activities by a handful of people
and to make possible a ceasefire between the two sides.

At the same time, we also condemn the violent
activities targeting innocent civilians in Israel. We call
for an early end to the vicious cycle of countering
violence with violence, so as to prevent extreme and
violent activities by a handful of people from
disrupting the early restoration of all the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people.

In the current situation, the United Nations, and
the Security Council in particular, should play a more
active and effective role to avoid the evolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict into an all-out confrontation
and to prevent the situation from sliding into an
irreparable state. Yesterday, the Council held separate
meetings with the Israeli and Palestinian sides. We
hope the two sides will take practical steps to
immediately stop all violent activities. All peace-loving
countries should work together to stop the deterioration
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and to promote the
momentum for peace in the Middle East.

