Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): The
debate on nuclear non-proliferation, disarmament and
security, which you, Madam President, have taken the
initiative of including on our agenda, is at the heart of
the concerns of the international community. We would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his introductory
statement.

We believe that this debate is taking place in an
international environment marked by progress in
conventional arms control and by the desire to
strengthen international cooperation aimed at
addressing the challenges we face. However, that
context stands in contrast with the lethargy of actual
disarmament mechanisms. All countries support the
promotion of multilateralism and have reached
agreement on the importance of the effective
implementation of all the provisions of international
treaties in the field of disarmament and
non-proliferation, so as to build a world that is based
on peace and security for all.
12-29927

Morocco's commitment to the subject of
disarmament is a strategic choice that reflects our
commitment to peace and security and to the principle
of the peaceful settlement of disputes. We are a State
party to the full range of multilateral instruments
pertaining to weapons of mass destruction. Morocco
remains committed to strengthening multilateralism for
general and complete disarmament, in particular with
regard to the disarmament of nuclear weapons in a
verifiable, irreversible and definitive manner.

The destruction of weapons of mass destruction is
crucial, as they pose an ongoing risk that places a
burden on the future of the world. Collective security
requires a renunciation of proliferation and further
commitments towards achieving complete and total
disarmament. In the absence thereof, the risk of the
acquisition of such weapons by non-State actors is not
a mere hypothesis. It is therefore our duty to do our
utmost to achieve the goals of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which
remains the cornerstone of the global disarmament and
non-proliferation regime and of the peaceful use of
nuclear energy.

It is undeniable that the universalization of a
treaty as important as the NPT must be a common
objective for our collective security. As a result of the
successful outcome of the eighth NPT Review
Conference, in 2010, we have seen that through
dialogue it is possible to attain commitments that allow
us to make progressive steps towards attaining the NPT
objectives. At the same time, it remains necessary for
all States parties to play their role fully and to shoulder
their responsibilities, in order to build upon the
progress that has been made.

Morocco underscores the importance of
adherence to the NPT and the conclusion of
comprehensive safeguards agreements with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) by all
States of the Middle East region, including Israel. We
believe that it is crucial to abide by the 2012 deadline
for the holding of a conference on the establishment of
a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction in the Middle East, by carrying out
the Plan of Action for the implementation of the 1995
resolution on the Middle East. The 2012 conference
will be a historic opportunity to trigger a process that
will make it possible to free this zone of weapons of
mass destruction. In that context, we welcome the
appointment of the facilitator and of the host country,

as well as the consultations that have been convened,
which we hope to see intensified so that the conference
can be convened as soon as possible.

Morocco remains firmly convinced that the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free world requires
the use of United Nations disarmament mechanisms, in
particular the Conference on Disarmament (CD). The
efficacy and the strength of these mechanisms depend,
of course, on the political resolve of States, as well as
on their compliance with the obligations and
commitments they enter into. The lethargy that for
years has been the hallmark of the Conference on
Disarmament stands in marked contrast to the
evolution of the international situation and the new
security challenges that the world faces, which are
undermining the shared goals of the international
community, namely, the achievement of general and
complete disarmament. We share the view that the
problems of the CD are due to political events. We
appeal for political flexibility so that the Conference
can reach agreement on a programme of work that is
balanced and makes it possible for the Conference to
play its full role as a negotiating forum in the field of
disarmament.

Based on a complete prohibition of nuclear tests,
my country regrets the late entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). In
that regard, we reiterate our appeal to all States that
have not yet done so to ratify the Treaty. Morocco,
which from 2009 to 2011 worked together with France
in order to facilitate the entry into force of the Treaty,
is encouraged by the new ratifications and the possible
ratification by an annex 2 State.

In order to meet non-proliferation objectives and
to enact the nuclear security measures that have been
established by the relevant international entities in this
field, it is crucial that all agreements be scrupulously
and universally observed. Morocco welcomes the
central role played by the IAEA in that regard. We call
for support for those efforts and for increasing the
Agency's financial and human resources. While
adapting to meet the new global challenges,
strengthening these norms and standards, however,
should not become in itself an obstacle to development
and to the peaceful use of nuclear energy for reasons of
economic and social development. In this spirit, my
country welcomes the outcome of the IAEA conference
on nuclear safety, as well as the holding of the high-
level meeting on nuclear safety and security held at the

initiative of the Secretary-General. We hope that the
political will that was expressed on those two
occasions will coalesce and lead to tangible measures
that support the IAEA's activities, in particular its Plan
of Action for strengthening nuclear security.

Morocco welcomes the outcome of the Seoul
Summit. We believe that our active participation in a
number of multilateral initiatives, such as the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the summit
process on nuclear security, is a reflection of the
importance that my country attaches to strengthening
international and regional cooperation on nuclear
security and on the fight against illicit trafficking in
radioactive nuclear material. The exchange of expertise
and experience in such initiatives helps to strengthen
multilateral action in the field of non-proliferation and
nuclear security. Accordingly, Morocco has organized a
number of activities, including an international
exercise on the response to a malicious act involving
radioactive material, which was held in Rabat in March
in collaboration with our international partners,
including the IAEA.

One week from now, the first meeting of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review
Conference of the Parties to the NPT will be held in
Vienna. In the following months, the Review
Conference of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the United
Nations Conference on an Arms Trade Treaty will take
place. All of those opportunities make it necessary that
we demonstrate political will and harness our efforts in
order to ensure a successful outcome to those meetings,
showing our firm commitment to multilateralism in the
field of disarmament and non-proliferation.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that peace
through disarmament is a common good of humankind
and we must spare no effort in order to help build a
nuclear-weapon-free world to help break away from
the arms race and to focus instead on the fight against
poverty, pandemics and the obvious environmental
deterioration.

