Mr. Ibn Chambas: I thank the Security Council
for once again giving me the opportunity to brief
it on challenges to peace, security and stability in
West Africa, particularly in the Sahel region. I speak
from Niamey, where I have just met with President
Mahamadou Issoufou as part ofa tour of the five Sahel
countries that are on the front line of humankind's
struggle with climate change. I will be travelling to
Ouagadougou right after this briefing, and will be
sure to bring my hopes and the Council's concern for
the impact of climate change on peace and security in
that region.

West Africa and the Sahel have for some time now
been faced with multifaceted challenges. From Dakar to
Djibouti, climate change is one ofthe most important of
those challenges through its impact on societies and their
livelihoods, as it directly affects security, development
and stability. In that context, climate change becomes a
fundamental threat to human security. In the maritime
domain, natural resources are underregulated and
overexploited, and criminal activities and piracy are
threatening security and economic activities. Erosion
and rising sea levels constitute another serious threat.

Both regions experience various unresolved
conflicts, ranging from the renewed insurgency in
the Niger delta and deadly clashes between farmers
and herders over scarce and dwindling agricultural
resources, to terrorist activities in northern Mali and
north-eastern Nigeria, which have spilled over to the
neighbouring countries of Cameroon, Chad and the
Niger. These threats go hand in hand with organized
crime, trafficking and violent extremism, and are
exacerbated, by recurring drought that climate change,
by all accounts, has rendered more frequent and
hazardous. The landlocked character of the area and
poor transport links are yet another strain preventing
regional trade that could provide employment and
stimulate economies.

On the positive side, the fight against terrorist
activities is beginning to yield tangible and encouraging
results owing to strengthened cooperation between
the concerned countries and the significant support
of partners. In the short run, however, more effort is
still needed to back the military campaign against
Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin area in terms of
financial and operational support for the Multinational
Joint Task Force, and to provide assistance to meet the
immediate humanitarian needs of displaced persons
and refugees, facilitating their return to safe areas and
assisting them to rebuild their livelihoods.

Further west, strengthened regional cooperation
and sustained international support are also required
to help the countries of the Sahel address the threat
of terrorism that continues to spread beyond northern
Mali and into West Africa and the Sahel. The United
Nations remains committed to playing its part within
the parametres of its mandate to help the region face
these security challenges. In the long run, there is a
growing awareness of the need to address the underlying
causes of the crisis, which are underdevelopment, poor
governance and attendant poverty, all of which are, at
least in part, linked to climate change.

The theme of the second Regional Security Summit,
held in Abuja on 14 May, "Consolidating collective
efforts for regional peace and development", testified
to the willingness of stakeholders to focus on the
economic potential of Lake Chad to alleviate poverty
and bring development to the region.

In the Sahel region, the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel guides the United Nations
system's multidimensional engagement to address the
root causes of instability in the region. Mitigating the
impact of climate change, which features prominently
under the resilience pillar of the Strategy, is the major
objective of the Strategy. That has been achieved in
close partnership with such actors as the Permanent
Inter-State Committee for Drought Control in the
Sahel, which supports environmental monitoring and
the governance of natural resources.

The Boko Haram onslaught has galvanized
attention to the devastating affects of climate change
impacting the Lake Chad Basin area. To mention just
one, the surface area of Lake Chad shrank from 22,000
square kilometres in 1960 to 1,700 square kilometres
in 1985. Since then, it has rebounded to about 8,000
square kilometres, showing the unpredictability of
external shocks and severely straining people's coping
mechanisms. Lake Chad, despite its vulnerability, is
blessed with a rich biodiversity that offers opportunities
for fishing, agriculture and livestock farming. It directly
provides livelihoods to about 2 million people, while at
the same time constituting a food-exporting hub that
supplies nearly 13 million people, including inhabitants
of the Chadian capital, N'Djamena, and the capital of
Borno state in Nigeria, Maiduguri.

The economic opportunities of the Lake led to
significant migration movements in the past, the
consequences of which prove challenging today. As of
2015, the Lake Chad Basin was home to up to 50 million
people, whereas its resources have decreased sharply.
It is anticipated that the population will again double
by 2030. The importance and urgency of restoring the
productive capacities of Lake Chad in order to prevent
crises in the future cannot be overemphasized.

Another important area of note is the Niger River
Basin area. It is an enormous resource for sustaining
and improving livelihoods, as well as economic growth
in the Sahel, but is now quickly dwindling as a result
of the impact of extreme climate change and rainfall
variability along the Niger River, a mainstay of the
Niger River Basin. The Basin covers nine countries:
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, cote D'Ivoire,
Guinea, Mali, the Niger and Nigeria. Seven of those
nine countries are among the 20 poorest countries in
the world. Up to 70 per cent of the 130 million people
in the Basin area live in rural communities amid food
insecurity - a situation that can only get worse, as
the population is expected to double between now and
2050. Without real concerted and tangible efforts for
those countries, with international support to address
the acute challenges confronting the inhabitants of
the Basin, the consequences in the future could be
horrific when the Niger River, along its 4,200 kilometre
course, begins to dry up, as can be visible in some
sections already.

I would also like to mention the Great Wall initiative
to combat desertification, which was conceived in 2005
by the former President of Nigeria, Chief Olusegun
Obasanjo, adopted by the African Union in 2007 and
signed by participating countries in N'Djamena in
2010. The Great Green wall is another example of a
long-term approach to attack the root causes of poverty
and marginalization. In fact, the ongoing security
deterioration due to deadly confrontations between
farmers and cattle breeders in some regions of Nigeria
is just another reminder of the devastating effects
of desertification.

Faced with those challenges, West African
and Sahel countries are at a crossroads. While the
responsibility for the implementation of those plans
rests with the Governments concerned, national budgets
are already being put under additional strain for higher
security spending, such as is the case in the Niger,
where I am today. External factors like insecurity in
Libya and North Africa and jihadists returning from
the Middle East are challenges beyond the scope
of individual Governments and require collective
international action. Thankfully, support is starting
to be forthcoming. The European Union has already
announced that €120 million from the Trust Fund for
Africa has been earmarked for security ~ a point that I
believe Ambassador Angel Losada may confirm.

However, humanitarian needs in the Lake Chad
Basin area continue to grow, with approximately
9.2 million people in need of assistance. More than
2.4 million people have been driven out of their homes
due to terrorist activities, of whom 1.5 million are
children. Up to 90 per cent of the displaced have found
refuge with host communities, placing a heavy strain on

their resources and weakening their ability to withstand
shock. Despite that dire humanitarian situation, of the
$535 million requested for humanitarian assistance in
the region, only 10 per cent has been received.

Two days ago, world leaders gathered around the
Secretary-General in Istanbul to consider ways and
means to jointly make the world hospitable for all. Among
the five core responsibilities defined by the Secretary-
General in his report entitled "One humanity: shared
responsibility" (A/70/709), I would like in particular to
highlight responsibility one - "political responsibility
to prevent and end conflicts" - an responsibility
four - change people's lives, from delivering aid to
ending need", which very much apply to the situation in
the Lake Chad Basin areas and the Sahel.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that the issues
I have cited here have been thoroughly reviewed over
the years. The problems have been identified, as have
the set of actions to be taken to address them. A number
of sound initiatives exist, and yet there is a feeling of
frustration because results are not as tangible as one
would wish them to be. Pooling efforts to rationalize
the implementation of existing plans would go a long
way in achieving our common goals.

