Mr. Thornberry (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the holding of this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, and to express my appreciation
for the briefing by the Assistant Secretary-General ad
interim for Political Affairs, Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-
Frandzen.

With regard to the question of Palestine, my
country has consistently maintained a clear position
of respect for the norms and principles of international
law, in particular peoples' right to self-determination.
Therefore, Peru recognizes the urgent need to implement
the resolutions of the General Assembly aimed at laying
the foundation for the creation of two States, one Arab
and one Jewish, living side by side, within secure and
mutually recognized borders, in a climate of peace and
security.

Based on our belief in the inalienable right of
the Palestinian people to self-determination and on
our conviction that the establishment of a Palestinian
State is the key to a peaceful and definitive political
solution to this conflict, Peru recognizes Palestine as
a State. We therefore sponsored General Assembly
resolution 67/ 19, through which Palestine was granted
non-member observer State status.

Peru condemned Israel's use of disproportionate
military force against densely populated urban areas in
the Gaza Strip last year and the rocket fire from Gaza
directed against Israeli civilians. However, despite the
calls for a ceasefire by the international community,
over 2,100 people were killed in the Gaza Strip, mainly
Palestinian civilians, including women and children.
Consistent with our strict respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law, therefore, Peru voted
for resolution S-21/1 of the Human Rights Council, in
which, in addition to deploring the attacks, the Council
called on Israel to put an end to its illegal settlement
activities and its blockade of the Gaza Strip.

My country recognizes the inalienable right
of Israel to protect its own existence and security,
including by making use of their right to legitimate
self-defence. However, we believe that the exercise of
that right must be carried out based on international
humanitarian law, taking into account in particular the
principles of proportionality and legality.

On that last point, my delegation reiterates that
the acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible
under international law. Therefore any action to
impose laws, jurisdiction and administration in such
settlements is null and void. In this regard, we reiterate
our call on Israel to immediately cease the practices
of settlement-building, house demolitions and evictions
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem.

Consistent with its unwavering commitment to the
peaceful settlement of disputes, Peru reaffirms its full
support and encourages the search for a lasting peace in
the Middle East. After decades ofan unsustainable status
quo, we consider it urgent for the Council, pursuant
to its obligations and responsibilities for maintaining
international peace and security, to effectively promote
the peace process. Peru recognizes that the ultimate
solution can be achieved only as a result of negotiations
among the parties in the framework of the obligations
set out in the Madrid principles, the road map of the
Quartet and other agreements, and with full respect for
international law, including the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council and the Organization.

The Security Council should promote a minimum
framework of understanding that would allow the
parties to resume direct negotiations. My delegation
therefore regrets that the Council was unable to adopt
a decision in December. The result of the voting on
30 December (see S/PV.7354) should be construed not
as a license to maintain the status quo, but as a call to
action, negotiation and compromise. In this regard, my
delegation reiterates its call on the parties to resume, on
the basis of good faith, the peace process in the Middle
East. Only thus will the goal of General Assembly
resolution 181 (II) of 29 November 1947 - Palestinians
and Israelis living in peace in two States within secure
and internationally recognized borders - be finally
achieved.

