Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for holding this important debate
today. I also thank High Commissioner Pillay, Under-
Secretary-General Amos, Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous and International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) Director-General Daccord for their compelling
and thoughtful contributions to this debate. The specific
examples they have used are sobering and underline the
importance of the subject that is before us now.

Fifteen years ago, the Security Council formally
committed for the first time to protect civilians in
armed conflict when it adopted resolution 1265 (1999).
In the wake of mass atrocities in Rwanda and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, it was increasingly clear that the
international community could no longer stand by and
witness the massacre of innocent people. Yet, as we
move towards the twentieth anniversary of the Rwandan
genocide, we continue to bear witness to the most brutal
violations of human rights in conflictt, from Syria and
South Sudan to the Central African Republic. It is vital
that we step up our efforts to prevent and respond to
such atrocities.

Before I move on to the topic of today's debate,
I want to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2013/689) and to reiterate our full endorsement
of United Nations efforts to enhance its role in
safeguarding human rights around the world through
the action plan entitled "Rights up front". Our objective
today is to establish and underline broad support for the
United Nations key role of protecting civilians. I think
that is why so many are here today to listen to and to
participate in the debate.

Politics and protecting civilians should not be
mixed: protecting civilians transcends politics.
Sovereignty matters, but so too do the global norms that
underpin the protection that we are seeking to uphold.
Yves Daccord reminded us just now of how essential
that is for organizations such as the ICRC, and in
particular for the individuals that they serve.

We are pleased that the presidential statement
just adopted today (S/PRST/2014/3) reiterates some
of the most basic principles and commitments that
have been made over the years by the Security
Council on the agenda item, including through the
attached aide-memoire (S/PRST/2010/25, annex).
The aide-memoire has been painstakingly compiled
from existing and agreed Council texts. It establishes
the clear baseline against which we operate and, as
Mr. Herve Ladsous has reminded us, clarity is vital for
those who operate in dangerous situations in the field.

Yesterday, the Security Council heard from
Ms. Valerie Amos about the humanitarian challenges
faced in the crisis in South Sudan. Today, she has set
out clearly the huge difficulties being faced in Syria
and the Central African Republic. Tomorrow, she will
brief the Council on Syria. We believe that the Council
can and must play a key role in alleviating the impact
on civilians in such crises. That is why we strongly
support agreement on a humanitarian draft resolution
on Syria to improve the lives of the Syrian people, who
are bearing the burden of the violence in their country.
There can be no justification for any country standing
in the way of a resolution that is designed to allow
civilians access to food and medical assistance.

Early action to prevent conflict and mass human
rights abuses remains vital. That must start long before
peacekeepers may be required. Once peacekeeping
missions are deployed, their protection mandates are a
fundamental part of the ability of the United Nations
to protect civilians in conflict. Those mandates must
be fully implemented. Priority should be given to the
protection of civilians in mission planning assessments
and the allocation of resources and in activities on the
ground. We encourage all mandated missions to develop
protection strategies and to use all the assets of the
mission to achieve that task. We urge mission leadership
to establish effective coordination mechanisms so as to
include all the relevant departments that enhance data
collection and analysis and that improve early warning
and rapid response. From the police and the military
to civilian personnel, where a misison is mandated to
protect, that should be at the centre of their daily work.

We welcome the positive steps taken by missions,
as outlined in the concept paper (S/2014/74, annex), and
encourage a greater sharing of best practices among
them. Regular opportunities to analyse strengths and
weaknesses are also important and more information
should be shared with the Council in country reports
and briefings in order to highlight the challenges that
missions face every day. As Ms. Navi Pillay urged,
we welcome the effective use of the human rights due
diligence policy so as to hold perpetrators accountable,
including by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo following the horrific Monova rapes in 2012.
We urge more consistent application of that policy
elsewhere.

The United Kingdom commends the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) for opening its
doors to tens of thousands of South Sudanese civilians
fleeing the eruption of brutal violence in September. I
think that that is something of that the Council really
needs to take note of. The actions of UNMISS saved
people's lives, and the Mission continues to work hard
with humanitarian actors to protect the 75,000 people
sheltering on its bases. We will continue to support the
Mission as it seeks to protect civilians more widely,
including through monitoring and reporting on human
rights violations and abuses and backing the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.

The planning, allocation and effective use of
resources are vital. The United Kingdom provides
extrabudgetary funds to the United Nations Department
of Peacekeeping Operations for the Protection of
Civilians Coordination Unit and the development of
predeployment training modules on conflict-related
sexual violence for the military, the police and civilians.
We encourage all Member States to consider providing
similar support.

The protection of civilians is among the Council's
foremost responsibilities. Just as peacekeepers must
consider the protection of civilians in every aspect of
their work, so must we. Mr. Ladsous rightly reminded
us of the limits of peacekeeping, as well as its great
strengths. It is therefore essential that we assume our
responsibilities and use the Council's authority to
ensure that States shoulder their primary responsibility
to prevent conflict, minimize suffering and ensure that
the cycles of conflict and pain are not repeated.

