Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation joins
previous speakers in welcoming the presence among us
today of the Foreign Minister of Angola, His
Excellency Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda, and in
thanking the Permanent Representative of Ireland,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993), for his
presentation of the comprehensive report contained in
document S/2000/l225. My delegation's appreciation
goes to Ambassador Juan Larrain and to the other
members of the Monitoring Mechanism for the
excellent quality of their work. Their activities, and
those of the sanctions Committee and of the earlier
Panel of Experts, broke new ground in regard to the use
of sanctions by the United Nations.

Jamaica welcomes the report of the Mechanism
as another step towards the effective implementation of
the sanctions against the Uniao Nacional Para a
Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA) aimed at
expediting the end of the long-running conflict in
Angola.

We are heartened by the observation in the report
that UNITA's procurement of arms and fuel has clearly
diminished, due in part to the reluctance of States and
individuals to engage in business as usual lest the
connection be established between UNITA and
themselves. This is a direct result of more effective
monitoring of the sanctions and of the strategy of
"naming and shaming" to expose sanctions violators. If
this is done consistently and with equity, it will prove
to be a powerful disincentive for sanctions violators to
continue their activities.

In this regard, we reiterate our call for the
Security Council to seriously consider the
establishment of an ongoing capacity to monitor the
implementation of sanctions, as well as to study their
unintended consequences.

The Monitoring Mechanism is a good example of
what can be accomplished if sanctions are monitored
effectively. However, we need to go further. By
institutionalizing the monitoring of sanctions, we
would ensure that the requisite expertise and
methodology are applied for the duration of sanctions
regimes: from conception to execution to termination.
We would be able to ascertain what has worked in the
past and what is likely to work in the future. We could
make sanctions regimes more incisive and targeted.

My delegation is supportive of the broad thrust of
the recommendations contained in the report of the
Monitoring Mechanism relating to arms and military
equipment, travel and representation, diamonds and
finance, and transport. I wish to comment on some of
the recommendations.

We are particularly supportive of the
recommendation to implement a certificate of origin
scheme for the export of diamonds. There are many
countries in the region with fragile economies, heavily
dependent on legitimate exports of diamonds, and these
can ill afford the dislocation caused by disputes arising
from uncertainty as to the source of their diamonds. A
certificate of origin scheme would go a long way in
ensuring the legitimate source of exported diamonds.

In the same vein, we support the establishment of
a licensing system for diamond buyers to complement
the certificate of origin scheme. If these measures are
adopted simultaneously, it may prove unnecessary to
record the characteristics of diamonds from each mine.
We recognize that this kind of cataloguing may prove
onerous for some countries, and there remains
uncertainty about the dependability of the current
technology to be employed. We therefore believe that
the efficiency of the technology needs to be assured
before this method can be used to adjudicate the origin
of diamonds.

Arms exporting countries should also strengthen
their system pertaining to arms exports, in particular by
verifying the authenticity and country of issuance of
the relevant documents. The standardization of the
format of end-user certificates would greatly assist
authorities to authenticate that weapons imported into
the region reach the intended buyer. The problem of the
proliferation of small arms will be solved only when
arms exporting countries agree to the establishment of
a database for the export of their weapons, which will
allow for greater transparency in the use of small arms.

The countries of the region have recognized the
need to work together to prevent the transhipment of
weapons through their territory, and we commend them
in this regard. The international community may also
wish to give full support to the implementation of the
Economic Community of West African States
moratorium and the Southern African Development
Community action plan for the control of light
weapons.

The international community cannot be satisfied
until UNITA's ability to wage war is completely
degraded. We wish to commend the Government of
Angola for the steps it has taken to focus on the
economic and social development of the people in the
areas under its control. But we recognize that their
efforts have been hampered by UNITA's continued
activities in areas where it is still able to operate.

In addition to improving the efficiency of the
sanctions on UNITA, we must respond to the pressing
humanitarian and developmental needs of the people of
Angola. My delegation commends the ongoing work of
all humanitarian agencies that have persevered in the
face of tremendous difficulties in order to assist the
people of Angola. We also commend the Secretary-
General and his Special Adviser for Special
Assignments in Africa, Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, for their
tireless efforts to bring peace to the people of Angola
and for the steps taken to improve relations between
the United Nations and the Government of Angola.

In regard to the humanitarian situation, I wish to
note that the World Food Programme has emphasized
that its operations this year will succeed only in places
where the security situation has improved and where
targeted beneficiaries have been provided with
sufficient arable land and agricultural supports such as
tools and seeds. The programme for this year shifts its
emphasis from emergency relief to encouraging greater
self-reliance among the communities currently
dependant on food aid for survival. In this regard, it is
clear that the activities of agencies such as the World
Food Programme have been made possible by the spin-
off effects of the work of the Monitoring Mechanism
and its predecessors.

In the final analysis, the measures and
recommendations ofthe Monitoring Mechanism will be
effective only if all Member States adhere to the terms
of the sanctions regimes. Those who violate sanctions
need to realize that by so doing they help to perpetuate
violence and uncertainty in the lives of the majority of
Angolans and put at risk the ability of the Angolan
people to chart their own destiny and to put an end to
the 30 years of conflict.

