Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the adoption
of resolution 2393 (2017), renewing resolution 2165
(2014) for one year. We express appreciation to all three
penholders - Egypt, Japan and Sweden - for their role
in facilitating the negotiations on the resolution. The
extensive consultation they held with all members and
the extra efforts they exerted to ensure a participatory
process made it possible to narrow differences to
a large extent. It is our view that they made all the
necessary efforts, and that they did so in good faith.
We have always felt that it would not be impossible to
make progress if we put the humanitarian needs and
continued suffering of the Syrians at the centre of our
deliberations. We seem to have made some progress in
that regard, and we commend Council members for their
constructive engagement and flexibility in that regard.

The cross-border programme is a vital mechanism
for reaching millions of Syrians in need of
humanitarian assistance. The Council's decision today
will certainly contribute to saving lives. We hope that
the implementation of the resolution will facilitate
the delivery of aid to millions of Syrians in need of
urgent assistance through the cross-border and cross-
line deliveries.

The resolution goes a long way towards addressing
the concerns of some delegations by requesting the
Secretary-General to conduct a review of the cross-
border operations with the objective of further
strengthening the United Nations monitoring
mechanism, while taking into consideration the views
of relevant parties, including the Syrian Government,
relevant neighbouring countries, the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners. The resolution also provides
an opportunity to receive detailed information about
cross-border and cross-line deliveries, thereby further
enhancing transparency. We therefore saw no weighty
reason why we should not support the resolution.

Finally, we all know that it is only through a
comprehensive political solution that the suffering of
the Syrian people can come to an end. One hopes that
all the necessary efforts will be made to achieve that
objective, no matter the existing and current difficulties.

