Mr. Zellenrath (Netherlands): First of all, we offer our deepest condolences to the families of the victims of the Ukrainian airliner that crashed in Iran. We understand their pain and my Government expects that the crash will be fully investigated. On behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, let me express my sincere thanks to the delegation of Viet Nam for convening this open debate. Seventy-five years ago, the Charter established the multilateral system based on international law, multilateral cooperation and the rule of law. Back then, few people could have believed possible the many achievements that this has brought to us all. We commend all the hard work of the men and women worldwide who have contributed to global peace and security, justice and economic and social development. However, despite those successes, the multilateral system is under pressure. Like others, we are deeply concerned about the recent events in the Middle East and it is of the utmost importance that we stop the use of weapons and give space to dialogue and de-escalation. It is the responsibility of all Member States to maintain and strengthen the multilateral system. In that light, allow me to focus on two key areas where the Kingdom of the Netherlands is assuming its responsibility to maintain and strengthen the current multilateral system - preventing conflicts and ensuring accountability. The first area concerns conflict prevention. As noted only days ago by my Foreign Minister, Stef Blok: "Democracy, fundamental rights and the rule of law are crucial for any healthy resilient society." In the most fragile regions of the world, we are contributing to establishing an early warning/early action system and addressing the root causes of conflicts. We do so by contributing to the establishment of peacebuilding programmes and transitional justice mechanisms, building the capacity of security and rule-of-law institutions and monitoring mechanisms by civil society. In particular, the ability of women to participate in, and influence the outcome of, political, peace and security processes helps to address the root causes of conflict and results in more durable and stable peace. That is why we empower women to participate in those processes in various countries, such as in Yemen, Libya, Afghanistan and Colombia, and support women's participation in United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions. Upholding the Charter also means ensuring that those responsible for gross human rights violations and abuses are held accountable for their crimes. That is the second area where the Kingdom of the Netherlands is assuming its responsibility. The Hague is the proud host of the International Court of Justice, the International Criminal Court, the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and many other international organizations that play a key role in the international legal order. We support investigative mechanisms, such as the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since 2011 and the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. We also support the adoption by the International Law Commission of the Draft Articles on Crimes Against Humanity and the recommendation to elaborate a convention on the basis of those draft articles. Such a convention would fill an important gap in the current legal framework. In addition, together with others, we are leading efforts to conclude a convention on international cooperation in the investigation and prosecution of the crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes - also known as the MLA initiative. We urge the States that have not yet done so to join this important initiative. In conclusion, when the multilateral system is under pressure, when upholding agreed international rules and norms is no longer a given, when multilateral institutions have difficulties inaddressing contemporary challenges, all Member States bear the responsibility to address those weaknesses. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is committed to maintaining and strengthening the current multilateral system and we stand ready to engage with all Member States to achieve that in order to ensure that the United Nations is fit for purpose and ready for the next 75 years.
