Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
this historic hour for the Sudanese people, Africa, the
United Nations and the international community in
general, I would like to begin my statement by giving a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Riek Machar
Teny-Dhurgon, Vice-President of the Republic of South
Sudan, and to his delegation, and to convey through
him our warm welcome to President Salva Kiir.

Today is above all a day of celebration, on which
we receive into the international community South
Sudan as an independent Republic. I wish to convey
the warmest and most sincere congratulations of the
Colombian State and citizens to all people of the
Republic of South Sudan and its authorities. The path
that had to be followed to reach this result has been
very arduous and there were many obstacles to
overcome. However, that achievement was possible
only thanks to the resolute will of the people of South
Sudan to achieve their independence and to the
acknowledgement of the parties to the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement that peace can be
achieved only through negotiation and democratic
means.

It is also necessary to underscore that the respect
shown by the authorities of the Sudan for the
commitments undertaken in the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, as well as their participation in the events
declaring South Sudan's independence on 9 July,
indicate that the principles of good-neighbourliness
and regional cooperation will guide relations between
the two States. We welcome the positive statement of
Ambassador Osman and his Government's recognition
of the new Republic of South Sudan.

It is particularly noteworthy that, on its first day
as an independent State, the Republic of South Sudan
applied to become a Member of the United Nations,
showing its commitment to the principles and goals of
the Organization. That is in keeping with the fact that
the independence process was carried out in exercise of
the principle of the self-determination of peoples,
which was clearly expressed in the huge participation
in the referendum early this year, its results and the
jubilation of the people during the declaration of
independence.

The international community must continue to
demonstrate its commitment to supporting the Republic
of South Sudan and to the establishment of conditions
favourable to a prosperous and peaceful future for its
entire population. Our enthusiasm at the establishment
of South Sudan as an independent State should not lead
us to lose sight of the enormous challenges awaiting
the Government. We must be aware that it will require
sustained and generous support for its national
institutions and authorities.

Guided by the commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of

South Sudan, and based on the principle of national
ownership, the Security Council adopted resolution
1996 (2011), establishing the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan, which must serve as
an instrument of support to the national authorities in
exercising their primary responsibilities.

With the birth of the independent life of the
Republic of South Sudan, the transition period also
ends although significant issues of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement remain to be implemented. Also
outstanding is the resolution of a series of issues key to
the future of bilateral relations, to which many of my
colleagues have referred. In that regard, the two States
are called on to resolutely commit themselves firmly to
achieving agreements that allow peaceful and mutually
beneficial relations.

In conclusion, I wish to show my appreciation for
the role undertaken by the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel to implement the
recommendations for the Sudan, which, under the
leadership of President Thabo Mbeki, helped to reach
commitments and to overcome difficult moments
between the parties. The work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan,
Mr. Haile Menkerios, and the appointment of
Ms. Hilde Frafjord Johnson as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for South Sudan, to whom we
wish the greatest success in undertaking her
responsibilities, should also be highlighted.

I wish the new Republic of South Sudan good
luck.

