Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Djani for his briefing.

As we have been reminded too many times sitting
in this Council, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDS) and their means of delivery,
including to terrorists and other non-State actors,
remains a real and current threat. Today's briefing
reminds us of the critical importance of fully and
effectively implementing resolution 1540 (2004).
We welcome the renewed energy that the Indonesian
chairmanship brings to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We also applaud the
efforts ofthe 1540 Group ofExperts, the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs and the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs for their steadfast
efforts to support the effective implementation of
the resolution.

The United States has provided more than $4 million
towards the 1540 Trust Fund and hundreds of millions
of dollars and non-proliferation assistance to partner
countries. We will continue to provide support for this
effort and we encourage our international partners to
do the same.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is the only legally binding
instrument requiring United Nations Member States
to adopt controls to prevent WMD proliferation. We
encourage countries to engage the resources of the
1540 Committee. We call on the Committee to expand
its outreach efforts so that countries are better equipped
to identify WMD non-State actor vulnerabilities and
effectively address them.

Looking forward, the Security Council is required
to complete its comprehensive review of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) by 2020. As we prepare for
this effort, we encourage all States that have not yet
submitted their initial reports to do so without delay.
We encourage those States that have submitted their
initial reports to provide additional information on
further steps taken to implement the resolution since
the Committee's initial report.

We call upon States Members of the United Nations
that have not done so to appoint a national coordinator
or point of contact for the 1540 Committee and to
provide contact information for those designees to the
Committee. That will allow for a direct communication
network to be established between the 1540 (2004)
Committee and the community of relevant policymakers
throughout the Governments of Member States. We
also encourage States in need of assistance in relation
to implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) to submit
their requests to the Committee and to remain in touch
with the Committee as to the status of those requests.

As we look forward to the renewal of the mandate
of the 1540 Committee in 2021, we urge our fellow
Council members to adapt to evolving proliferation
threats that fall within the remit of resolution 1540
(2004). In particular, we should be mindful of emerging
technologies, such as unmanned aerial vehicles, which
could be used as a means of WMD delivery, and
synthetic biology, which is already reconfiguring the
way in which life scientists conduct their research.

The next two years will demonstrate the
effectiveness of resolution 1540 (2004). We should
seize this opportunity to add renewed momentum to
our implementation of the resolution. We call upon
the Secretariat to ensure that the Committee and, in
particular, the Group of Experts have the resources that
they need to recruit and retain the most talented capable
personnel available in pursuit of implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

I encourage my fellow members of the Council to
join us in making resolution 1540 (2004) as effective as
possible. The stakes are too high for us to do otherwise.

