Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to thank you, Sir, for having
convened this open debate under your presidency on
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. My delegation associates itself
with the statement made by the representative of Egypt
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. I also thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, for his briefing.

We have observed and closely followed the
negotiations launched on 2 September. We did not have
to wait long before seeing once again which party
would continue to create obstacles to peace in the
Middle East. The occupying Power was quick to
announce its intention to hold a referendum clearly
aimed at creating conditions surrounding any outcome
and at violating the Palestinians' right of return. In
addition, Israel made the illegal and provocative
decision to continue to build housing units in East
Jerusalem. The Israeli expansionist policy also
continues to include the demolition of Palestinian
homes. More serious still is the policy of violence and
xenophobia preached by the Israeli Government,
inciting its citizens to violence with the aim of
compelling the Palestinian Arab population to leave the
lands that are rightly theirs.

Nicaragua once again reiterates its condemnation
of the criminal blockade on the Gaza Strip and demands
that Israel meet its international obligations under
international law, in particular international
humanitarian law and United Nations resolutions. Israel
continues to collectively punish more than 1.5 million
Palestinians in Gaza, who live in that jail of 360 square
kilometres under an air, sea and land blockade.

After having murdered nine Turkish activists
aboard a humanitarian flotilla, the decision that Israel
took in June 2010 to reduce restrictions and allow the
entry of food and household goods was seen by some
as a good start. However, in the light of events, that act
was nothing more than a cosmetic touch-up of the
genocidal blockade and an attempt to divert public
attention from the situation.

The true aim behind the blockade is to keep the
people supposedly alive, but in reality keeping them
always on the brink of annihilation. The blockade also
cuts off a people's right to sustainable development.
Proof of that, to give just two examples, is that since
the start of the blockade, half of the agricultural land
has become inaccessible and lies fallow. Also, most of
Gaza's manufacturing facilities have closed their doors,
with unemployment estimated at 40 per cent.

Returning to the attack on the humanitarian
flotilla, with its characteristic impunity, Israel has
refused an international investigation and has qualified
the murder of those people as self-defence. Can the
illegal boarding of a humanitarian flotilla in
international waters be considered legitimate defence?
It not being enough to attack the humanitarian flotilla
in international waters, Israeli soldiers displayed the
most brutal violence and were not satisfied with
neutralizing their victims, but riddled them with
bullets.

Likewise, Nicaragua condemns the continued
violations of Lebanon's sovereignty in open violation
of the Council's resolutions, as well as all measures
and actions undertaken against the occupied Syrian
Golan, which must be returned immediately by the
occupying Power.

Nicaragua calls on all countries that have not
done so to recognize the State of Palestine, but in
particular on the Council's permanent members and
those other States involved in the peace process, which
have the greatest responsibility in that regard.

The General Assembly and the Council should
take concrete steps to fully recognize the Palestinian
State and its entry into this Organization as a full-
fledged Member. It is simply shameful that the
international community continues to favour the strong
over the weak and the occupier over the occupied. It is
unacceptable for the Organization to recognize a State
that resorts to violence as a national policy and not
recognize the Palestinian State, whose people have
sought for more than 60 years peace and freedom to
give their citizens a dignified life.

We must ask ourselves if Israel and its main ally
will really take the decision this time to bring about,
through dialogue and negotiation, the creation of a
Palestinian State within the 1967 borders or if,
respectively, they will continue to be victimizers and
accomplices to a genocide that has already lasted more
than six decades.
