Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to
thank you, Foreign Minister Judeh, for convening this
meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
update on the situation in Middle East.

In Syria, the total destruction of the country's
economic and social fabric, displacement and
starvation, increasing fragmentation, sectarianism
and the spread of extremism are the price of the
Government's failure, three years ago, to respond to its
people's peaceful demands for reforms. The effects of
the war in Syria are felt throughout the region, with
neighbouring countries struggling to accommodate
the refugee flows, and Al-Qaida affiliates and other
extremists using the crisis for their ends. The failure
to put an end to the extraordinary human suffering
and continuous massive violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law in Syria is deeply
troubling. We note the ongoing efforts, under extremely
challenging circumstances, aimed at the removal of
chemical weapons from Syria, and take note of the
Syrian Government's reassurances that it is fully
committed to the process.

At the same time, we stress that further delays in
the removal of chemical weapons, including the most
dangerous chemical agents, must be avoided. All
necessary equipment is in place. It is now up to the
Syrian Government to ensure that all chemical materials
are delivered to the port for removal. All parties to
the conflict have the responsibility to make sure that
the task is carried out on time and without incidents.
Furthermore, progress on the chemical-weapons track
must be accompanied by tangible and sustained progress
on the humanitarian track. Let us not forget that civilians
in Syria continue to die from the indiscriminate use of
heavy weapons, aerial bombing, including incendiary
barrel bombs, and mortar shelling. We condemn in the
strongest terms the ongoing violations of international
humanitarian law and strongly urge all the parties to
the conflict, in particular the Syrian authorities, to live
up to their legal obligations to protect civilians.

We also urge the warring parties to take all the
necessary measures to provide safe and unhindered
humanitarian access throughout the country, ensuring
the full and immediate implementation of the Security
Council presidential statement of 2 October 2013
(S/PRST/2013/15). We note the fact that some supplies
to places that have been sealed off for months, including
Camp Yarmouk, were allowed through in the past few
days. However, as Under-Secretary-General Valerie
Amos stressed in her latest report, such exceptions
should become the rule. We commend the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and other international humanitarian actors
for their efforts, under very difficult circumstances,
to provide relief assistance to the suffering population.
Lithuania has contributed before, and will continue
to do so, in response to the humanitarian needs of the
Syrian people.

In a couple of days, the second Geneva Conference
on Syria will offer a window of opportunity to end this
devastating war. We strongly urge all parties to fully
commit to the dialogue and prove that commitment
by their actions. The only solution to the conflict
is a genuine political transition in Syria, based on
the full implementation of the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). Syrian women must be part
of that solution. Their active participation must be
ensured at all stages of negotiation, reconciliation and
peacebuilding.

Let me turn briefly to Syria's neighbourhood. In
recent weeks, Lebanon has been shaken by a series of
terrorist attacks. Rocket fire and cross-border strikes
from Syria have caused casualties and are adding to
the tensions in the country. We appeal to the Lebanese
people to preserve their national unity, and appreciate
the policy of disassociation from the Syrian crisis. We
welcome the opening of the Hariri assassination trial
at the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. It is essential that
those who commit acts of terror be held to account.
Impunity cannot be allowed to continue.
The recent attacks in Anbar province and elsewhere
in Iraq, which claimed multiple lives, remind us of
the gravity of threat posed by terrorism. We express
our support to the Government of Iraq in countering
that threat. We appreciate the efforts of Iraqi security
forces, local police and tribal leaders aimed at defeating
Al-Qaida affiliates. At the same time, we stress the
importance of continued national dialogue and an
inclusive political process to ensuring the country's
long-term stability and security. We look forward to the
holding of free and fair elections in April.

Let me now turn to the Middle East peace process.

Lithuania strongly supports the current United
States-backed direct peace negotiations and commends
the personal involvement and commitment of Secretary
of State John Kerry. We applaud the political courage
and statesmanship shown by both Prime Minister
Netanyahu and President Abbas. That is a unique
opportunity for a breakthrough in the peace process,
which could lead to a viable two-State solution and
enable Israel and Palestine to live side-by-side in
peace and security. It is crucial, therefore, that both
parties - Israel and Palestine - refrain from any
unilateral actions that could undermine the negotiations.
In that context, new settlement announcements by Israel
could potentially be very damaging and could derail
the process. Rocket attacks from Gaza to Israel and the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Gaza are both a
great concern and do they not contribute to the peace
process. We underline the importance of the Arab
Peace Initiative in achieving peace in the Middle East.
All the relevant parties should do everything possible
to ensure that those negotiations succeed. Together
with our European Union partners, we look forward to
working with everyone to achieve a lasting success.

