The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Turkey.

Turkey has long-standing, direct experience with
terrorism. I would like to take this opportunity to
express our solidarity with all victims of terrorism
around the world and our sincere condolences to the
families of those who have lost their lives at the hands
of terrorists.

This unfortunate and painful experience has
taught us, among other things, the indispensable nature
of international cooperation in combating this scourge.
Indeed, terrorists operate across borders, exploit
opportunities and use every available technology
presented to them in today's globalized world. Efforts
to counter this threat therefore need to be firm,
coherent and adaptive.

The United Nations has a central role to play in
laying the groundwork to make that possible. Indeed,
through the adoption of a number of conventions,
protocols and resolutions the United Nations has
provided the international community with a sound
legal structure on counter-terrorism. Through those
instruments we have identified the relevant norms and
necessary measures to prevent and suppress terrorist
acts and to bring their perpetrators and facilitators to
justice.

However, there is still a regrettable and
significant gap between the objectives behind those
measures and the stark reality. It is therefore incumbent
upon us as members of the Council to make a candid
assessment of the nature of the ongoing shortcomings
and to search for remedies. That would constitute a
vital first step to re-energize international counter-
terrorism efforts. Let me cite a few areas of
shortcoming as we see them.

Criminal justice is one crucial case in point.
Victims of terrorism need to see that those who are
engaged in terrorist acts are punished. Terrorists, for
their part, should have no false expectation of
immunity from justice. However, terrorists are still
able to exploit loopholes in legal mechanisms, and at
times they manage to escape criminal justice before
our very eyes. For instance, the granting of asylum to
perpetrators or supporters of terrorism remains a
stumbling block to extradition. Therefore, while
upholding the rule of law, we need to remedy these
loopholes.

Terrorist financing is another important area
where much more needs to be done. Despite the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism and Council resolution 1373
(2001), this critical problem continues. It is particularly
in this area that terrorist organizations most exploit the
lack of a harmonized, coherent international approach.
The methods employed, such as extortion, fundraising
through front organizations and transfer of funds by
couriers, are well known. Against such activities, the
international community must have a uniform and
consistent approach that is effective and result-
oriented.

Another issue that merits particular attention is
the phenomenon of incitement to terrorism. Council
resolution 1624 (2005) calls on all States to prohibit by
law incitement to terrorist acts. However, there is an
increasing trend of terrorism-related propaganda.
Terrorist organizations benefit from freedoms inherent
in our societies and exploit them for their own
purposes, namely, to terrorize audiences and breed
radicalization and thus facilitate recruitment and
support. In fact, there are even examples of terrorist
organizations running television stations under
pseudonyms. We cannot allow basic democratic rights,
most notably the right to freedom of expression, to be
exploited for motives linked to the aims and purposes
of terrorist organizations. It is our shared responsibility
to prevent that and to do so without exception.

Having mentioned some implementation gaps, I
would now like to examine the underlying reasons for
our failure to close those loopholes that have persisted
for too long.

Let me start with the notion of political will. Let
us be candid: at times the lack of political
determination is where the problem lies. That cannot
be allowed. Our stance must not waver either in
rhetoric or action.

Lack of counter-terrorism capacity, particularly
lack of expertise and resources, is another big
challenge for many countries. Countries that have the
will but for one reason or other lack the capacity to
fight terrorism deserve our support. Turkey has
security agreements with over 70 countries with a View
to sharing experiences and building capacity. We will
continue our efforts in this vein and encourage others
to do the same.

As a key forum for developing global counter-
terrorism norms, the United Nations also plays an
important role in assisting the countries that should
implement these norms. We strongly commend and
support the capacity-building efforts of the relevant
United Nations bodies. I wish to mention in particular
the importance of the focused and regional approach
pursued by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate. We also appreciate the valuable
contributions of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime.

In fact, there is a growing need for enhanced
capacity-building and cross-regional cooperation to
strengthen the international counter-terrorism structure.
Such efforts should also be better coordinated among
the United Nations bodies and with other multilateral
stakeholders such as the World Bank, civil society and
the private sector. That is why we strongly support
strengthening the role of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force in this field.
Last but not the least, counter-terrorism activities
need to be conducted on a legitimate basis. Respect for
human rights and the rule of law are indispensable
elements of a successful counter-terrorism campaign.
We are pleased to note that United Nations bodies have
made concrete progress in this direction. In this
context, I should particularly mention Council
resolution 1904 (2009), which established the post of
an ombudsperson. However, the Council continues to
face criticism in this area. Therefore, it is the Council's
duty to underline time and again that security and
freedom are not conflicting objectives and that this is
not a zero-sum game.

The challenge before us is not limited to
remedying deficiencies in the present global counter-
terrorism framework. We should also proactively
debate emerging threats such as the increasing link
between terrorist groups and organized crime, the
advent of cyberterrorism and the spread of radical
ideologies. In doing so, we should also consider the
necessary steps to counter such challenges.

At this point I would also like to share my
conviction that the United Nations, particularly the
Security Council, needs to ensure that its focus goes
beyond combating terrorism. It should be more
comprehensive and focus on efforts geared towards
preventing terrorism as well. In doing so, the Council
can work closely with the General Assembly in
addressing conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism. In any case, the United Nations is the most
appropriate forum in which to develop ways and means
to address the comprehensive nature of these
challenges.

My remarks may imply daunting tasks for the
United Nations: asking it to bring various stakeholders
into play in counter-terrorism efforts, to provide
knowledge and expertise to Member States, to develop
global norms to address the evolving nature of
terrorism in a comprehensive manner, and to monitor
the implementation of these measures. Naturally, while
expressing such expectations for the United Nations, it
is also my duty to affirm my country's determination to
support those endeavours. The shared determination of
United Nations Member States leads me to be more
optimistic that success is possible and that terrorism
can and will be defeated.

I believe that the draft presidential statement to
be adopted at today's meeting will duly reflect our
resolve to retain counter-terrorism as a priority on the
agenda of the international community and to shed
light on particular aspects of counter-terrorism that
require more attention and new approaches.

Before concluding, I would like to thank the
members of the Security Council for their cooperation
and contributions to the preparation of this thematic
meeting and the presidential statement.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of the United States has asked
for the floor to make a further statement.

