Mr. Wittig (Germany) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express my gratitude to the Colombian
presidency for its initiative to organize today's meeting
on the situation in Haiti.
(spoke in English)

With Haiti currently in the final phase of the electoral
process, this debate is very timely. At this critical
moment, it is important that the Council reiterate its
clear message of support and solidarity with the people
of Haiti.

Your presence, Madame President, and that of
President Santos Calderon here today underscore the
great importance that your country, jointly with many
other countries, in particular from Latin America and
the Caribbean, attaches to helping the people of Haiti
recover from the horrific earthquake, which was
followed by devastating hurricanes and an outbreak of
cholera.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
his Special Envoy, former President William Jefferson
Clinton for their reports and briefings today. I was
impressed to learn of President Clinton's initiatives in
the field of economic recovery, especially the small
business initiative. I also wish to join my colleagues in
very warmly welcoming President Preval to the
Security Council. I would like to pay tribute to him for
steering his country through enormously difficult and
trying times, including a peaceful transfer of power.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later in this debate on behalf of the European
Union.

More than a year after the devastating
earthquake, the magnitude of the challenges that the
people of Haiti face remains daunting. The Council
will rightly reiterate that the ownership of, and the
primary responsibility for, recovery and reconstruction
lie with the Government and people of Haiti. At the
same time, we are all aware of the fact that this will
require sustained and well-coordinated support and
assistance from the international community.

The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) has a complex mandate, which it is
implementing in a pragmatic manner. We would like to
recognize Edmond Mulet's able leadership in that
regard, as well as to thank him and his team for their
unflagging commitment. I would also like to pay
tribute to his predecessor, the late Hedi Annabi, who
lost his life in the earthquake.

I would like to focus on three aspects where
MINUSTAH has an important supporting role to play,
namely, elections, security and reconstruction,
development and the rule of law. I should first like to
turn to elections.

The electoral process must be completed in a
peaceful, credible and legitimate manner. In the light of
the preliminary results of the presidential election, we
join the call on all political leaders in Haiti to live up
to their responsibilities, to contribute constructively to
an atmosphere of political dialogue, to help to heal the
wounds of the political battles of the past and to build
together a better future for their country.

Secondly, on security, MINUSTAH's continued
presence remains a prerequisite for the stabilization
and development of the country. We pay tribute to all
the men and women from the different nations
participating in this important United Nations Mission.
The security-related challenges are manifold, ranging
from gang violence, drugs and human trafficking to
sexual and gender-based violence. On the latter aspect,
we commend the United Nations for developing an
operational plan for strengthening women's security,
and MINUSTAH for launching a campaign aimed at
discouraging sexual violence. We urge all relevant
actors to continue all efforts aimed at enhancing the
protection of vulnerable groups.

Thirdly, on reconstruction, development and the
rule of law, for the future of Haiti and the
reconstruction and long-term development of the
country, it will be essential that Haiti succeed in
attracting private foreign investment.

Germany would like to express its sincere
gratitude to Special Envoy President Clinton for his
persistent efforts in helping the people of Haiti to
embark on that road of reconstruction and development
and to encourage the private sector to look at Haiti as
an investment opportunity. For these efforts to be
successful, the rule of law must be strengthened in all
areas of society and respected and implemented by all
relevant actors.

Institutional capacity and an adequate legal
framework are prerequisites for sustainable economic
development and an increase in foreign investment. We
commend Special Representative Edmond Mulet for
his initiative to realign resources in support of a rule-
of-law compact aimed at bringing the rule of law and
economic development together.

We also note the Secretary-General's call on all
international partners to work with the Government
and the United Nations in a concerted and cohesive
effort to strengthen the rule of law.

Madam President, in preparing today's debate,
the Colombian Government strongly supported a call
for the enhanced and effective coordination of all
international efforts for Haiti. We fully share your
sense of urgency on this issue and support any
initiative aimed at enhancing existing mechanisms for
coordination in line with the priorities of the Haitian
Government.

The United Nations, including the United Nations
country team and MINUSTAH, must continue to play a
fundamental role in this regard. In that context, we also
encourage the United Nations Coordinator for
Humanitarian Affairs to continue her coordination
efforts. All stakeholders, including the hundreds of
non-governmental organizations working in the field,
are called upon to continue to contribute constructively
to these efforts in order to make real progress possible.

In concluding, let me underscore that Germany
remains committed to assisting the people of Haiti,
both nationally and as member of the European Union.

