Mr. Hawke (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate and for your
efforts both as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and as
Council President.

I would also like to acknowledge and thank our
briefers for their expert insights.

Inspired by the current elected members' delivery
of a joint statement today, I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of 22 former elected Council
members from all regional groups, whose representatives
sat around this table between 2011 to 2018: Argentina,
Australia, Azerbaijan, Chad, Chile, Egypt, Guatemala,
Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lithuania, Malaysia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Portugal, Rwanda,
Spain, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine and Uruguay.

Getting working methods right is essential to the
work ofthe Council. It goes to the heart ofthe Council's
performance and accountability to the whole United
Nations membership and the Charter of the United
Nations. Good working methods create an environment
enabling each and every Council member to be fully
involved, contribute to informed discussions and play
a full and meaningful role in the Council's work. That
becomes even more important when there is disunity
in the Council and seemingly no space for a political
solution. With that, we want to talk to two issues.

The first is shared responsibility. The Council
comprises 15 members. All Council members should
have equal opportunity to exercise their Charter
obligations to uphold international peace and security.
That includes a balanced division of labour for
penholdership and the chairing of subsidiary bodies,
which we have worked hard to achieve during our
respective terms. It was not easy and the gains we
were able to secure were small. We risk that cycle of
behaviour repeating from tomorrow, when another
group of non-permanent members are elected to the
Council. We call on the permanent members to shoulder
the burden of chairing and share the pens that they hold.

The second issue is about how to better deliver on
the Council's conflict prevention role. That requires
doing the big and small things right as Council members,
including, first, requesting "Any other business" items
to ensure that emerging threats are addressed with the
right timing; secondly, inviting briefers who can deliver
insights to add value to the Council's deliberations;
thirdly, demanding appropriate briefings, including
maps and graphics, from Secretariat briefers to better
support discussions; fourthly, tailoring the format
and focus of meetings to secure the best chance of a
meaningful outcome from the Council's deliberations
and, when an outcome is reached, keeping the Council
accountable to it; fifthly, making better and more
frequent use of situational awareness briefings; and,
sixthly, ensuring that we are not just speaking about
countries concerned but also speaking to them.

I would like to end with a message to the current
elected members of the Council. We are encouraged
to see that they are continuing the legacy of elected
members and we urge them to continue to be brave.
Meaningful change, while enabled by rules and
procedure, is driven by taking the initiative and leading
by example.

