Mr. Kaludjerovic' (Serbia and Montenegro): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting and for providing the wider
United Nations membership with an opportunity to
contribute to the debate on the increasingly complex
issue of United Nations peacekeeping. I should also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his statement.
The presence at this morning's meeting of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan underlines the
importance of this discussion, as well as of Pakistan's
own role in many peacekeeping operations throughout
the world.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made earlier today the European Union. In the
framework of the excellent guidelines offered by the
presidency, I would like briefly, from our own national
standpoint, to focus on what has worked and what has
not worked in present-day United Nations
peacekeeping.

The United Nations is ever-more-frequently
launching peacekeeping operations of a far-reaching
and multidimensional nature. Some of them are
carried out alongside regional or multinational
authorized forces. Many are working in close
cooperation with regional organizations, thus offering
helpful opportunities to meet the challenges of
complex peacekeeping operations, given the
experience of such organizations in certain areas and
their ability to pursue a more local, sensitive approach.

For five years my country has been host to such
an operation - the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
Although officially a peacekeeping operation, UNMIK
is in effect a complex mission engaged in post-conflict
peace-building. Allow me, therefore, to speak of some
of the fundamental issues of peacekeeping that our
experience has highlighted.

By its very nature, peacekeeping is aimed at
achieving security with a view to creating a solid basis
for long-term stability. This is no trouble-free task. The
precarious security conditions in which peacekeeping
is generally conducted are particularly volatile in cases
of internal conflict, where armed elements are often
only partially under control and where there are many
spoilers who would exploit perceived United Nations
weaknesses to derail a peace process. However, there
can be little doubt that without security there will be no
stability and very little chance of building democratic
institutions.

Regrettably, security has not been achieved in
Kosovo and Metohija. After years of more or less
regular attacks on non-majority ethnic communities, in
March we witnessed a wave of organized, brutal,
ethnically motivated violence during which - in less
than 48 hours - many people were killed or injured,
KFOR and UNMIK personnel were severely attacked,
entire villages were burned and Christian religious and
cultural sites - many of which belong to the world
cultural heritage - were destroyed. The targets were
members of non-majority ethnic communities,
particularly Serbs.

Insecurity is further exacerbated by the large
quantity of small arms existing illegally in the
province. A small arms survey, entitled "Kosovo and
the Gun", commissioned in 2003 by the United Nations
Development Programme, found that the total holdings
of guns by civilians in Kosovo can be estimated at
between 330,000 and 460,000, almost all of them held
illicitly. Obviously, it is hard to envisage that as a
foundation upon which durable peace and a stable
democratic society can easily be built.

On a related issue, I would like to remind the
Council that resolution 1318 (2000), on ensuring an
effective role for the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
underlined the need for respect for human rights and
the rule of law. In addition, the Brahimi report
recommends a doctrinal shift in the direction of an
increased focus on strengthening rule-of-law
institutions and improving respect for human rights in
post-conflict environments. That is evidence of the
growing realization that the establishment of the rule of
law is a key aspect of peacekeeping operations, since
the experience of virtually all post-conflict societies
has shown that sustainable peace cannot be built in the
absence of the rule of law.

We believe that that essential aspect of
peacekeeping can determine the success or failure of
peacekeeping missions, because it constitutes the key
element of a strategy for the long-term settlement of
conflicts. This is clearly a difficult task. After the
March violence in Kosovo and Metohija, more than
200 perpetrators were arrested, but, to the best of our
knowledge, charges have been brought against very
few - if any - of them. Even before those events, no
perpetrators of ethnically motivated crimes - whether
murder, arson or any other crime - committed since
the establishment of UNMIK had been brought to
justice. The consequence is the establishment of a
culture of impunity surrounding violence against
minorities that further exacerbates insecurity and
reduces the possibility of the return of a quarter of a
million refugees and internally displaced people who
were forced to flee the province after the arrival of
UNMIK.

It is self-evident, therefore, that the focus on the
protection of human and minority rights necessarily
needs to be reinforced in peacekeeping operations.
Situations in which the basic right to life is not
established for non-majority ethnic communities are
clearly not an environment conducive to society-
building and inclusive discussions on major political
issues.

If long-term stability and durable political
settlements are the ultimate aim of United Nations
involvement in peacekeeping missions, then much
more resolve and consistency are needed in addressing
those issues, on the part not only of peacekeepers
themselves, but also and primarily, of the Security
Council that defines their mandates.

