Mr. Esono Angue (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I should like at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, for your exemplary leadership of this meeting of the
Council. I also express my appreciation and gratitude to
the Russian presidency for having convened this very
timely debate pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, which helps raise the profile of
the role of regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

We also appreciate the statements of Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres, Mr. Vladimir Norov,
Mr. Valery Semerikov and Mr. Sergey Ivanov, which
provide clear examples of how collaboration between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations can help strengthen global efforts to ensure
lasting peace and security and sustainable development.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea reaffirms that
terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations, constitutes
one of the most serious threats to international peace
and security and that terrorist acts are unjustifiable
crimes, whatever their motivation and wherever they
are committed. We also reaffirm in that regard the need
to combat terrorism by all means and with consummate
respect for the sovereignty of States and in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, including the applicable norms of human rights,
refugee and humanitarian law.

The continuous and persistent illicit flow to
non-State actors of weapons, especially small
and light weapons, contributes significantly to
exacerbating insecurity and violence in various parts
of our continent, undermining social cohesion, socio-
economic development and the effective functioning
of institutions. My country, Equatorial Guinea, was
the victim of an attempted terrorist act with political
and economic objectives in December 2017 involving
foreign elements that, had it been successful, would
have had dire consequences for the security and
stability of the entire Central African subregion given
its level of integration and interconnectedness.

We believe that the response to current challenges
to peace and security, especially terrorism, requires a
sustained and comprehensive approach that involves
active participation and collaboration, addressing the
root causes of the problem faced by all States and
international and regional organizations, in order to
stop, defuse, isolate and neutralize the terrorist threat.

The report of the Secretary-General on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations (S/2018/592) and the presentations we
have had the honour of hearing today have provided
clear examples of the advantages of cooperation
among such institutions, in particular for the various
regions, and, in this case, for the countries of Asia and
Eastern Europe, regions that are critical to the fight
against terrorism, whether in terms of peacebuilding,
the prevention of violent extremism and conflicts,
disarmament, the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction or, most especially, controlling the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters.

As established by the Charter ofthe United Nations,
the Security Council bears primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Recognizing the Council's leading role in that regard,
we would like to point out that, as the presentations
showed, collaboration between the Council and regional
organizations facilitates the exchange of information,
good practices and lessons learned, which are all key
elements for mounting a more effective collective
response in our shared struggle against terrorism.

Such initiatives help build trust among participating
States through coordination and mutual capacity-
building efforts in the fight against terrorism. Such
coordination also helps identify blind spots in the fight
against terrorism through a better understanding and
use of local knowledge and perspectives, which help
sustain political commitment at the regional level.

We recognize and encourage in that regard
the growing collaboration, among the regional
organizations of the United Nations, the offices of the
special representatives assigned to those regions, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the various
Security Council committees, to support the work of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Commonwealth of
Independent States in implementing the resolutions of
the Security Council and the General Assembly in the
fight against terrorism.

We believe that the experience in fighting terrorism
of the three organizations present here, which represent
a significant percentage of the world's population and
territory and of many of its States, are valuable for the
development and strengthening of similar initiatives
in other regions, especially in Africa. During the
presidency of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea in
February 2019, my delegation organized an open debate
on cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, on the theme "Silencing
the guns in Africa", which adopted a focus similar to
that of today's debate (see S/PV.8473).

We believe it is important to consolidate the
relationship between the Security Council and the
regional organizations and to make it more strategic.
Given the mobility of foreign terrorist fighters in Asia,
many of whom come from or return to Africa and
other regions, we encourage efforts by organizations
to coordinate with their counterparts in other regions,
in particular in Africa. We welcome in that regard the
collaborative efforts of the Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
with the African Centre for Studies and Research on
Terrorism of the African Union, and encourage similar
efforts be carried out to strengthen regional security
and stability.

We also note the global efforts ofthe member States
ofthe three organizations, such as those of Kazakhstan,
to strengthen the global fight against terrorism through
the Code of Conduct Towards Achieving a World Free of
Terrorism, of 2018, to which the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea had the honour of subscribing.

We believe in conclusion that it is crucial to
recognize the need to invest in the root causes of
terrorism and conflict and thereby in sustainable and
equitable development and peace, especially through
the empowerment of women, young people and the
most vulnerable communities. We will be able in
that way to construct a compelling narrative against
terrorism and violent extremism. We note that the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Commonwealth of
Independent States are taking that approach.

In line with Council press statement SC/13179, we

welcome further cooperation and coordination between
the United Nations and those organizations in order
to build the capacities of those regions to overcome
challenges with a View to achieving peace, stability
and the sustainable development of their peoples. We
encourage them to continue this important work so that
we can all learn to craft innovative collective responses
to the new terrorist threats.

