Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I, too,
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his briefing. Through
him, I would like to pay tribute to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for the
crucial role that it has played in support of the electoral
process in recent months. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, for his statement.

I associate myself with the statement to be made
during this debate by the observer of the European
Union.

At the most recent debate (see S/PV.7208), we in
this Chamber unanimously welcomed the determination
and outstanding courage of the millions of Afghan men
and women who went to the polls to contribute to the
future of their country in a democratic way. Today, it
is crucial that the hopes placed by the people in the
electoral process be heard and that the common desire
for peace and stability be taken into account.

We want to believe that the candidates for the
presidential election and their supporters will be able to
meet the challenge. More than ever, we call on them to
exercise restraint in their statements and their actions
and to make the interests of the Afghan people their
main priority. Specifically, we expect them, as they
have committed to doing, to accept the election results
and to form a national unity Government. There is no
other realistic way.

The national unity Government, once formed, will
face significant challenges. One of those is security. In
that area, the new administration must quickly make
decisions. In particular, it will be important to move
forward as quickly as possible in the establishment of
the legal frameworks necessary for the deployment of
future international assistance missions to the Afghan
National Security Forces. For its part, NATO once
again reiterated its firm commitment to supporting the
Afghan security forces beyond 2014 at the summit in
Newport at the beginning of this month.

Another challenge for Afghanistan is the economy
and the fight against poverty. The implementation
of economic reforms and close cooperation with its
regional partners will be essential to reviving the
economy and to improving the living standards of
Afghans.

A stable and prosperous society also rests on the rule
of law and human rights. In those areas, it is important
to recognize the progress made by Afghanistan over
the past decade without, however, losing sight of the
extent of the outstanding problems, in particular, that
of the status of women. In that respect, we urge the next
government to spare no effort to effectively implement
the law on the elimination of violence against women.
We advocate the improvement of women's rights in
Afghanistan as one of its priorities.

With regard to the protection of children's rights,
we welcome the agreement reached on 23 July on the
road map to accelerate the implementation of the action
plan against the recruitment and the use of children in
the Afghan National Security Forces. We encourage
UNAMA to keep the Security Council informed,
through its periodic reports, on the progress made by
the Afghan Government in the implementation of the
road map.

As we see in many conflicts, intensified fighting
is often associated with an increase in the number of
civilian casualties. That axiom is unfortunately true
also in Afghanistan. The civilian population continues
to bear the brunt ofthe conflict. Women and children are
paying a very heavy price, as the Special Representative
reminded us. We are appalled by the significant increase
of 24 per cent in the number of civilian casualties in
the first half of 2014 as compared to the same period
in 2013. Anti-Government forces are responsible for
three quarters of those civilian casualties. We want to
recall here that the parties to the conflict are obliged to
distinguish between civilians and combatants.

In conclusion, I would like to express our
gratitude to the staff of UNAMA for their unwavering
commitment in difficult conditions. It is essential that
UNAMA get the support needed to continue its work
alongside the Afghan people.

Echoing other colleagues, I would like to express
my delegation's appreciation to Jan Kubis for the
professionalism and remarkable skill with which he has
fulfilled his mandate as Head of UNAMA at a crucial
time for the Afghan transition. Through his work, he
has embodied the principles and values of the United
Nations. We warmly thank him for that and wish every
success to his deputy, Nicholas Haysom, who will
succeed him on 1 November.

