Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I,
too, welcome Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo Farid Zarif and
thank him for his briefing. I welcome as well His
Excellency Mr. Ivica Daeic', Prime Minister of Serbia,
and His Excellency Mr. Hashim Thaci, Prime Minister
of Kosovo, and thank them for their presentations.

On 3 November 2013, municipal elections were held
for the first time throughout the territory of Kosovo
under Kosovo law, in implementation of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations between Belgrade and Pristina. Despite
a few incidents, the commitment of political officials
on both sides and the significant support provided by
international partners, in particular the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union, ensured the success of the municipal elections,
including in the four municipalities in northern Kosovo.
We are confident that all the necessary measures will
be taken for the partial election of 23 February to
determine the mayor of northern Mitrovica also takes
place under the best conditions possible. Once that
phase has been completed, we encourage Serbian and
Kosovar leaders to reach an agreement as soon as
possible on the modalities for the establishment of Serb-
majority municipalities as. In so doing, the provisions
of the historic Agreement of 19 April 2013 will have
full effect.

In addition to the municipal elections, the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, facilitated
by the European Union, has led to progress in terms
of the progressive dismantling of parallel structures,
in particular within the police, and in terms of the
management of border crossings, with the introduction
of new procedures for the collection of customs duties.
We hope that the next round of the dialogue, to take
place in Brussels on 12 February, will be an opportunity
to make progress in the area ofjustice arrangements.

The normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina must necessarily be accompanied by the
energetic pursuit of reforms aimed at ensuring the rule of
law in Kosovo. The European Union Rule ofLaw Mission
(EULEX) continues to play a key role in three areas:
first, in helping the Kosovo authorities to strengthen
their institutions; secondly, in fighting organized
crime and corruption; and, lastly, in prosecuting the
perpetrators of war crimes and combating impunity
for the most serious crimes, including those related to
allegations of organ trafficking.

Luxembourg attaches particular importance to the
fate of the 1,721 people who are still listed as missing
since the end of the conflict in Kosovo. We welcome
the fact that, with the support of EULEX and in the
presence of the authorities of Kosovo and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), the Serbian authorities began excavation
work in December along the Rudnica road in the
municipality of Raska, Serbia, where a mass grave
was discovered. The case having been assigned to an
examining magistrate, we now encourage the recovery
of remains as soon as possible to allow the families of
the deceased to establish the fate of their relatives.

As important elections lie ahead in 2014, I wish
to pay tribute to the two Prime Ministers for their
perseverance and political courage. I also want to
congratulate the European Union High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Catherine
Ashton, for the skill and efficiency with which she
continues to facilitate the high-level dialogue. The
opening of European Union accession negotiations
with Serbia, on 21 January, and the continuation of
negotiations with a view to concluding a stabilization
and association agreement between the European
Union and Kosovo must inevitably encourage Belgrade
and Pristina to resolutely and irreversibly move towards
reforms and the normalization of their relations.

At the level of the Security Council, given the
new situation on the ground, which is characterized
by a lasting stabilization of the security situation and
increased involvement by the European Union, we share
the view voiced previously by our colleagues from the
United States, the United Kingdom, Jordan and France
that the time has come to review the frequency with
which the Security Council addresses the situation in
Kosovo and the activities of UNMIK. Undoubtedly,
there is a need to consider adapting the presence of the
international community on the ground in the medium
term. As the European perspective of Serbia and
Kosovo materializes in the years to come, the need for
United Nations involvement in Kosovo will diminish.
We call on the leaders and citizens of the two countries
to continue to demonstrate the necessary commitment
and courage to achieve their common European future.
Luxembourg is committed to supporting them along
that path.

