Mr. Al-Dosari (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his detailed report
on Sierra Leone, as well as his Special Representative,
Mr. Francis Okelo, who contributed to moving the peace
process forward in Sierra Leone. I would also like to thank
Mr. Olara Otunnu for the valuable additional information
which he provided us.

I would be remiss if I did not also express my
gratitude to the members of the United Nations Mission, as
well as to the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), under the
chairmanship of Nigeria. They have made considerable
material and human sacrifices in order to bring security and
stability back to Sierra Leone.

The civil war in Sierra Leone has had devastating
effects on the economy and infrastructure of this country -
a country which needs dozens of years and enormous
financial resources to recover. The war has also caused
unspeakable suffering to innocent civilians, particularly to
women and children. They were prey to all types of abuse,
as well as to deportation, and were deprived of basic means
of subsistence, as well as of decent living conditions. In
addition, they were exposed to various forms of torture and
death. These abuses were carried out by the rebel forces.

The report submitted to us by Mr. Olara Otunnu shed
light on the suffering endured by civilians in Sierra Leone,
which prompts us to call on the international community to
provide urgently needed financial assistance, as quickly as
possible, to assist the people of Sierra Leone to overcome
the suffering they are experiencing. There is also a need to
provide adequate protection for innocent civilians.

This mission must not turn into a new political
setback. If that were to take place, it would mean the
demise of any hope of restoring security and stability to
Sierra Leone. This is why we call on all the signatories of
the Lome Peace Agreement to scrupulously abide by the
letter and spirit of that Agreement, for this is the only
instrument available to us that can return peace and security
to Sierra Leone.

Here I would like to welcome the constructive efforts
made by the Government of Sierra Leone, headed by Mr.
Ahmad Kabbah, to relaunch the peace process and bring
about national reconciliation. We welcome the return to
Sierra Leone of Mr. Sankoh and Mr. Koroma, whose
mission will contribute to the implementation of the Lome
Agreement.

We hope that the new United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) will effectively assist the
parties to the conflict in the implementation of the Lome
Agreement and will allow for the restoration of peace and
stability. This is why we shall vote in favour of the draft
resolution. And here my country insists on the need for
the parties to respect the safety, security and freedom of
movement of members of the Mission, as well as of all
international staff, especially those from emergency
organizations.

