Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, on behalf of the Group of Arab States, which
the Sudan has the honour of chairing this month, allow
me to welcome you, Mr. Minister, as you preside over
the Security Council during this month of August. Let
me take this opportunity to congratulate your friendly
country on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month. We are confident that this
will represent yet another achievement in the list of
Colombia's diplomatic successes.

Allow us also to thank you, Sir, for your initiative
to convene this important meeting and for having
invited non-members of the Council to participate in
this debate. I should like also to take this opportunity
to thank the Permanent Representative of the People's
Republic of China for the outstanding and wise manner
in which he discharged his duties as President of the
Security Council last month.

Today's meeting is being held in the wake of the
recently concluded United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects. Your country, Mr. President, had the
honour of presiding over the Conference, in the person
of Ambassador Camilo Reyes. Ambassador Reyes
played a central role in the process and deployed major
concrete efforts, throughout difficult negotiations, to
reach a consensus on the text of the Programme of
Action to prohibit the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons in all its aspects.

The Programme of Action, through various
measures - national, regional and international - and
review mechanisms, has given the international
community a firm foundation for undertaking serious
efforts to combat the threat posed by the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons in all its aspects.

The implementation of the Programme of Action
will require intensive efforts by Member States, the
United Nations and relevant and international regional
organizations in order to undertake constructive
initiatives in implementation of the Programme's
objectives.

The Group of Arab States contributed to the
success of the Conference through many positive
proposals that promoted the possibility of, and
enhanced efforts to reach, a consensus. The Arab
Group, in this context, wishes again to express its
regret at the fact that the Programme of Action does
not contain a clear commitment by Member States to
export weapons only to Governments. That call was
made by all African States, in the light of the fact that
Africa is the continent most affected by the threat of
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons in the
hands of rebel groups, thereby threatening peace and
security in the continent. The importance of this
commitment can be clearly seen in the many conflicts
that the Security Council deals with on an almost daily
basis, in which these criminal groups work to
undermine security in the African continent.
Many of the statements made during the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects stressed that this
illicit trade was not a defining element of the nature of
the many emerging conflicts in many parts of the
world. However, such traffic does fuel existing wars.
Conflicts have their roots in the remnants of
colonialism; in economic, social and human conditions;
in ethnic strife; in the proliferation of poverty, debt,
illiteracy and infectious diseases in developing
countries, in particular the least developed countries; in
the glaring inequities in international, trade, and
economic relations between developed and developing
countries; and in situations of occupation, which lead
to political strife followed by military action.

The Arab Group believes, therefore, that all
efforts must be focused on dealing with these root
causes in order to put an end to the human suffering
caused by the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.

The Arab Group believes that issues relating to
disarmament fall within the mandate of the First
Committee of the General Assembly. That Committee
has adopted many resolutions on these questions. Our
Group believes that the role of the Security Council
must be a supporting one in respect of the efforts
undertaken by the General Assembly. We also hope
that the Security Council will fulfil its role in
coordinating with relevant bodies to mobilize resources
and expertise in order to implement the Programme of
Action on the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, as well as provide assistance to States in
implementing the Programme.

Nevertheless, our Group understands the
Council's interest in the threat posed by small arms and
light weapons, in the light of its role and responsibility,
as enshrined in the Charter, for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and considering also
the interlinkage between the proliferation of these
small arms and light weapons in the conflict zones that
the Council deals with.

All of these challenges are underlined in the
Programme of Action, which also encourages the
Security Council to consider the inclusion, on a case-
by-case basis, of appropriate measures relating to
disarmament, demobilization, resettlement and
reintegration in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations.

The Arab Group hopes that any measures taken
by the Security Council in future on the subject of
small arms and light weapons will be in line with the
provisions of the Programme of Action. We hope that
the Security Council will give due consideration to the
fundamental right of States to self-defence, in
accordance with Article 51 of the Charter, which
implicitly gives States the right to acquire weapons to
defend themselves and to establish their own defence
systems.

The Security Council is also called upon to
respect the right to self-determination of peoples under
colonialism or other forms of foreign domination or
occupation. We express the hope that the Council will
strictly abide by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, including the sovereign
equality of all States, their territorial integrity, the need
to resolve disputes by peaceful means and non-
intervention in the affairs of other States.

The Programme of Action stresses that efforts
pertaining to small arms and light weapons must not
encroach on priorities related to nuclear disarmament
and to those pertaining to weapons of mass destruction
and conventional weapons.

In this regard, the Arab Group hopes that the
Security Council will give due consideration to nuclear
disarmament and to weapons of mass destruction,
which are a genuine threat to humankind and are
closely linked to international and regional peace and
security. These priorities are set forth in the final
declaration of the 1978 General Assembly special
session devoted to disarmament, which stressed that
utmost priority be given to nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction, and then to conventional
weapons.

The threat of such weapons is clearly seen in the
grave situation in the Middle East, where Israel
possesses weapons of mass destruction. The world
witnesses daily the excessive use of military force by
the Israeli occupation forces against an unarmed
Palestinian people struggling for its right to self-
determination.

In conclusion, the Group of Arab States pledges
to continue its efforts and contributions to combat the
threat of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, in the United Nations and in all other
relevant international and regional organizations, and
to support the review conference in 2006 and other
meetings devoted to reviewing the progress made
nationally, regionally and internationally in
implementing the Programme of Action.
