Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
welcome Foreign Minister Yun Byung-se to the
Security Council today, and I thank the Mission of the
Republic of Korea for organizing today's important
debate and for Korea's leadership of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) as we
work together towards the comprehensive review of the
implementation of the resolution in 2016. I also thank
the Deputy Secretary-General for his introductory
statement.

Ten years ago, we adopted resolution 1540 (2004).
Since that day, non-State actors have not acquired
weapons of mass destruction, indicating that the
resolution has been effective. But we cannot rest on
that as a measure of our success. We know that terrorist
groups want to and intend to obtain weapons of mass
destruction. As Thomas Jefferson said, "The price of
liberty is eternal vigilance". That is why States must
continue to implement resolution 1540 (2004) with
the same vigour and commitment as when we first
adopted it. Universal compliance with resolution 1540
(2004) is an essential component of the international
non-proliferation response. The United Kingdom
therefore strongly supports the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its work to
achieve full implementation of the resolution. We will
continue to do our part to bring that about.

On 20 December 2013, the United Kingdom
submitted our fourth national implementation report
and our first national action plan to the 1540 Committee.
Under our 2013 presidency of the Group of Eight's
Global Partnership against the Spread of Weapons and
Materials of Mass Destruction we hosted an outreach
event for non-reporting States, involving two of the
1540 Committee experts. Some of the States attending
have since submitted their first reports.

The United Kingdom also supports the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in its work with
a number of States. Through our Counter-Proliferation
Strategic Programme Fund we have hosted outreach
and awareness-raising workshops to help States
develop domestic legislation that meets resolution 1540
(2004) requirements. That fund has also enabled us
to collaborate with Canada and Indonesia to produce
a national legislation implementation kit on nuclear
security. We hope that other States find that kit useful
in ensuring that their domestic legislation is in line with
the requirements of resolution 1540 (2004).

The value ofthe 1540 Committee's Group ofExperts
cannot be underestimated. In addition to performing the
vital role of collating requests and offers of assistance,
the 1540 Committee and its experts conduct country-
specific visits to grasp the challenges of national
implementation and to guide States towards sources of
assistance. That direct engagement has increased the
number of reporting States. I encourage Member States
to take the initiative to reassess their compliance with
the resolution, for example with greater use of peer-to-
peer review. I also encourage the Committee to work
with a range of actors, including industry, civil society,
academia and the private sector, to support States in
their implementation of the resolution.

Much has been achieved in the past ten years. To
date, 172 States have submitted their national reports
on the implementation of the resolution voluntarily,
and the number of non-reporting countries continues
to decrease. I take this opportunity to urge the
21 States yet to submit national implementation reports
to the 1540 Committee to do so as soon as practical.
Of those 21 States, 17 are in Africa. The reports are
not as onerous as States may fear, and assistance is
available in preparing them, including from the Panel
of Experts and from regional partners. As we enter the
second decade of the resolution, we must look for new
and innovative ways to increase effective practices
to support the resolution and to ensure that non-State
actors never acquire weapons of mass destruction.

