I thank the South African presidency of the Security Council for this opportunity to brief the Council today on the situation in the Sudan. Since my last briefing in September (see S/PV.8761), the Sudan has made progress in its democratic transition. The Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan between the transitional Government, the Sudan Revolutionary Front alliance and the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi faction was signed on 3 October and enshrined in the Constitutional Document on 2 November. The amended Constitutional Document extends the transitional period to 39 months from the date of signature of the Juba peace agreement. It expands the membership of the Sovereign Council from 11 to 14 members and provides for the signatories to select 25 per cent of ministerial portfolios and 75 seats out of the 300 in the Transitional Legislative Council. It also provides for the establishment of the Council of Partners for the Transitional Period and exempts representatives of the signatories from the ban on running for office in elections that will follow this period. The formation of the Transitional Legislative Council has now been postponed until 31 December. All political stakeholders will need to engage in constructive consultations to ensure the creation of an inclusive and representative body that reflects the diversity of the Sudan's social and political landscape and includes significant representation of women. Despite the progress observed, political forces are increasingly fragmented. Disagreements have surfaced particularly over the mandate and functions of the Council of Partners for the Transitional Period that was established on 1 December. Key political stakeholders expressed concern that the nominally advisory and coordination body may have been given additional powers that would undermine those of other transitional institutions. While initially supportive, the Council of Ministers and the Forces for Freedom and Change subsequently rejected the suggested authority of the Council of Partners and its current composition and deplored the lack of women and youth representation. The Council of Ministers also called for the swift formation of the Transitional Legislative Council, emphasizing its exclusive power of oversight and accountability, and its role in guiding the transitional period. I hope that consensus can be found to ensure the functioning of clearly defined transitional institutions that are inclusive and effective. I also echo the transitional Government's call for the swift formation of the legislative body pursuant to the Constitutional Document. Let me note that while the transitional authorities have committed to the promotion of gender equality, women remain underrepresented in transitional structures. There are only three women among the Cabinet's 18 ministers, and the Council of Partners has only one female representative. I welcome the efforts of women's organizations to develop a common agenda in promoting the inclusion of women. The equal right to political participation and representation of women in decision-making at all levels of the transition is an integral part of democratization. I commend the transitional Government's efforts in relation to legal reforms that promote gender equality. The dire economic situation continues to cast a dark and long shadow over all the foregoing efforts. Restrictions occasioned by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), including the five-month-long shutdown to prevent the spread of the disease resulted in a severe decline in economic activity and a loss of approximately 42 per cent of State revenues. Given the Sudan's arrears, the country has been unable to avail itself of debt relief. The increased spending on emergency health programmes, coupled with a decline in public revenues, has led to a budget deficit of approximately $250 million per month. Rampant inflation and exchange rate fluctuations are negatively affecting the amounts of funding available for programme delivery. Further, the inflation rate increased to 229.85 per cent in October, negatively affecting United Nations agencies' and partners' operations. On 19 December, we will mark the second anniversary of the revolution in the Sudan. Demonstrations continue to intermittently occur across the country because of the economic crisis, voicing demands for Government reform and rejection of the amendments to the Constitutional Document. Some have been accompanied by loss of life and injuries. The COVID-19 pandemic has further aggravated humanitarian needs, which have also been driven by severe flooding, intercommunal violence and prolonged displacement. In recent weeks, over 48,000 people have fled the conflict in the Tigray region of Ethiopia and sought refuge in the Sudan, which has put an additional strain on the Sudanese authorities. In the International Monetary Fund's staff-monitored programme, which was signed in September, the transitional Government agreed to implement the removal of subsidies and undertake macroeconomic reforms, which have caused serious hardships for the population in the short term. It is critical that the international community continue supporting the country's economic recovery through funding the basic income cash transfer programme known as the Sudan Family Support Programme, which is intended to mitigate the social impact of the transitional Government's economic reform agenda. I once again welcome the intention of the United States to rescind the Sudan's designation as a State sponsor of terrorism, a change that will facilitate the country's access to critical international financial assistance. I also welcome the commitment of President Emmanuel Macron of France to holding an international economic conference in Paris next year in support of the Sudan. After a thorough planning process involving the United Nations system, the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), began to deploy to Khartoum in October. The team is now continuing its consultations with transitional authorities regarding priorities for this time-bound mission. The transitional Government has underscored the need for UNITAMS to have a light footprint, which is how the Mission has been configured. The Mission will focus on the four objectives outlined in resolution 2524 (2020): assisting the political transition; supporting peace processes; bolstering peacebuilding, civilian protection and the rule of law; and promoting the mobilization of economic, development and humanitarian assistance. The Mission will provide good offices, technical support and capacity-building. It will also leverage the work of the United Nations country team. UNITAMS is headquartered in Khartoum but will establish field offices in Darfur, the Two Areas and Eastern Sudan. Let me stress that UNITAMS will be a fully integrated Mission, and the Mission staff and the United Nations country team are now developing an integrated strategic framework and coordination structures to maximize United Nations support and effectiveness. Our goal is for UNITAMS, together with the country team, to begin delivering on all the Mission's strategic objectives by | January 2021. As the Mission establishes itself, we count on the transitional Government's continued support. In that regard, I urge the transitional Government to finalize the status-of-mission agreement for UNITAMS. UNITAMS is also working closely with the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in anticipation of its drawdown. The protection of civilians remains a concern, especially for women and children, who face a multitude of risks in areas still under the control of armed groups. The protection of civilians will be the responsibility of the transitional Government, but UNITAMS will provide support and help to create a protective environment for vulnerable populations. I welcome the steps the Government has taken to address that issue, including through the formulation of a national plan for civilian protection and the announcement that 12,000 members of a protection force will be deployed to Darfur. National and local authorities have made a strong commitment to ensuring basic security and protection across the Sudan. UNITAMS will support the transitional Government by helping to create a protective environment. Joint UNAMID-UNITAMS teams are conducting assessment visits focused on the protection of civilians to ensure that lessons learned from UNAMID are applied and sustained. UNITAMS will have child protection advisers, women's protection advisers, human rights officers and police trainers to support the transitional Government's efforts. However, the effective protection of civilians can be achieved only through the Sudan's own efforts. Key to such efforts will be the implementation of the Juba peace agreement, which is a major step towards ending years of conflict in the country, addressing the root causes and building sustainable peace. The Sudan is at a critical juncture. It can move forward decisively in its transition, but that process could still be derailed by the many challenges it faces. It is incumbent on all of us to support the Sudan in its efforts to achieve democratic governance, economic prosperity and an inclusive society for all Sudanese people.
