The President: I wish to warmly welcome
the Secretary-General, the Ministers and other
representatives present in today's meeting. Their
participation is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil,
Canada, Cote d'Ivoire, Cyprus, Denmark, Ethiopia,
Germany, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Kazakhstan, Mexico, Morocco, Pakistan, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic ofKorea, Rwanda, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, South Africa, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey
and Uganda to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Her Excellency
Ms. Amina Chawahir Mohamed, Cabinet Secretary
for Foreign Affairs and International Trade of Kenya
and Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission; and His
Excellency Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Carl
Hallergard, Minister Counsellor ofthe Delegation ofthe
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/586, which contains a letter dated
1 July 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Japan to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

