Mr. Gracia Aldaz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate the New Zealand presidency for bringing
before the Security Council the topic of the security
challenges facing of small island developing States
(SIDS). As stated in the final document of the United
Nations Conference On Small Island Developing
States, the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
Pathway, SIDS represent a special case with respect to
sustainable development because of their unique and
particular vulnerabilities. Spain is well aware of this,
which is why I wanted to participate personally in this
debate. In my own contribution, I shall try to address
the security challenges that these countries face and to
provide a Spanish view on the matter.

The year 2015 is key for international development
agenda. The lengthy process of debates that are leading
to the definition of the post-2015 agenda as a universal
and transformative agenda has led the international
community to focus its consideration on aspects that
go beyond the traditional sectors of development.
At the heart of this reflection is the importance of
understanding how, in today's world, the threats to
development and peace are interconnected.

The consequences of climate change, particularly
sea-level rise, represent a significant obstacle to SIDS
in their efforts to achieve sustainable development. But
also they pose a serious threat to their own survival
and viability and the security of their populations.
Similarly, and as recently revealed by the dramatic
impact of Cyclone Pam on Vanuatu and other countries
in the region, the increased frequency and severity of
extreme weather events has had serious consequences
for safety.

It is quite legitimate for small countries, whose
responsibility for greenhouse gas emissions has been
minimal, to call upon the international community to
take responsibility for tackling climate change. We
hope that at the coming Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, to take place in Paris in December of this year,
we will be able to reach a comprehensive, global and
legally binding agreement that is ambitious in terms
of emissions-reduction, duly takes into account the
adaptation needs of the most vulnerable countries, and
upholds the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities commensurate with the respective
capacities of nations, bearing in mind the different
national circumstances.

The result of Spain's commitment in that regard
was the convening on 30 June, together with the
Permanent Mission of Malaysia, of an Arria Formula
informal meeting ofthe Security Council to analyze the
role of climate change as a threat multiplier affecting
international peace and security. The United Nations
Deputy Secretary-General, six ministers, a large
number of Permanent Representatives and a robust
showing of civil society representatives participated
in that meeting. That gave us the space to take stock
of the extent to which the international community
acknowledges that the growing consequences of climate
change have clear implications on international security
and especially on the SIDS. During the meeting, there
were multiple calls for an updated version of the 2009
Secretary-General's report entitled "Climate change
and its possible security implications" (A/64/350) to be
made prepared. That is something that we support once
again today.

The challenges faced by SIDS are a priority for
Spain's cooperation policy, as evidenced by the active
participation of our Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation in the Third International Conference
on Small Island Developing States, which took place
last year in Samoa. For that reason, Spain has signed
memorandums of understanding with 13 SIDS countries
to support cooperation projects funded by Spain and the
United Nations Development Programme Fund, aimed
at attaining the sustainable development goals and by
the Fund for Humanitarian Aid of the Spanish Agency
for International Cooperation and Development.

Through that support Spain addresses the
specific needs and priorities of each country in areas
such as combating climate change, strengthening
response-capacity to natural disasters, strengthening
capacities in the health sector and ensuring adequate
water supply. Commensurate with all of this, Spain
has contributed €1 million in conncection with the
memorandum sponsored by Italy, together with other
countries, which was set up to finance priority actions
for SIDS in the area of boosting their resilience to the
impacts of climate change.

Insecurity, piracy, drug trafficking, violence
and transnational organized crime also pose a
serious threat to SIDS, putting at risk their security,
hampering the normal day-to-day functioning of their
public institutions, undermining respect for human
rights, damaging economic sectors that are crucial to
growth, and negatively impacting their development
perspectives.

It is essential therefore to dovetail the efforts
of the international community and the United
Nations - particularly the efforts of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Vienna - to
help those countries to reduce their levels of criminality
and their exposure to illicit trafficking. Aware of that
need, Spain has been supporting cooperation projects
in the Caribbean to prevent violence and youth
marginalization. In a similar vein, we participated
in the Caribbean Basin Security Initiative and have
participated in the group of donors for security issues.
Spain, with its thousands of kilometres of coastline and
a geographical position that often makes us a gateway
to Europe for illicit traffickers, is more than willing to
make available its experience in the area of monitoring
its national waters and airspace to the SIDS.

We are aware that the oceans and the seas, as well
as their marine and coastal resources, are a core element
of the identity and of the economy of SIDS, and we are
therefore aware of the importance of preserving that
heritage. For Spain the fight against illegal, unreported
and undocumented fishing is a priority, whose adverse
impact on the conservation and management of fishery
resources is, in our view, unacceptable. Spain has
an unwavering commitment to the sustainability of
fisheries resources, which is reflected in the way we
manage our own national fishing fleet, which is held to
the highest standards of monitoring and compliance in
the world. In a similar vein, 1 am delighted to announce
that next October Spain will host a meeting in the city
of Vigo celebrating the twentieth anniversary of the
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization
Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, an event
whose goal is to foster a debate on the need to adopt a
future strategy that would guarantee the sustainability
of fisheries.

Our election campaign for the Security Council was
based on dialogue, partnership and commitment. To
implement those principles we have made transparency
and accountability our standards, and they have guided
our actions within the Council since becoming an
elected member. In order to live up to both of those
principles we held numerous meetings with SIDS
throughout our election campaign, in which we were
able to hear clearly what their priorities and concerns
were. And we are very aware today, more than ever,
that it is vital that the international community robustly
support these States in order to help them to effectively
overcome the aforementioned vulnerabilities. For that
reason, I want to conclude my statement by reiterating
Spain's implacable commitment to standing with the
SIDS in their fight to achieve sustainable development
in all three of its dimensions: peace, security and
development.

