Mr. Fulci (Italy): Since I have not had the personal
opportunity to do this before, allow me, Sir, to congratulate
you most warmly on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of May, which you are
exercising with your well known and highly appreciated
ability, wisdom and complete impartiality. I also wish to
express my country's and my personal warm appreciation
to your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Chile,
Ambassador Juan Somavia, for his very successful
presidency in the month of April and for having organized
during that month, in such a gracious and effective way, an
informal meeting between the President of the Republic of
Italy and the 15 members of the Security Council.

I have the honour to speak in my capacity as the
representative of the presidency of the European Union.
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania and Slovakia associate
themselves with this statement.

This is the second time in 1996 that events in Liberia
have prompted the Security Council to address the issue in
the framework of a public debate. In January, the

 

deteriorating situation on the ground had led the Council
to warn the parties that the increasing level of violence
would jeopardize the peace process. In the light of the
recent fighting in the country, it appears today that this
prediction was even too optimistic. The Abuja Agreement
of August 1995, which raised our hopes for a positive
outcome of the Liberian peace process, seems now more
distant than ever.

Is there still a chance for peace in Liberia? We do
not have the answer to that question, but after nearly two
months of fighting, looting, harassment of United Nations
and international personnel and human rights violations,
the prospects seem very gloomy indeed. In Liberia a few
men are holding an entire population hostage, protracting
the suffering of scores of women, children and men
beyond human understanding.

Our message to the Liberian warring factions is short
and clear: we reiterate the call for an immediate cease-fire
and we demand that they return to the Abuja peace
process. We have exhausted our appeals to those who
have once more plunged the country into chaos and
Violence, also threatening the stability of the West African
region.

We want to make it clear that we do not intend to
extend recognition to any Government established through
the use of force.

The situation in Liberia reminds us of what
happened in Somalia not long ago. There too, the
international community tried to contribute to the search
for peace only to find that the struggle for power was the
overwhelming concern of the faction leaders and was
much more important to them than the well-being of the
people. We sincerely hope that the stubborn will of the
Liberian warlords to continue their fight will not force the
international community once again to withdraw from an
African country which is in desperate need of help. As
the Secretary-General says in his report, this could be
catastrophic not only for the country but also for the
subregion as a whole. In this respect, we note the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the mandate of
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)
be extended for three months.
The European Union and its member States have so
far been among the major providers of relief assistance to
Liberia. Today the continued fighting and the level of
insecurity are preventing delivery of assistance. We can
only say that we remain committed to assisting the
civilian population. Yet we cannot but repeat that such
support will depend on the return of a safe and secure
environment.

 

In 1992 the Security Council, by resolution
788 (1992), imposed an embargo on all shipments of
weapons and military equipment to Liberia. Under
resolution 985 (1995), all States have the obligation to
bring all instances of violations of the arms embargo before
the Committee established by that resolution. It is clear that
the embargo is continually violated. We wish to appeal to
all countries to launch in-depth investigations into the flow
of arms into Liberia. As long as the factions can arm
themselves there will be no real possibility of attaining a
long-lasting peace in Liberia.

We reiterate our support for the strenuous efforts of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and its Chairman, President Rawlings, to
achieve peace. The agreement signed in Abuja in August
1995, which in our View still provides the central
framework for the peace process, was successfully brokered
by ECOWAS. It is only through the ongoing commitment
of the neighbouring States that peace in Liberia has a
chance to prevail. We therefore express the hope that the
next summit of ECOWAS States will yield positive results.
We also agree with the Secretary-General's assessment that
the ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) lacks the
resources and adequate structure to carry out its
responsibilities effectively.

Finally, we cannot but underline the direct and
personal responsibility of the Liberian warlords on this
issue. Not only is it their responsibility to restore peace, but
they should also be warned that the international
community will hold them responsible for the breaches of
human rights and humanitarian law committed in the
country, as reported in the Secretary-General's report.

