Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank those who have called for this briefing
for the information they provided.

In order to prevent the situation from further
deteriorating, we call on all Council members to work
together to foster a peaceful solution to the crisis.
We call for violence to be avoided at all costs. In that
regard, I would like to make three points - first, the
importance of full humanitarian access in accordance
with humanitarian principles; secondly, the need to
launch as soon as possible a peaceful political process
that paves the way towards free and transparent
presidential elections; and, thirdly, an appeal to protect
Venezuelan citizens from all forms of violence.

First, it is clear that the situation in Venezuela
constitutes a humanitarian crisis, as we just heard from
the briefers. Approximately 25 per cent of Venezuelans
are in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. Those
segments of the population most affected include people
suffering from chronic health problems, pregnant
women, young children and indigenous populations.
We must do everything in our power to alleviate the
suffering of those vulnerable groups.

Belgium calls on all actors to allow and facilitate
safe, rapid and unhindered access for humanitarian
supplies and personnel in the country. We recall the
need to respect the principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence in the provision of
humanitarian assistance, and we stress how it important
it is that such assistance be provided according to needs-
based criteria and not used to achieve political ends. I
also commend the efforts of the United Nations and all
humanitarian and medical personnel in Venezuela, as
well as those of other partners, such as the European
Union, which my colleague from France mentioned.

Secondly, in the absence of a political solution,
the humanitarian situation will continue to deteriorate.
Belgium reiterates its call for the early launch of a
peaceful political process that paves the way towards
the holding of free and transparent presidential elections
and reconciliation in Venezuela. As I have already
said on several occasions, the May 2018 presidential
elections were neither free and fair nor creditable, and
thereby stripped the Government of Nicolas Maduro of
its democratic legitimacy.

We support Juan Guaido in his endeavour to
organize the holding of free, fair and democratic
presidential elections. The European Union, together
with countries ofthe region, has set up the International
Contact Group, which aims in particular to create the
necessary conditions for the holding of presidential
elections in the near future. I call on all stakeholders
to demonstrate their full commitment to that initiative.

In that regard, Belgium is concerned about reports
of an increase in foreign military aid to the Maduro
regime, the goal of which is far from clear. As I
have already said, Belgium advocates for a peaceful
resolution of the situation in Venezuela, and the presence
of foreign security forces will not help achieve, but is
diametrically opposed to, that goal.

Thirdly, we call for the protection of Venezuelan
citizens from all forms of violence. The Venezuelan
people have the right to express themselves without fear
of political persecution. The intimidation of members
of the press and civil society is unacceptable. Belgium
urgently calls for full respect for the rights provided in
the Constitution and for the immunity of all members
of the National Assembly, including its President. Their
civil rights, freedom and physical integrity must be
respected at all times. They must be able to carry out
their functions without any form of intimidation.

In conclusion, I thank the countries of the region
for their support for Venezuelan refugees and migrants,
especially Colombia, represented here today by
its Minister.

