Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): May I join others
in expressing our condolences to the delegation of
Afghanistan on the tragic earthquake that has struck
their country very recently. I might also thank Norway
for convening this open debate, which we consider a
very timely initiative.
New Zealand welcomes the progress that has
been made in bringing Afghanistan back into the
community of nations. Without the tireless efforts of
the United Nations, in particular those of the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, the landmark Bonn
Agreement and the installation of the Interim
Administration in Kabul, this would not have been
possible. While the situation clearly remains fragile
and dangerous, we should acknowledge at the outset
the important steps that have been taken in the
rehabilitation of Afghanistan. With the continued help
of the international community, we hope that the
Afghan people will be enabled to secure a more
peaceful and prosperous future.

The next major step in the programme foreseen in
the Bonn Agreement will be the convening of the
emergency Loya Jirga in June. In the period leading up
to that very significant date, we expect that the Interim
Administration will step up its programme of
integrating the work of regional and provincial
authorities with its own. High on the agenda for the
new governing structure should be the establishment of
the commissions on judicial affairs and human rights,
including the rights of women.

For its part, the United Nations is seeking to
bring together its own functions in Afghanistan under
the proposed United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). New Zealand very much
welcomes the Secretary-General's proposals in his
report for the structure and functioning of UNAMA
and this first use of the concept of an integrated
mission task force. When implemented, it will certainly
stand as a tribute to Special Representative Lakhdar
Brahimi, who proposed the concept when he was the
United Nations special adviser on peacekeeping.

In its response to the crisis in Afghanistan, New
Zealand has sought to provide effective emergency
assistance to the Afghan people. Our initial response to
the crisis was focused on the urgent humanitarian needs
of refugees who reached our shores. We subsequently
made a contribution of one million New Zealand
dollars to the United Nations Consolidated Appeal for
Afghanistan and have provided a quarter of a million
New Zealand dollars for New Zealand non-
governmental organizations to assist their work in
Afghanistan.

At the Tokyo Conference on Reconstruction
Assistance to Afghanistan, New Zealand pledged that
we would remain engaged in the international aid effort
to assist in the reconstruction of Afghanistan. We have
followed up this pledge by announcing in the past week
a further contribution of 600,000 New Zealand dollars
for reconstruction efforts. New Zealand's contribution
to these reconstruction efforts will be directed to
projects identified in the Immediate and Transitional
Assistance Programme for the Afghan People and
through a further allocation towards New Zealand non-
governmental organization activities in Afghanistan.

These contributions demonstrate New Zealand's
firm commitment to support the Afghan Interim
Authority and the Afghan people in their reconstruction
efforts after nearly two decades of tragic war and
upheaval. We stand ready to play our part in the
reconstruction effort in partnership with the
international community and with the Afghan people.

Clearly, a critical element for achieving a lasting
peace is a successful demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration programme. New Zealand experience,
particularly in the Pacific, suggests that this
programme should be integrated into the mission and
addressed as part of the wider political process.
Finding alternative activities for former combatants
will be crucial.

New Zealand has also contributed personnel to
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
is the only country outside Europe so far to do so. In
doing this, we have demonstrated a commitment to
Afghanistan's stability and security. In the event that a
decision is made to extend the mandate of ISAF
beyond Kabul, New Zealand hopes that additional
countries will join in the security operation. Only in
stable and secure conditions will the personnel
assigned by UNAMA to the seven regional centres
outside Kabul be able to function effectively. New
Zealand has long pressed for adequate measures to
ensure the safety of United Nations personnel. In our
View, the safety of UNAMA's regional personnel, as
well as that of the Afghan population outside Kabul,
needs to be taken into account in decisions on the
future role and scope of ISAF.

