Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In recent weeks, we have repeatedly voiced
at the Security Council and at the General Assembly
our assessment of the activities of International
Criminal Court (ICC). They largely have to do with the
Darfur investigation.

We have taken note of the twenty-third report of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court on
the investigation into the situation in Darfur. We were
surprised at the tone used by the Prosecutor in addressing
demands to the Security Council for so-called follow-
up to the referral of the situation in Darfur. We expect
from the ICC Prosecutor detailed reporting on her work,
rather than some sort of assessment of the activities of
the Security Council, its authority and positions. We
consider it inappropriate to attempt to bring influence
to bear on the Council. All this ones again makes one
wonder about the point ofthis kind of dialogue between
the Security Council and the ICC.

It should be noted that there is no consensus, even
among State parties to the Rome Statute, when it comes
to implementing certain arrests warrants issued by
the ICC. In a number of cases, the African Union and
its members have pointed to contradictions between
ICC requirements and their own obligations under
international law concerning the immunity senior
State officials. We understand the position of African
countries on the issue ofthe ICC. We think it isjustified.
Unfortunately, as has been demonstrated in practice in
recent years, not all members ofthe Council are ready to
heed that position. Our delegation was interested in the
initiative to establish a special ministerial committee of
the African Union to address the concerns of African
countries with regard to the ICC. We also supported
the idea of convening a dialogue between the Security
Council and representatives of such a committee. We
hope there will soon be such a meeting in New York.

We would like to comment on some facts and
figures included in the Prosecutor's report. We call
attention to unverified information about the number of
civilian victims and displaced persons in Darfur. Those
findings have not been corroborated by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).
The report essentially relays to the Security Council
assertions from Radio Dabanga. Based in The Hague,
the station is known, among other things, for blatantly
spreading misinformation and for its connections with
the Sudanese armed opposition. As it is known, there is
currently an operation under way in Darfur against the
Sudan Liberation Army. That group stubbornly refuses
to engage in negotiations with Khartoum. Those
insurgents have rejected the moratorium on military
operations and have attacked both Government forces
and civilian targets and civilians themselves. The
militias in Darfur have also adopted a destructive
position. In particular, they have refused to sign the
African Union road map - a peace plan backed by
the Secretary-General and the Chair of the African
Union Commission.

Experts of the Security Council sanctions
committee on the Sudan have confirmed violations of
international humanitarian law by Sudanese rebels,
including the recruitment of child soldiers. In the
report of the Prosecutor information about that and
other wrongdoing by the insurgents undermining peace
and security in Darfur is conspicuously absent. Such a
one-sided assessment by the ICC against the legitimate
Government of the Sudan is unlikely to add credibility
to impartiality of the ICC.

Finally, speaking not only about the Darfur
investigation but more broadly, we would like once
again to emphasize the importance of striking a balance
between the interests of serving justice and those of
achieving lasting peace and stabilizing the situation.
Those tasks are of equal importance and require a
comprehensive and balanced approach.

