Ms. Loj (Denmark): Denmark appreciates this
opportunity to discuss the issue of improved
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. We welcome the Romanian initiative to
hold this debate and the fact that the Foreign Minister
of Romania is presiding over our discussion.

We would like to associate ourselves with the
statement to be delivered later by the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom on behalf of the
European Union (EU).

We welcome the participation today of
representatives of a wide range of regional
organizations. Their contributions to enhancing
international peace and security are of the utmost
importance.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations should be
developed even further. We feel that two areas in
particular are in need of further and timely attention,
namely, the African dimension and counter-terrorism.
Those two issues are also reflected in the draft
resolution initiated by Romania - a draft resolution
that Denmark wholeheartedly supports.

In relation to the African dimension, progress has
been made. We welcome the continued efforts to
strengthen practical cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU), as demonstrated
most clearly in the case of the African Mission in
Sudan.

We would like to encourage enhanced African
ownership and participation in conflict management on
the continent. The Security Council should explore
how best to support ongoing efforts to develop the
African security architecture and work closely with the
African Union and regional organizations to advance
ways and means of cooperation.

Such a coherent approach stimulates operative
cooperation between the United Nations, the EU and
other international actors. The goal should be to
establish efficient partnerships and an equitable
division of labour among organizations involved in
conflict prevention and peacekeeping.

Let me note that Denmark contributes actively to
enhancing African regional and subregional
organizations' conflict-prevention capacity, through the
European Union and through substantial bilateral
assistance. Thus, Denmark provides, on a bilateral
basis, through our Africa Programme for Peace, $40
million to capacity-building.

In relation to the fight against terrorism, Denmark
firmly believes that regional organizations can and
should play a particularly important role. In fact, we
will not succeed in this fight unless regional and
subregional organizations firmly commit themselves to
that challenge.

First, the more strongly regional organizations
vow to condemn terrorism in all its forms, the more
successful the international community will be in its
fight against that phenomenon. Such an unambiguous
message is essential to helping dispel any remaining
doubts that terrorism in some form could be
acceptable. It is not.

Secondly, as the Council has noted on several
occasions, many States are willing to do more in the
fight against terrorism but lack the capacity to do so. A
key role for regional organizations is to assist members
in implementing their international obligations in this
field, including by helping them to develop the
necessary capacity to fulfil those obligations.

That is a challenge of which the Security
Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) is fully
aware. As Chairman of that Committee, I urge the full
cooperation of all regional and subregional
organizations in our collective fight against terrorism.

In conclusion, we see improved cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
as a work in progress. Much has been achieved already,
notably on the ground, not least in the Sudan. With the
overall goal of enhancing international peace and
security, Denmark remains committed to supporting
concrete initiatives to further improve cooperation in
future. The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission will be a very important step in that
regard.

