Mr. Schwarz-Schilling: First, I would like to
thank all delegations and nations represented around
this table for their thorough advice and for having
studied the real situation of the country. I was really
surprised by the detailed knowledge shown here. It has
given me the impression that close attention is being
paid to everything going on in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I therefore thank you very much, because
sometimes I have the feeling that increasingly the
focus is on other areas, and that the real problems of
the Balkans area - and perhaps specifically, now, of
Bosnia and Herzegovina - are being neglected.

I thank the Council for its understanding of the
approach that I have taken, in the context of my
mandate, to enable local politicians to exercise
ownership, and to give them the chance really to
exercise it in good time, before the Office of the High
Representative closes. How will we assess the exercise
if we have not provided that opportunity? I think it was
good to see that, and also to get our own experience in
that respect.

I am very glad that it is also understood that some
basic reforms are necessary for the gradual
normalization of the country. I want to mention the
question of educational reform, broadcasting reform
and police reform - which is particularly important,
because entity questions are already being raised in
that respect - as well as constitutional reform.
Considerable attention and help from the international
community will be necessary. This is particularly
important, because we know that police reform is one
of the basic preconditions for the signing of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement.

I also think that some strong words need to be
used to tell those people - those politicians - who
are boycotting this what they are doing to the whole
country. The signing of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement is particularly necessary to
pave the way for the next gradual approach and the
possibility of normalization presented by reforms.

The same is true for constitutional reform. There,
of course, we have the very difficult situation of how to
combine the rules of democracy by majority rule on the
one hand, with, on the other, the equality of three
constituent peoples, who have a lot of veto
opportunities under the Dayton constitution. How do
we unblock the situation? It is very difficult to move
towards a mechanism whereby vetoes and majority
votes lead to a situation in which the decision-making
of the State and the institutions of the State come
together. And I must say that we should not blame only
the politicians in that respect; we must also think about
that very carefully, to see how to give the best advice
in this regard.

I only hope that, after the formation of the
Government and the negotiations of the coalitions, they
see that this is one of the basic points, because there is
growing nervousness among the population of the
country that tells me that the Office of the High
Representative should not be allowed to go as long as
there is no other de-blocking institutions in our
country. So we have to think and to see whether this is
on track, and we have to make our final assessment
with great attention to the whole atmosphere created by
this situation.

I just wish to thank the Council for the many
ideas coming to me because of the statements I have
heard. I thank the Council very much for the careful
comments, especially from Finland, stating on behalf
of the European Union the need for the mandate of the
EU Special Representative to bring forward the whole
situation of transition, and pointing out that it is not a
matter of the departure of the Office of the High
Representative but making more visible the European
presence in the country, because that increases the
belief and the trust in the integration of Euro-Atlantic
institutions.

It was very useful for me to learn from the
comments of the Council, which I very much
appreciate. I found that my report was not too
diplomatic, as the Prime Minister meant that I would
not say the things as they are. I think the answers of all
have shown that they could understand very well what
I meant, so I thank you very much for your comments.

