Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): Allow me to convey
our gratitude to Mr. Mariano Fernandez Amunategui
for his effective work as Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) during a
very difficult and challenging period for Haiti. We wish
him tremendous success in his new assignment and
thank him for his insightful presentation of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2011/540).

The end of the presidential elections in Haiti and
the transition to another elected Government, despite
the acrimony that attended the process, represent a
major milestone in Haiti's political development. The
need to avoid the pitfalls of the past while striving to
heal the wounds emanating from the political process
requires the new Government to rapidly consolidate its
efforts.

But as President Martelly rises to the enormous
challenges of his office, the support of the Haitian
people will remain exceedingly vital. The challenges
facing the country require Haitian leaders to forge a
common bond. More than ever, they must demonstrate
willingness to own the process of national recovery.
They must commit to peace, democracy and national
stability by ending the current political stalemate in the
appointment of a new Prime Minister. Indeed, the task
of rebuilding the country cannot be successfully
accomplished in the current fractious atmosphere.

The implementation of the Haitian national
recovery and development plan will require strong and
resilient security institutions that will effectively
address the increasing menace of armed banditry and
organized crime. The Haitian National Police will need
to be adequately resourced to discharge its
constitutional law enforcement duties. It will require
basic equipment, logistical support and other essential
assistance to strengthen its operational efforts and
overcome the dire security challenges facing the
country. We believe that the implementation of the
recommendations contained in paragraphs 49 and 50 of
the Secretary-General's report will go a long way
towards comprehensively addressing Haiti's security
concerns.

The international community must also support
Haiti in developing the capacity and resources needed
for proper border management. The partial withdrawal
of MINUSTAH's military and police personnel should
neither compromise the current security conditions nor
prejudice the Mission's ability to address adjustments
to its mandate.

Although much remains to be done to restore
Haiti to its pre-earthquake state, it is encouraging that
the humanitarian conditions in the country have
improved considerably since the recovery efforts
began. Undoubtedly, the significant inflow of funds
from donors and the international community and
pledges received through international aid initiatives
played a critical role. The launching of the World
Bank-supported housing project and the Government
housing initiative to build 2,000 homes in Port-au-
Prince will, we hope, ameliorate the current conditions
of over 1 million internally displaced persons still
living in emergency shelters in and around the capital
of Port-au-Prince. We expect that these initiatives will
further decongest the over 1,000 internally displaced
person sites and provide durable accommodation that
will survive the harsh weather.

We would like to take this opportunity to
commend humanitarian partners for their efforts in
distributing relief materials and coordinating with the
Haitian authorities in implementation of the country's
priority programmes. Indeed, the United Nations
country team and MINUSTAH have facilitated the
delivery of a humanitarian response capable of
consolidating Haiti's recovery and the implementation
of its programmes.

Aware of the persistent challenges, the
international community must not remove its focus
from Haiti. We must continue in our bilateral and
multilateral efforts to assist Haiti to grow faster and

better following the devastating effects of the
earthquake and cholera epidemic. It would help if
donors were to continue to fulfil their outstanding
pledges and also respond favourably to the 2011
consolidated appeal of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).

While the international community remains
vigilant, the Government must assume responsibility
and full ownership of Haiti's stability process by
advancing the provision of basic amenities and
reducing the country's dependence on international
support. The role of the United Nations - in particular
MINUSTAH, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and OCHA - in leading and coordinating
the international efforts in Haiti is most commendable.

Nigeria is pleased that its police contingent is
part of MINUSTAH, which has continued to carry out
it mandate with distinction under very trying
circumstances. I therefore salute the courage,
dedication and sacrifice of the gallant men and women
of MINUSTAH, as well as humanitarian workers in
Haiti. On this score, we welcome the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the mandate of
MINUSTAH be extended.

