I align myself with the statement made by the representative of Germany (annex 8) on behalf of the co-penholders. I would now like to make a few remarks in my national capacity. I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Lowcock, and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Pedersen, for their valuable briefings. Approximately a year ago, on 20 December 2019, two Member States vetoed a draft resolution (S/2019/961) to renew cross-border access to Syria through the four crossing points that had been in place since 2014 (see S/PV.8697). Last summer, cross-border humanitarian access was further restricted, again after long and arduous negotiations. As a co-penholder on the humanitarian situation in Syria for the past two years, Belgium has done its utmost to alleviate the humanitarian situation in Syria and in the region. Together with Germany, we have taken countless initiatives to that end. We have repeatedly called for the protection of civilians. We have reiterated the imperative for all parties to respect their obligations under international law, in particular international humanitarian law. We have endeavoured to ensure full, neutral and unconditional humanitarian access to all Syrian territory. Our actions have been guided solely by the interests of Syrian children, women and men. Indeed, as Belgium leaves the Security Council at the end of this month, the Syrian conflict continues to threaten regional and international peace and security. Even if the lines of the conflict inside Syria have not shifted recently, the plight of the Syrian people remains very worrisome. Eleven million people are still in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. Millions of people remain internally displaced. Civilians and infrastructure have been deliberately targeted. Violations of international humanitarian law continue to occur. That cannot be tolerated. The responsibility for that situation lies largely with Damascus and its allies. The vast majority of Member States around the table have shared our ongoing concerns and repeatedly supported our efforts. I would like to thank them for their consistency. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and his team in New York, as well as representatives of civil society for their advice. I would like to pay tribute to the humanitarian agencies and their partners that are on the front line every day. Lastly, I would like to thank Ambassador Heusgen and his team for their collegiality in managing this very important issue. While our shared experience was very frustrating, taking on such an immense responsibility with a close neighbour made it easier. My message today is also a call for peace. The conflict in Syria is in its tenth year. Over the past two years, like many of our partners in the international community, we had hoped that the establishment of the Constitutional Committee would open the door to a political solution. To date, those hopes have not been realized. However, the steps to be taken to achieve a political solution are relatively well known. First, a ceasefire on the whole Syrian territory, controlled by the United Nations, should be put in place. Secondly, all parties, in particular the Syrian authorities, should engage fully, constructively and meaningfully with the Constitutional Committee. We therefore call on all parties with influence in Damascus to use it to that end. Thirdly, concrete steps should be taken to implement the various elements of resolution 2254 (2015), the political road map the Council unanimously adopted in 2015. Only the lack of political will prevents Damascus from taking confidence- building measures, such as releasing political prisoners. Fourthly, free and fair elections supervised by the United Nations should be held, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), in a secure and neutral environment, in which displaced persons, refugees and the diaspora should be able to participate. Any election not held under resolution 2254 (2015) would be a major step backwards and would undermine any prospects for peace. Fifthly, those who have committed the most serious violations of international law must be held accountable, without delay. Belgium supports all initiatives to that end, including through the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as by referral of the situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court. Sixthly, no return of refugees and displaced persons should take place if not conducted in a safe, voluntary and dignified manner. International criteria are clear. It is up to Damascus to create those conditions. Lastly, I reiterate my country's position on the issue of reconstruction. Belgium, alongside the European Union, will not assist in reconstruction efforts until concrete steps are taken towards a political solution. For all the reasons I just listed, it is essential that monthly political briefings be maintained, along with monthly humanitarian briefings. Two parallel crises are at play. Although linked by the same intransigence demonstrated by the main political actors, they are separate. If a political solution to the conflict in Syria within the framework of resolution 2254 (2015) is not found, they should be addressed in the Council every month, as called for by the relevant resolutions. The trend in recent months to merge the political and humanitarian formats into a single meeting only makes the two individual crises less visible and the suffering of the Syrian people more trivial. It is our earnest wish that the Council will unite and fully assume its responsibility to act in the interest of peace and that it will redouble its efforts and work collectively to resolve the crisis. It is simply what the Syrian people deserve.
