At the outset, I would like to congratulate the Secretary-General on his report (S/2020/536), which adequately describes recent developments in the situation in South Sudan in the political, economic, security and humanitarian fields, as well as the threat posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) to the dynamics of peace, security, stability and development under way in the country. We also thank Mr. Edmund Yakani, Executive Director of the Community Empowerment for Progress Organization, for his submission. The Niger further wishes to commend the Government and the opposition of South Sudan for the sense of responsibility they have shown for the establishment, albeit partial, of the Transitional Government of National Unity, and urges them to make more compromises to make the establishment of that Government effective, while respecting the 35 per cent quota to be reserved for women, in accordance with the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan of November 2018. Furthermore, we welcome the establishment of the Joint Transitional Security Committee, which will certainly help in the implementation of the security arrangements of the peace Agreement. We also welcome the creation of the high- level task force to combat COVID-19 and the addendum to the 2020 humanitarian response plan, taking into account the challenges related to COVID-19. The Niger deplores the lack of coordination at the State level and the disagreement over the posts of governors, and expresses concern about the acute humanitarian situation in the country, which makes displaced persons, who number nearly 4 million, vulnerable to the spread of COVID-19. The lack of coordination at the central level has largely contributed to the deterioration of the security situation and exacerbated intercommunal violence. It has also led to an increase in clashes between Government forces and certain opposition movements. We call on the parties to ensure the maintenance of the ceasefire. In the face of the impact that COVID-19 has had, both on the people of South Sudan and on the ongoing peace, security and development dynamics, the Niger shares the Secretary-General's view that "the imperative to accelerate and consolidate peace implementation has never been so urgent" (S/2020/536, para. 110). To that end, we strongly call on the parties to make the implementation of the peace agreement their main priority for the establishment of lasting peace, in particular, and the economic and social development of the country, in general. My delegation dares to hope that the appointment of the permanent chair of the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission will help to strengthen the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism. To that end, we call on the parties to support the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) in the implementation of its mandate, so that it may continuously provide the authorities with the necessary technical assistance to strengthen national monitoring mechanisms and effectively support the implementation of the peace agreement. In the light of all the above, my delegation would like to express its deep appreciation to the UNMISS personnel, from civilians to uniformed personnel, headed by Special Representative David Shearer, who, despite the challenges imposed by COVID-19, have swiftly redefined their priorities to prevent and mitigate the pandemic by supporting national efforts. In conclusion, the Niger invites the partners of South Sudan to support the country's peacebuilding and development efforts, which could be jeopardized by the pandemic.
