Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank General Lamine Cisse,
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Peace-building Support Office in
the Central African Republic (BONUCA), for his
statement and for being here today. We also express our
gratitude for the statement made by Mr. Robert
Calderisi of the World Bank. We listened to his briefing
with great interest because we realize that he has the
difficult job of supporting, with rather limited
resources, the political and economic recovery in that
country.

The report of the Secretary-General has been
most revealing with regard to the scope of the current
pressing needs of the Central African Republic. Those
needs are related to the very functioning of the State
and its ability to foster the well-being of its 4 million
inhabitants and to the political entente needed for the
country to overcome its difficulties.

In fact, the situation raises a serious question
about the will of the international community to
support peace-building in countries emerging from
conflict. It is clear that the United Nations cannot be
absent from such a situation and that it should, with the
means at its disposal, extend assistance to the
Government of the Central African Republic to
promote a climate of national reconciliation and to
channel the efforts of foreign donors towards the
country's economic reconstruction.

We would like the report to be submitted by the
Secretariat to the Security Council at the end of the
year to clearly reflect the contribution that regional and
subregional organizations and the donor community are
making to meet the urgent needs of the Central African
Republic.

We would like to emphasize the important
mission that the Representative of the Secretary-
General is carrying out in the political sphere.
Members of the Council trust that his ability to
communicate with the authorities in Bangui and with
the country's political organizations will continue to
guide the work of the United Nations and make it
possible for us to assess the prospects for peace and
development.

We hope that the United Nations will continue to
promote human rights in the country and to provide
humanitarian assistance to the people who have
become refugees and internally displaced persons as a
result of the recent attempted coup d'etat.

It is for all of these reasons that we support the
proposal of the Secretary-General to strengthen
BONUCA's mandate. We are prepared to consider a
longer-term presence in the country.

