Mr. Annen (Germany): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today's debate. We highly
appreciate Indonesia's commitment to the multilateral
order and the strengthening of international law.
Rest assured that Germany is with you in this
crucial endeavour.

We are also glad to align ourselves with the
statement to be delivered later by the representative
of Switzerland on behalf the Group of Friends on the
Protection of Civilians.

Like our briefers today, I am frustrated and
saddened that, in the seventieth year of the Geneva
Conventions, we still have to condemn direct and
indiscriminate attacks on civilians and the deliberate
targeting of places of education, hospitals and other
services essential to civilian populations by parties
to conflicts all over the world - in Syria, Yemen,
Myanmar and the Central African Republic, to name
just some examples. In addition, sexual violence, rape
terror and starvation - deeply despicable methods of
warfare - are still being used, and those who attempt
to help those most in need are attacked on a daily basis.

I believe that I speak for all of us here today by
thanking all humanitarian and medical personnel for
their dedication and service. In the north-western part
of Syria - in Id1ib - the recent heavy bombardments,
including attacks on humanitarian and civilian
infrastructure, have led to the loss of life of too
many innocent civilians, including health workers. I
agree with what Emergency Relief Coordinator Mark
Lowcock said here in this very Chamber, namely, that,

"some of those attacksare clearly organized by
people with access to sophisticated weapons,
including a modern air force and so-called smart
and precision weapons." (S/PV8527, p. 4)

It bears repeating that the fight against terrorism can
in no way justify indiscriminate attacks on civilians
and civilian infrastructure. Counter-terrorism
operations do not override the responsibility of parties
to protect civilians, nor should they impede impartial
humanitarian action.

I am also deeply worried about the deteriorating
situation of journalists and interpreters, as for example
in Afghanistan, as well as in Syria and Yemen.
Impeding their work is often a particularly cynical way
of covering up grave human rights violations.

All in all, we live in a world where the
accomplishments of earlier generations in guaranteeing
at least a basic respect for the human rights of
civilians, who have come increasingly under attack,
as Mr. Borello and Mr. Mauer made very clear. We
must not acquiesce to that. It is the Council's task to
safeguard international humanitarian law, to create the
legal framework for the protection of civilians and to be
consistent in implementing its own resolutions. All of
us must live up to that.

In the light of that distressing state of affairs, allow
me to encourage the Secretary-General to continue
to speak up loudly when it comes to violations of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law, and to use his good
offices whenever he can to prevent those violations
from happening in the first place. He can count on
Germany's support.

Germany decided to use its term on the Security
Council to advance the protection of civilians. Just in
April, within the framework of our twin presidencies
with France, we initiated the drafting of a humanitarian
call for action for which we will be seeking broad
support within the membership. In September,
the General Assembly will provide us with an
opportunity to do so. We also introduced a resolution
on sexual violence in conflict (resolution 2467 (2019)),
strengthening a survivor-centred approach, protection
and accountability. We invited the High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the High Commissioner for
Refugees to brief the Council on protection concerns,
and we presided over a meeting of the Council where
for the first time a refugee with disabilities was able to
share her views on the challenges facing people with
special needs in a conflict setting (see S/PV.8515).

Undoubtedly, the international community has
taken a number of important steps in the past 20 years,
including the establishment of the International
Criminal Court and, more recently, other accountability
mechanisms; stronger focus on protection of civilians
in peacekeeping mandates; and the development of the
powerful children and armed conflict monitoring and
reporting system.

But we still have a long way to go. We, as States and
the international community, have to step up our efforts
to build on those achievements and do better. In that
regard, I would like to share four concrete proposals.

First, international law is weakened when
violations go unpunished. That is why Germany is a
strong supporter of the International Criminal Court.
That is why we support the commissions of inquiry set
up by the Human Rights Council and the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, set up by the General Assembly; the mechanism
for Myanmar and the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. It is
important that those mechanisms also address the
actions of non-State armed groups. We must enforce
international law, making the fight against impunity
a reality and preventing further atrocities by bringing
perpetrators, wherever they come from, to justice.

Secondly, the protection of civilians is a key task
of many peacekeeping missions. For the protection of
civilians to become a reality and not remain a lofty
ambition of us here in New York, we must collectively
work towards that goal. That starts with turning the
protection of civilians into a priority for us Member
States, the United Nations, the host nation and the
whole mission - military, police and civilians
alike - as well as for all United Nations staff deployed
in mission settings.

In addition, peace missions need to be adequately
resourced. We need to ensure that a sufficient number
of posts for protection personnel are provided to the
missions, in particular child and women protection
advisers, as well as for early warning and community
alert systems, for liaison arrangements and public
information, for human rights monitoring and for
programmatic funding to support the missions'
work. That includes strengthening the host countries'
capacities to fulfil their responsibility in protecting
civilians through the rule of law and security
sector reform.

A systematic gender analysis of protection facilitates
better understanding of the needs of civilians and
allows for the development of strategies that meet the
specific protection needs of women, men and children.
Furthermore, troop- and police-contributing countries
need to prepare their personnel more effectively for the
task of protecting civilians. That includes conveying a
thorough understanding of local conflict dynamics, as
well as promoting clear adherence to United Nations
standards and protection of civilian policies, including
on how to prevent and address sexual and gender-
based Violence.

Raising the number of women in peace missions is
also an essential part of the protection of civilians. The
participation of women enables a closer relationship to
local communities, particularly women, and contributes
to trust-building, which is an essential precondition for
protection. Germany has announced several initiatives
to increase the number of female peacekeepers in
United Nations peace missions.

Thirdly, we need to better care for humanitarian and
medical workers in armed conflict and to strengthen
humanitarian negotiation capacities. Tailored trainings
and confidential spaces for humanitarian front-line
workers to discuss their experiences with each other
are promising approaches. We need to scale them up.

Finally, red lines have to be drawn for the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas. Germany has
initiated a dialogue series in Geneva, bringing together
military practitioners, diplomats and humanitarian
actors to work out best practices on how to minimize
civilian casualties in urban theatres of conflict. We are
glad that many States and the International Committee
of the Red Cross are playing a leading role in that
joint endeavour.

In his report, the Secretary-General observes
that "the state of the protection of civilians today is
tragically similar to 20 years ago" (S/2019/373, para. 4).
That is a damning assessment for the Council; it is a
damning assessment for all of us. Let us therefore join
forces to ensure that the next report will come to a more
positive conclusion.
