Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank all the briefers at
today's meeting.

The position of the Russian Federation with regard
to the security impacts of climate change is well known.
We deem it excessive, and even counterproductive, to
consider climate change in the Security Council, whose
aim under the Charter of the United Nations is to swiftly
respond to serious challenges to international peace
and security. We consider that this practice undercuts
the current system of division of labour within the
United Nations. Yes, the climate is changing. However,
climate change is not a universal challenge in the
context of international security. Accordingly, it should
be considered specific to each specific situation, which
was confirmed by briefer Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo.

In some situations, as Achim Steiner pointed out,
climate change can be an additional risk factor in some
countries and regions. However, a generalized linking
of the topic of climate change with peace can lead to the
false assumption that the problems of the environment
are unavoidable and always lead to conflict.
Furthermore, if, for example, we take the Sahel region,
which was mentioned in the concept note (S/2019/1, annex), then we should not shift focus onto climate and
droughts while pushing to the backburner the real main
reasons for the conflict, which include the proactive

actions of a number of countries that led to regime
change in Libya and the terrible impact of the NATO
air strikes, including on the country's oil and oil-field
infrastructure. Today, in another region now, we once
again see a demonstration of how external provocations
to exacerbate domestic crises with specific ambitious
goals, as well as abuses of international law, and this
is precisely what the Security Council should work on.

Coming back to climate, I would like to point out
that nobody denies that the challenges in this area
require a comprehensive approach. Every opportunity
to fully develop such approaches is provided by the
existing specialized bodies within the United Nations,
where rather than mere cosmetic efforts, concrete,
expert-level work is conducted to that end.

The Russian Federation has unfailingly advocated
the expansion of international cooperation to reduce the
risk ofdisasters and to strengthen resilience to them. We
support the Organization's central role in that regard.
We consider that in order to ensure effectiveness we
must engage in professional dialogue based on in-depth
expertise and relevant knowledge, first and foremost as
part of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction.

We believe that the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015-2030 in Africa, which was adopted
at the third World Conference on Disaster Reduction
and endorsed by General Assembly resolution 69/283,
is the main mechanism for exchanging experiences
and best practices in order to strengthen the global
architecture of international cooperation in the area of
disaster risk reduction.

It is important to foster cooperation at the regional
level by tapping into the potential of the regional
economic commissions. As a result of the decision
taken by the United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific concerning the
use of space technology for sustainable development,
the Asia-Pacific region became the first to benefit
from practical high-tech development in the field of
disaster risk reduction within Organization's regional
commission, and there has been a great deal of interest
in further exploring such development.

We urge the Council to focus on the provision
of technical assistance and on strengthening the
potential of developing countries, which are the most
vulnerable to natural disasters due to challenges in
the socioeconomic sphere. The Russian Federation
provides assistance to small island developing States
in the southern Pacific Ocean in order to promote
sustainability in the face of disasters. We do so through
the United Nations Development Programme, various
other specialized programmes, funds and agencies, as
well as the International Civil Defence Organization.

Technical assistance projects are being undertaken
to strengthen prevention and response to natural
disasters for the Commonwealth of Independent
States countries and to deal with the aftermath of
natural disasters in countries of Latin America and the
Caribbean, Asia and the Middle East. It is important for
all States that are able to do so to provide comprehensive
assistance to countries in need in order to strengthen
the overall potential of disaster risk reduction.

As for problems associated with climate change,
we deem the most pertinent challenge facing the
international community to be ensuring total
compliance with the rules for implementing, in the
framework of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
the comprehensive document approved at the twenty-
fourth session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in December.

We need to focus on specific measures taken at
the global and national levels that are greatly contribut
to preventing the rise in temperature, lower the risk
of the increasing frequency and destructiveness of
natural disasters, and mitigate their effects and their
adverse socioeconomic impact for the most vulnerable
countries and regions. Climate risks must also be taken
into consideration, not in a generic way but in the
context of discussing specific and real situations on the
Council's agenda - if they exist and if they are real.

