Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I very much thank all of today's briefers.

Much more than a decade ago, the African Union
began making significant efforts to confront all of the
challenges on the African continent, and those efforts
have meant that the African Union has become a very
crucial partner ofthe Security Council. It is therefore in
the interests of everyone to strengthen the capacities of
the African Union so that we can successfully address
all of those challenges. That is why the financial
agreements are particularly important, owing to which
we decided to fund 25 per cent of the costs of peace
operations for 2020. Over the past year, we have also
seen a series of proposals to strengthen collaboration
between the two Councils, the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union and the Security Council
of the United Nations. I would like to refer to three of
them in particular.

First, there are the annual informal consultations,
such as the one held yesterday. I believe that yesterday's
consultations were exceptionally productive, and I
commend you, Sir, for them. I believe that we must
continue on the same path during future meetings,
focusing, however, on one or two issues so that all
the members of the Security Council and the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union can have a
deeper exchange of ideas.

Secondly, it has been said on more than one
occasion here that there needs to be greater channels
of communication between the presidency of the
Security Council and the African Union. I have to
acknowledge that when I presided the Security Council
in December 2015 I was not in contact with the Chair of
African Union Commission, and I was not aware of it.
However, I want to assure everyone that, during Spain's
forthcoming presidency of the Council in December, I
think i will exchange ideas with the presidency of the
African Union, especially when we consider issues
involving Africa on the Security Council.

Thirdly, the other idea that has already been
brought up rather frequently involves the possibility
of carrying out joint visits by both Councils. I believe
that we missed a good opportunity on that score when
the Council travelled to Guinea-Bissau, because only
shortly thereafter the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union also made a visit. It is unfortunate not to
benefit from the two Councils' synergy in carrying out
visits, in particular on the African continent.

We all know that three very important reviews were
carried out in 2015 and this year, and I will not cite them
all. But I would like to make several comments with
regard to them, particularly in the context of the high-
level review of resolution 1325 (2000). I would like first
to acknowledge the excellent work of the African Union
in reviewing the resolution by citing four fundamental
facts. First, one third of the countries that have a national
action plan for implementing resolution 1325 (2000) are
members of the African Union. Secondly, the African
Union has established a gender, peace and security
programme for the years 2015 to 2020. Thirdly, the
African Union has established the position of Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, which is held by
Ms. Bineta Diop, who is carrying out excellent work.
Lastly, the African Union has developed initiatives
that the United Nations could also follow, such as the
compilation of a roster of women mediators that would
be of benefit to both the African Union and the United
Nations. Accordingly, I would like to propose three
concrete initiatives that would allow for improving our
cooperation within the framework of resolution 1325
(2000).

First, I believe that we could explore how the
African Union could participate in the meetings of
the new informal group of the Security Council on
women and peace and security when there are African
countries on the agenda. Secondly, the secretariats of
each organization should exchange information on how
the United Nations and African Union peace operations
could holistically address issues involving gender
in their activities on the ground. Thirdly, we need to
include women and peace and security issues on the
meeting agendas of both organizations.

I want to conclude by mentioning two areas for
potential cooperation between the Security Council
and the African Union, namely, climate change and
non-proliferation.

With regard to climate change, I want to underscore
that the African Union has recongnized that climate
change is a multiplier of threats to security in Africa.
In that regard, I would like to recall the joint initiative
of Spain and Egypt through which the Council would
analyze the impact of new factors on security in the
Sahel region.

As to the matter of non-proliferation, as members
are aware, Spain chairs the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and has launched an important review of that
resolution. I would like once more to call attention to
the important partnership that we have with our African
counterparts in order to redouble our efforts and avoid
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their diversion to to non-State actors.

I would like to conclude by aligning myself with
the statement that will be delivered shortly on behalf of
the European Union.

