The President (interpretation from Chinese): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Angola, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Van-Dunem
"Mbinda" (Angola) took a place at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the first
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III),
document S/ 1995/ 177.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1995/192, which contains the
text of a letter dated 9 March 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
Secretary-General's report of 5 March 1995
(S/1995/177) on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III).

"The Security Council welcomes the
assessment by the Secretary-General that the cease-
fire is generally holding. It also welcomes the
continued deployment of United Nations military
and police observers to sites outside Luanda. It
notes, however that this deployment has been
complicated by a lack of full cooperation by the
parties, in particular UNITA. In the month since the
adoption of its resolution 976 (1995), a number of
developments have taken place which give rise to
serious concern. These include the lack of progress
in disengagement around Uige and Negage, the
escalation of tensions in the last few weeks,
especially in the northern region, the lack of security
clearances to visit certain areas and restrictions on
movement of UNAVEM. III personnel, attacks on
villages, mine-laying, unauthorized movement of
troops and military air activity, and attacks on
United Nations aircraft, in particular that by UN ITA
in Quibaxe on 13 February 1995. The Council calls
upon the parties, particularly UNITA, to refrain from
such activities, to end negative propaganda, to
improve their cooperation with each other and the
United Nations through the Joint Commission and to
cooperate fully with humanitarian operations.

"The Security Council reiterates its call upon
President Dos Santos and Dr. Savimbi to meet
without delay as a sign of their joint commitment to
the peace process and urges the Government of
Angola and UNITA to finalize arrangements towards
this end immediately, with a view to ensuring the
necessary political momentum for the successful
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. It also
encourages the observer States to the peace process,
the Organization of African Unity and the
neighbouring countries involved to continue their
efforts aimed at the full implementation of the peace
process.

"The Council reaffirms the obligations of all
States to implement fully the provisions of paragraph
19 of resolution 864 (1993) and reiterates its call
upon the Government of Angola and UNITA to
cease the acquisition of arms and war materiel as
agreed in the 'Acordos de Paz'.

"The Security Council notes that the United
Nations is currently pursuing with the Government
of Angola the provision of critical services and
access to key facilities such as ports and airports for
UNAVEM. III. Early and positive responses from the

 

Government of Angola to the United Nations
requirements in this respect are essential to UNAVEM
III's deployment. It calls on both parties to expedite
the completion of the initial tasks in order to ensure
the prompt deployment of UNAVEM. III units. The
Council reiterates the importance it attaches to the
Government of Angola and the United Nations
agreeing on a Status of Forces Agreement by 20
March 1995 as called for in paragraph 13 of its
resolution 976 (1995). It will continue to monitor
closely developments in these areas.

"The Security Council commends the United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
for their continuing efforts to distribute humanitarian
relief throughout Angola. It reiterates the importance
it attaches to a well-coordinated and comprehensive
mine clearance programme which will, inter alia,
improve the logistics of humanitarian operations. It
calls upon both parties to cooperate with the United
Nations and with the non-governmental organizations
to put this in place. It deplores the killing on 2 March
of three Angolans and one German, all members of
the 'Cap Anamur' non-govemmental organization
involved in demining activities, as well as attacks in
the last month on ICRC aircraft and road transport and
reminds the parties of its repeated demands that they
refrain from all actions which could jeopardize the
safety of humanitarian personnel in Angola.

"The Security Council endorses the Secretary-
General's conclusions that the Government of
Angola and UNITA must provide more concrete
signs of cooperation and goodwill in the
implementation of the peace process. It reminds the
parties that the deployment of the units of
UNAVEM. III will not take place unless the
conditions contained in paragraph 32 of his report of
1 February 1995 (S/1995/97) have been met. It has
taken careful note of the Secretary-General's
statement that, unless he can report by 25 March
1995 that the parties have complied with these
conditions, it will not be possible to ensure that
deployment begins on 9 May 1995. Time is short if
the opportunity created by the Lusaka Protocol and
the Council's resolution 976 (1995) is not to be lost.
The Council joins the Secretary-General in calling
upon the parties to take the necessary steps now to
ensure that deployment of these units can begin as
planned on 9 May 1995. It requests the Secretary-
General to keep it closely informed of developments
in this regard."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/ 11.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.25 pm.

