Mr. Chabar (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, I would like first to congratulate you
and your friendly country, Peru, on presiding over the
Council this month, and I wish you every success. I
would like to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
representative of Japan, for his efforts and wisdom in
guiding the work of the Council last month.

My delegation associates itself with the
statements made by the representative of Qatar on
behalf of the Arab Group, Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and Cuba on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. All previous
speakers have voiced the same concern that Morocco
feels with respect to the occupied Palestinian
territories. We would like to reiterate some of these
concerns, because we are interested in developments in
the Middle East conflict, particularly the Palestine-
Israel component.

We strongly denounce the Israeli attacks on Gaza,
particularly the bombardment of Beit Hanoun on
8 November by the Israel Defense Forces, causing the
deaths of civilians, including women and children. We
are shocked by this act of aggression, which cannot be
justified. We convey our condolences to our brothers in
Palestine, while reiterating our feelings of solidarity
with them and our full support and hope that they will
regain their rights.

At the same time, we voice our indignation at the
Israeli Government's escalation of violence against the
defenceless Palestinian people and its continuous
targeted killing, collective punishment, the destruction
of economic and social infrastructure, the kidnapping
of freely elected Government officials and the
economic and security blockade of the territories.
These are all flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law, human rights and all agreements and
treaties, including the Fourth Geneva Convention
relevant to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War.

Confronted with this military pressure in the
Palestinian territories, and noting Israel's overt
intention to continue this kind of aggression, we call
upon Israel to learn the bitter lesson of its attack on
Lebanon last summer. The logic of force is incapable
of solving political issues. It leads only to more
violence and counter-violence. It threatens stability in
the entire region and deeply separates peoples who can
coexist only with mutual respect.

The Kingdom of Morocco rejects any and all acts
of violence against civilians regardless of who
perpetrates them. Here, we appeal for restraint in order
to spare the region the disasters of further escalation.
Given the complications in this situation and the
growing tension between the parties, Morocco believes
we can act to restore communication between the
parties in order to revive the peace process. We insist
that this is linked to genuine political will on both
sides. We would like to recall that the Arab party at the
Security Council ministerial-level meeting on
21 September declared its honest and sincere desire for
peace and the steps to attain it.

Morocco would like to point out all the efforts
that have been made regionally and internationally to
move ahead with the peace process. We reiterate the
need for the parties to back up their words with action
in order to restore confidence by taking effective
measures that lead to the resumption of negotiations.
An immediate ceasefire would be the first step,
followed by abstaining from anything that could
ratchet up tension, stopping the isolation of the
Palestinians, ending the unjustified siege, freeing
Palestinian funds and tax money, and providing moral
and material support for efforts to create a unity
Government that would serve as a partner in the peace
process. It goes without saying that those efforts
require the full and clear support of the international
community. In this regard, the Security Council, more
than ever, has a responsibility to maintain international
peace and security in the region.

The draft resolution before the Council contains
first steps and measures, in particular the invitation for
a complete end to active aggression against the
Palestinian people and the sending of international
observers.
06-61024
Putting an end to violence is a priority, but we
also have to address the essential political facets. In
that connection, the Quartet has a particular
responsibility to create momentum in the peace
process. We must look at the Palestinian track from the
economic and humanitarian perspectives and must
consider effective political measures that can produce a
resumption of negotiations, not only on the Palestine-
Israel track, but also on the other two tracks: Israel-
Syria and Israel-Lebanon.

We reaffirm the importance of the primary terms
of reference on which the peace process is based: the
Road Map, the principle of land for peace, the Arab
Peace Initiative and relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1515 (2003).
Some of those terms of reference set out clearly
defined objectives within a clearly defined timetable,
in order to bring the parties closer to a solution.

Although the Israel-Palestine conflict is the
mother and the core of the Arab-Israel conflict, we will
not achieve lasting and comprehensive peace in the
region without continuous and parallel efforts on all
fronts. Peaceful coexistence among all the peoples and
religions of the Middle East will make it possible for
peace and love to prevail over hatred, through the
creation of two States living side by side in peace:
Israel and independent Palestine with Jerusalem as its
capital.

I reaffirm my Government's full support for all
efforts to revive the peace process and to spare the
region any more years of a conflict that has already
lasted far too long.

