The President: I thank the representative of
Cameroon for his kind words addressed to me.

Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic) I am pleased to welcome you, Sir, here in New
York. I would like to extend my thanks to you for
presiding over this public meeting of the Security
Council. I would also like to express my thanks to
Ambassador Mahbubani and his mission for the very
good preparations they made for this open meeting.

This historic day - commemorating the
independence of East Timor, which has completed its
path towards self-determination and whose courageous
struggle to attain freedom and independence has been
crowned with success - serves as a prominent
example of how a State can be established in
accordance with the wishes and struggle of a people
and with the decisive support of the entire international
community. I am pleased on this happy occasion to
express to the people and Government of East Timor
the congratulations of the people and Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic and our wishes for this
nascent State in the new millennium for full success in
bringing about development and stability.

On this day, too, we turn a new leaf in the history
of the United Nations - a page distinguished by
unusual collaborative efforts to bring about peace in
East Timor and to set a firm basis for the establishment
of the country. Therefore, the United Nations, with all
its different agencies and bodies, fully deserves all
congratulations for this historic success. I would like to
take this opportunity to express our gratitude for the
efforts of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and
to commend the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) for its
endeavours in East Timor and for the dedication and
sincerity it showed under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, in providing assistance to the people
of East Timor during the period of transition to
independence.

One reason for our welcome is the commitment
of the leaders of East Timor to lead the country in a
spirit of collaboration and national pride, while seeking
to take practical steps towards establishing close and
strong relations with neighbouring States, especially
with its closest and most important neighbour,
Indonesia, which has declared its readiness to
collaborate with East Timor to build a society in which
peace, unity and continuity prevail.

We believe that this historic achievement would
not have been possible without constant understanding
and cooperation on the part of the Indonesian
Government and its initiatives to find ways of settling
pending issues. We heard, a while ago, the friendly
representative of Indonesia, who emphasized the
commitment of his Government to continue to expand
relations with East Timor. It is worth mentioning the
importance of providing the necessary assistance for
East Timor in the post-independence period to
safeguard ongoing progress in development and in
promoting basic infrastructures and public
administration and the capacities for law enforcement
and defence.

We are fully confident that UNMISET,
established in accordance with resolution 1410 (2002)
of 17 May 2002, will help to promote and strengthen a
stable environment in East Timor and will provide
further evidence of the commitment of the United
Nations and of East Timor's Government and people to
continue to work towards progress in promoting State
and law enforcement. We are fully confident that
Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma will lead this Mission
to success in a manner that serves the interests of a
nascent East Timor.

I wish to conclude by saying that we look forward
to the occasion when East Timor will become a
Member of the United Nations and its flag will fly high
with the other flags of United Nations Member States.
We look forward to cooperating with its
representatives. We wish this country all success,
progress and prosperity.

The President: I thank the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic for his kind words.


