Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We congratulate
the Republic of Poland most warmly for assuming
the presidency of the Security Council and cordially
wish you, Madam President, great success in all your
endeavours, especially during your stewardship of this
main organ dedicated to ensuring global peace and
security. We also commend you, Ambassador Joanna
Wronecka and your team for choosing very timely and
critical issues for consideration on this month's agenda.
We look forward to the deliberations resulting in greater
awareness and action.

We thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for
his briefing and update on the recent developments
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Ambassador Milos Vukasinovic', to the Chamber.
Kazakhstan reiterates its commitment to the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign and
united country. We have witnessed substantial progress
in the country in different fields; however, there are a
number of issues that remain unresolved.

The country is preparing for it general elections
in October. As such, the efforts of all parties must
be focused on the earliest possible adoption of the
election law. We call on the leaders of the two entities
to implement the Peace Agreement and observe all
provisions and procedures that are integral components
of that settlement, including the rulings of the
Constitutional Court.

We very much welcome the meeting held in March
between the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the Presidents of Serbia and Croatia. The political will
of the leaders of neighbouring countries is the most
effective instrument available to promote dialogue and
trust among the parties. My delegation welcomes the
positive ongoing dialogue among the Governments,
including regular high-level contacts, and we sincerely
encourage the parties to carry them forward.

Unfortunately, there has been in an increase in
political tensions inside the country, accompanied
by provocative and aggressive rhetoric by certain
representatives of the parties. That type of
communication obviously affects negatively the political
climate before the elections, overall stability and
security, as well as the social and economic dimensions
that impact the quality of life ofthe local population. In
that regard, we encourage all political actors, as well as
the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to resolve
all disputes. We believe that should be done through
the established legal processes, constructive dialogue
and within the existing constitutional framework. We
urge all the parties to act in accordance with the Peace
Agreement, and also to abide by their commitment to
cooperate fully with all the institutions involved in the
implementation of this peace settlement.

My delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to call on all parties to resolve pending
issues, which present a challenge to respect for human
rights and for democratic institutions, inter alia by
ensuring further implementation of the adopted reforms
with a sharp focus on good governance and the rule of
law. That must also include combating corruption and
organized crime and preventing terrorism and violent
extremism. At the same time, we need to address any
outstanding shortcomings of the judiciary required for
its de-politicization, impartiality and independence,
including the prosecution of war crimes.

On other tracks, efforts must also be focused
on greater fiscal responsibility and sustainability,
strengthening the Parliamentary Assembly and
developing media and broadcasting communication.
The question of returning refugees and displaced
persons, together with the issues related to their
resettlement, should be addressed as well. We also
would like to underline that the engagement of civil
society organizations and the participation of women
and youth are critical for building intercommunal trust
and confidence.

Finally, we encourage the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to overcome narrow political interests and
to make meaningful progress towards implementing
commitments on economic and governance reforms.

