Mr. Jegermanis (Latvia): Latvia has aligned
itself with the European Council conclusions of 17
February. However, we still feel it is necessary to
express our views on this critical issue.

Latvia would like to thank Mr. Blix and Mr.
ElBaradei for their reports. We express our
appreciation to their inspection teams for the work they
are doing in Iraq.

Latvia has repeatedly stressed that Iraq must fully
comply with its international obligations and
immediately rid itself of its weapons of mass
destruction, which present a clear threat to world peace
and security.

Over the past 12 years the Security Council has
repeatedly demanded Iraq's disarmament in 17
resolutions, which have failed to discourage Iraq from
developing its weapons of mass destruction. Resolution
1441 (2002) has offered Iraq the last chance to fulfil its
previous commitments and disarm. Iraq still remains in
material breach of its commitments under that
resolution.

It is the responsibility of Iraq to prove that this
disarmament is taking place. The inspectors' task is not
to play hide and seek with Iraqi authorities; the
inspectors are there to register the disarmament. Latvia
urges Iraq to take advantage of this last opportunity
presented by resolution 1441 (2002). The responsibility
of maintaining peace rests squarely on Iraq's shoulders.

As the European Council conclusions affirm, the
united stance of the international community, backed
by military force, has slowly moved Iraq in the
direction of more cooperation. Both of these elements
will continue to be essential tools to resolve the crisis.

Latvia regards the use of force as the last resort.
Nevertheless, it is for the Iraqi regime to end this crisis
by complying with the demands of the Security
Council. This requires an immediate change of attitude
on the part of Iraqi authorities. If this is not
forthcoming, only Iraq will be responsible for the
serious consequences that may follow.

Latvia will stand together with our allies in the
international community as it deals effectively with the
threat posed by Iraq to world peace and security. The
credibility of the United Nations, and the Security
Council in particular, is at stake here, and Latvia calls
upon the Council to take the necessary and appropriate
action in response to Iraq's continuing threat to
international peace and security. Let us not forget that
only Saddam Hussain benefits from discord within the
Security Council.

