Mr. Campbell (Ireland): May I offer you, Sir, our
sincere congratulations and good wishes on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The following associated countries -
Bulgaria, Hungary, Lithuania, Malta, Romania, Slovakia
and Slovenia - have aligned themselves with this
statement. Iceland and Liechtenstein also align themselves
with this statement.

It is with the utmost dismay that the member States
of the European Union learned of the latest grievous
outbreaks of violence in Jerusalem and throughout much
of the occupied territories. The catalyst for breaking the
peace on this occasion was the regrettable opening of a
tunnel connecting some of the most sacred and
archaeologically important sites in the Holy City. The
atmosphere among the Palestinian people has become so
charged by the frustration arising from the absence of any
real progress in the peace process over recent months that
a spark such as this was enough to ignite a wave of
violence and destruction.

It is particularly distressing that this violence should
be taking place among people whom we had all hoped
would increasingly have seen themselves by this stage as
active partners in a peace process which has been
welcomed throughout the world. The lack of progress in
the peace process, together with such decisions as the
lifting of the freeze on settlements, the failure to redeploy
Israeli troops from Hebron and the aforementioned
incident, are undermining the developing partnership

 

between the Israeli Government and the Palestinian
Authority.

The European Union deplores the killings that have
occurred as a result of this latest violence. We also fear the
deleterious effect that these events - the most serious
since the signing of the Declaration of Principles three
years ago - may have on the peace process in the Middle
East as a whole. There can be no doubt that the current
incidents are a most serious setback to this process, which
we all support.

The European Union is committed to its policy on the
status of Jerusalem. This policy is based on the view that
East Jerusalem is subject to the principles set out in
Security Council resolution 242 (1967), notably the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force, and
other Security Council resolutions pertinent to Jerusalem.
The European Union further asserts the full applicability of
the Fourth Geneva Convention in this regard. In particular,
the European Union opposes measures by any party which
would prejudge the outcome of the permanent status
negotiations.

The European Union recalls its statement of only
yesterday in which it urged all parties to exercise the
utmost restraint and to work to avoid confrontation.
Following the most recent loss of lives, it all the more
urgently calls upon the leaders of the parties jointly to
commit themselves to putting an end to the present
violence. At the same time, they should recognize that the
only solution is to pursue the current peace process with
renewed vigour. It is vital that international confidence be
re-established and commitment to the peace process
demonstrated.

We renew our call upon Israel to give clear practical
demonstration of its confirmed intention to implement fully
the agreements already reached and to carry forward the
peace process. We stress the crucial importance, for the
achievement of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace, of
the respect for the key principles agreed upon by both
parties: self-determination for the Palestinians, with all that
that implies, and land for peace.

The Heads of Government of the European Union, at
their meeting in Florence last June, reaffirmed that peace in
the Middle East is a fundamental interest of the Union. The
peace process alone can lead to security and peace for all
the countries and peoples of the region. We remain
dedicated to our support for this process. We again urge all
parties to resume negotiations on the basis of the principles
already accepted by both parties in the Madrid and Oslo
agreements. We recall, in particular, that it was agreed
between the sides that negotiations should include the
question of Jerusalem, noting its importance for the
parties and the international community, not least the need
to respect the established rights of religious institutions.
We recall also that the essential principles on which the
successful conclusion of negotiations should be based
have been enshrined in Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978).

Today the European Union exhorts the parties to
refrain from any action which might lead to any further
escalation of the violence in the occupied territories. It
calls upon their leaders, through their actions and their
words, to lead their people back to the path of peace.
Personal contact between President Arafat and Prime
Minister Netanyahu is clearly essential in the present
circumstances. Accordingly, the European Union urges
these two leaders to come together with the least delay to
resume the dialogue which alone can lead to the peace
which their people earnestly seek and deserve.

