Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo
and Lowcock for their briefings this morning.

China follows the humanitarian situation in
Syria and supports the United Nations and the parties
concerned in their tireless efforts to improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Last September,
Russia and Turkey signed the Sochi memorandum on
de-escalation in Idlib, affirming their determination
to combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
and to maintain stability in north-western Syria. China
supports Russia and Turkey in continuing to implement
the memorandum. The international community should
keep in mind the overall need for combating terrorism in
Syria and for working to ensure its territorial integrity
and its future, with a view to finding a comprehensive
and long-term solution to the issue of terrorism and the
humanitarian situation in north-western Syria.

China supports the United Nations and the other
parties involved in providing humanitarian relief
to displaced civilians in north-western Syria and
improving their living conditions. In discussing the
humanitarian situation there, we cannot ignore the
problem of combating terrorism. Terrorist groups
have been trying to expand their areas of influence
in recent months by launching frequent attacks that
have resulted in civilian casualties and damage to
infrastructure and have jeopardized humanitarian relief
efforts and undermined the security situation in the
region. China supports maintaining uniform criteria
and retaliating against terrorist groups' atrocities, in
line with the relevant Security Council resolutions and
international law.

China is equally concerned about the humanitarian
issues that people in other regions of Syria and in camps
for internally displaced persons are dealing with. We
urge that efforts be made to tailor solutions to the
situation on the ground. The population in the Al-Hol
camp has exceeded its capacity, and it will be essential
to increase humanitarian relief for the camp and find
an appropriate solution to the problem of resettling its
residents. The international community should also
strengthen its dialogue and communication with regard
to the issue of the Rukban camp and reach a consensus-
based solution that will enable more Syrians to return
home as soon as possible.

In areas where the security situation is relatively
stable, the international community should support the
Syrian Government in its efforts for reconstruction and
improving its people's livelihoods. China is concerned
about the negative impact of economic sanctions on
the livelihoods of the Syrian people. The humanitarian
relief operations in Syria should show full respect for
its sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity and adhere strictly to the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the United Nations Guiding
Principles on the right to humanitarian assistance and
the relevant norms of international law. The coordination
of communications with the Syrian Government should
be strengthened.

If we are to genuinely alleviate the humanitarian
situation in Syria, we must continue to advance the
political settlement process. In the quest for a settlement
that responds to the concerns of all sides, China supports
the United Nations in its role as the main channel for
mediation and Special Envoy Pedersen in encouraging
the parties in Syria to follow resolution 2254 (2015) and
the principle that the peace process should be Syrian-
led and Syrian-owned. We call on all parties in Syria
to work to overcome their differences through dialogue
and consultation in order to resolve specific issues in
the political process.

