Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
will be brief, because some of what I was going to say
has been said by others.

Mr. President, I want to join in complimenting
you and your team on the excellent job you have done
this month, and I join others in praising your service -
not just this month but during your time on the
Council - to the Council and to your region. We have
had a lot of important issues on our agenda this month,
as others have noted. However, I wanted to concentrate
on this meeting, because I think it was a particularly
good idea to have this meeting now, to hear from the
outgoing members and to have the benefit of their
views and comments as they review their time here.
Indeed, they have given all of us, and placed on record,
their insights into, and appreciation of, their time on
the Council and their views on what we have achieved
during those two years and on some of the things that
we have not achieved but will continue to work on.

As always, along with all of our colleagues on the
Council - new and old - we will continue to try to
find better ways to do our work. I note that, while we
all realize that there are many areas in which we can
improve, there are also areas in which improvements
have been made over the past couple of years. I think
that we are making progress in the transparency and the
interchange that all of us seek, but that, as Ambassador
Greenstock said, has in some respects still eluded us.

But every time we address this issue, I think that
we make a little bit of progress. As Ambassador
Strommen noted earlier, the concept that is developing
in meetings of ensuring that we hear views from others
on issues under consideration - as was the case in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo Panel meeting and
in the meeting on West Africa - does, I think, enrich
and improve our understanding of the subject matter
and, I hope, improve our product. I think that is a good
step.

I was also struck by Ambassador Durrant's
observations about coming to the Security Council and
having a better insight into the difficulty of building
peace, or finding peace, which is our primary and most
important task, and a very difficult one indeed. I think
that the admonition that we can do better in that regard
also can take us into the new year.

I should like to join my Chinese colleague in
wishing all of you the very best for the holidays, peace
on earth and goodwill towards men and women.

