Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
report of the Secretary-General on the progress
achieved in the implementation of the
recommendations of the Security Council mission to
Central Africa (S/2004/52) reflects something that my
delegation would like to emphasize today before the
Security Council, namely, that despite the signs of
positive developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi, there are still challenges to the
restoration of peace in its full sense to those two
countries. Conditions in the Great Lakes region in
general are still extremely serious, and we must exert
more effort to confront them. In this context, my
delegation would like to make the following remarks.

First, it is important to recognize that the post-
conflict phase in Central Africa requires partnerships
between the transitional Government, the United
Nations, the concerned regional and international
parties, the African Union, subregional organizations
and the community of international donors. Those
partnerships must be based on the principle of
integrated and balanced responsibilities among the
partners.

We now have a clearer understanding of the needs
and requirements of the different phases of
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building in the
region. Those requirements go beyond the very limited
concept of peace to a much broader list of inter-related
and overlapping political, humanitarian, economic and
social elements. Such elements require an integrated
package of assistance, incentives and obligations,
which could be difficult to turn into practical measures
if the required partnerships are not achieved.

Secondly, because addressing those elements in
one State acquires specific importance based on the
nature, specificity and aspects of that State's ongoing
conflict, we urgently need a more comprehensive
regional vision of the broad-based issues which extend
beyond the national borders of any individual country
and impact regional stability and peace. Such issues
include, in particular, the status of refugees,
repatriation of ex-combatants to their original countries
and social and economic development.

We therefore look forward to the continuation of
the current preparatory process for an international
conference on peace, security and democracy in the
Great Lakes region, under the joint auspices of the
United Nations and the African Union. The idea of
holding the conference is a practical translation of the
concept of partnership to which we aspire, as well as a
manifestation of the comprehensive vision of the
organic link between the concepts of security, on the
one hand, and development, on the other hand,
including its political, economic and social elements.

In that context, my delegation would like to
express its appreciation for the invitation extended by
the seven core countries to Egypt to participate in the
conference as an observer, a matter which reflects the
strong natural and strategic links between the peoples
of the Nile Valley and those of the Great Lakes. Here I
note that we aspire to contribute to that process by
providing the necessary political and technical
guidance to make the conference successful and to
reach its goals and objectives.

Thirdly, the Central African region, and
particularly Burundi, is witnessing the beginnings of
the evolution of the role of the African Union in
peacekeeping efforts in the continent. We would like
today to note our appreciation ofthe African States that
are participating in the first peacekeeping mission that
the African Union has successfully implemented, in
Burundi, despite the well-known financial and
logistical difficulties that the mission faces. Here, we
call for the United Nations and the community of
international donors to provide all forms of political,
technical and financial assistance to the African Union
in Burundi, as an emerging model reflecting the desire
of Africans to undertake an ever-growing role in
peacekeeping and to gradually fulfil their participation
in the international partnership to bring peace and
security to Africa.

Fourthly and finally, the relative progress
achieved in the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is an indicator of what can be
achieved by a partnership between the United Nations
and the national, regional and international powers
during one of the most difficult and intractable crises,
provided that the parties have the necessary political
will.

One of the most significant challenges facing the
partners in the forthcoming stage is how to deal with
the continuing illegal exploitation of the natural
resources ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe Congo and
how to channel the revenues from its natural resources
towards efforts to bring peace and reconstruction,
instead of using those resources to destabilize the
eastern and northeastern areas of country. Those
resources must serve, as well, in the rehabilitation and
reform of the security sector as preparation to gradually
extend the authority of the transitional Government to
all parts of the country.

In that context, we look forward to the Security
Council taking specific steps to deal with the link
between the illegal exploitation of natural resources
and the flow of arms to the forces and factions which
resist and obstruct efforts to bring about peace and
reconstruction in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

We look forward to the transitional Government
and the international donors being committed to their
agreements concerning the measures and steps
necessary to reform the national security sector. We
believe that the members of this Council should
recognize that the huge efforts already invested in the
restoration of stability to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo deserve all ways and means possible to
overcome the challenges that still threaten that country
which is considered a cornerstone of stability in the
Central Africa region as a whole.

Finally, I would like to express to you, Sir, our
deepest thanks for organizing this meeting.
