Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to express my delegation's great
appreciation to Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
extremely valuable contribution to the peace process in
Afghanistan and for his very instructive briefing on
recent political developments in that country. We
would also like to pay tribute to the reforming vision of
the President of the Transitional Authority, Mr. Hamid
Karzai, who has manifested his determination to help
to build a new Afghanistan that is no longer plagued by
retrograde thinking and is respectful of the rule of law
and oriented towards building a prosperous economy
while being fully at peace with its neighbours.

We greatly deplore the reprehensible
assassination of Vice-President Haji Abdul Qadir. We
certainly hope that the investigations under way will
shed light on the incident, so that the perpetrators may
be punished in a manner commensurate with the crime.

The briefing we have just heard has enabled us to
gauge the progress made since the holding of the
Emergency Loya Jirga, and especially now that
Afghans have just established a new Transitional
Authority that will be responsible for guiding their
destiny pending free and regular elections. Now that
the Transitional Authority has been established, it is
incumbent upon Afghans to become more aware of the
situation they face. They must roll up their sleeves and,
in an atmosphere of peace and solidarity, utilize this
important achievement as a springboard towards a
better future.
In this long-term undertaking, the international
community - through the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the various
donors - is duty-bound to make a generous
contribution. The success or failure of the operation
will be the real litmus test by which the Afghan people
will judge our resolve and sincerity in assisting them.
In this regard, my delegation believes that, as far as
UNAMA is concerned, special attention should also be
given to humanitarian assistance, reconstruction and
economic recovery. As we have always pointed out, it
would be pointless to imagine any kind of recovery in
Afghanistan today without providing access to
humanitarian assistance, particularly in the area of
food, to displaced persons and the large number of
refugees returning to the country. That recovery would
also be in vain without a genuine policy to restore basic
infrastructure.

Above and beyond those aspects, which are
admittedly important in themselves, my delegation
would like to stress the need to create and maintain a
climate of peace and security throughout Afghanistan.
It is clear, as Mr. Brahimi's briefing has pointed out,
that there are still a number of regions of the country
that are in the grip of rivalries being fuelled by
warlords who continue to defy the central power. We
must therefore assist the new Transitional Authority to
extend its authority throughout the country in order
that it may play its role fully. To do that, the efforts to
form a representative national army must be
accelerated. Similarly, the demobilization programme
for former combatants must be strengthened. At the
same time, the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) - whose remarkable performance we laud -
should step up its efforts to deter any attempt to
jeopardize peace. The struggle against pockets of
Taliban resistance and the Al Qaeda network should
also be pursued more vigorously.

The path charted by the Bonn Agreement is long
and arduous. Every stage reached in the
implementation of the Agreement must be viewed as an
opportunity to fulfil new duties, so that the process can
be completed successfully and in accordance with the
commitments undertaken.

In conclusion, my delegation is convinced that, in
this delicate and snag-riddled exercise, the
international community will act as one to respond to
the wishes expressed by the people of Afghanistan,
who dream of a better future.

