Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank you for convening this open debate. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing earlier.

Last month marked the start of the fifth year of
the Syrian conflict. For the past four years, Al-Assad
has repressed, maimed and killed his own people.
He has ruined the country he should protect. Syria is
now a shell of its former self, and still the situation
gets worse. We are deeply concerned by the fate of
the Palestinian refugees in Yarmouk, where intense
fighting is continuing between armed groups, including
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
Jabhat Al-Nusrah. Thousands of civilians, including
many children, have been living under siege from the
Al-Assad regime for nearly two years, and are trapped,
with little access to humanitarian assistance. The plight
of the people in Yarmouk is also the tragic reality for
more than 440,000 Syrians currently under siege by
Al-Assad and ISIL, without access to humanitarian
assistance. That includes nearly 230,000 people
besieged in Dayr Al-Zour by ISIL. They face severe
shortages of food and basic goods. Power and water
supplies have been cut and public health concerns are
growing. We call on all groups to protect civilians,
ensure humanitarian access and allow the safe passage
and evacuation of civilians.

The need for a political settlement in Syria has never
been more pressing. The regime's recent loss of Idlib
shows that neither side can win on the battlefield. There
is no military solution. The only way to bring about
sustainable peace remains a political transition through
mutual agreement of the Syrian parties, supported by
the international community. The Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, Staffan de Mistura,
continues to have the United Kingdom's strong support
in his efforts to achieve that, and we look forward to his
briefing later this week. We remain clear that Al-Assad
can play no part in Syria's future.

We must also be unwavering in our humanitarian
commitment to Syria. We thank Kuwait for their
leadership in hosting the third International
Humanitarian Pledging Conference. The $3.8 billion
pledged goes a long way to meeting the United Nations
financing needs for 2015. The United Kingdom itself
has now committed more than $1.2 billion to the Syrian
crisis. But more needs to be done. We urge all States
to disburse their pledges promptly, and we encourage
the United Nations' humanitarian agencies and their
partners to scale up humanitarian deliveries to besieged
areas, including through cross-border routes.

I will now turn to the Middle East peace process.
We all know that the only way to resolve this 60-year
old conflict is through a negotiated two-State solution.
We must have renewed international efforts to support
progress and to start serious negotiations towards a deal.
The parties themselves must also resume negotiations
to reach a durable ceasefire in Gaza and tackle the
underlying causes of the conflict. The Palestinians need
to take concrete steps towards moving the Palestinian
Authority back to Gaza, starting with border crossings.
Israel must support Gaza with exports, energy and
water. Egypt needs to resume its mediation role and

show flexibility in opening Rafah, and donors need to
deliver on their pledges as soon as possible.

The regional turmoil we are witnessing only
reinforces the importance of resolving the Israel-
Palestine conflict. Both parties must think seriously
about how they can work together to improve the reality
on the ground. It is clear that comprises on the part of
both parties are needed. Israel must stop its illegal and
totally unnecessary settlement building, which seems
designed to undermine a two-State solution. It should,
instead, be easing economic conditions on the ground
and removing barriers to Palestinian development.

Furthermore, while the Palestinians seek legal
international roots to statehood, they must realize
that there can be no substitute for negotiations with
Israel. The United Kingdom sees merit in the Council
adopting a clear resolution setting out the parameters
for a peaceful and negotiated solution. That will require
proper consultation to achieve the full backing of the
Council.

As this is my final Middle East open debate, I
would like to thank Council members, past and present,
for their efforts on these issues over the past five
years. But it is deeply regrettable that greater progress
on Syria and the Middle East peace process has not
been possible during this time. Much greater unity of
purpose and more willingness for members to set aside
their narrowly defined interests will be needed if we
are to overcome these intractable issues in the future.

