Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States joins in welcoming to the Council
Special Representative Riicker, Prime Minister Ceku
and Ms. Raskovic-Ivic.

The United States continues to support the role
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) is playing in developing meaningful
self-government in Kosovo, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). We
appreciate the leadership of Mr. Riicker and the work
he is doing to prepare Kosovo for its future political
status.

The United States is encouraged by the progress
Kosovo is making in implementing the Contact
Group's standards priorities. Kosovo should make
every effort, with the full support of UNMIK, to
complete all of the priorities and to continue work on
the overall standards for Kosovo, paying particular
attention to respecting individual property rights.

We strongly condemn the 8 December explosion
of a railway line in the municipality of Vushtrri and
note with concern reports of illegal checkpoints being
established in western Kosovo. We call upon all sides
to refrain from violence and to respect the rule of law.
Individuals responsible for the 8 December explosion
and other violent incidents should be brought to
justice. Belgrade must also do its part to help improve
the situation in Kosovo by supporting Kosovo Serb
participation in local institutions, returning cadastral
records taken from Kosovo and working with the
international community to ensure stability,
particularly in northern Kosovo.

Six and a half years have passed since
international community intervention brought an end to
the fighting in Kosovo. The people of Kosovo - all
the people of Kosovo - deserve clarity about their
future. As the Secretary-General notes in his recent
report on Kosovo, the mere speculation about delay in
the status process has led to a feeling of uncertainty as
to the way ahead and could represent a source of
instability if momentum abates. We agree with the
Secretary-General's assessment that it is important to
keep the momentum in the political process and
achieve a status settlement soon.

We thank President Ahtisaari for his leadership of
the Kosovo status talks. The United States supports
President Ahtisaari's decision to present his report
without delay to the parties following the 21 January

elections in Serbia. To that end, we ask both Belgrade
and Pristina to receive President Ahtisaari's report with
open minds, a willingness to be flexible on the many
issues under discussion, and an understanding of the
importance of reaching a settlement that helps
accelerate that region's Euro-Atlantic integration.

As the United Nations-led status process enters
its concluding stages, both sides must be realistic about
the probable outcome. As the Contact Group has stated,
there will be no return of Kosovo to the pre-l999
situation, no partition of Kosovo, and no union of
Kosovo with any other or part of another country.
Additionally, the settlement must solidify Kosovo's
multi-ethnicity and must also offer real protection for
the political and cultural rights of all communities in
Kosovo. At the same time, the settlement must be
acceptable to the people of Kosovo.

Finally, it is important for UNMIK, as well as the
Pristina and Belgrade authorities, to work closely with
the representatives of NATO, the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and others in the international community on the
transition planning needed for the period following the
conclusion of the status process.

