Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa): May I begin by
congratulating Singapore on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council. I also extend my delegation's
congratulations to the other new members of the
Council.

My delegation also wishes to commend you, Mr.
President, for preparing an excellent discussion paper,
which certainly highlights the most important aspects
requiring our ongoing focus and attention.

Part of the problem that has beset United Nations
peacekeeping in the last few years, and most recently
demonstrated by events in Sierra Leone, has been the
lack of coordination between key role-players. My
delegation has therefore welcomed the Brahimi report's
recommendations, which focused on this particular
problem. In light of recent discussions among Member
States on the Brahimi report, the debate on this theme
could not have come at a more opportune time.

Meaningful consultations between the Council,
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and the Secretariat
form an important part of coordination and
cooperation, which are an essential requirement for the
successful implementation of peacekeeping mandates
and the overall efforts to improve United Nations
peacekeeping. South Africa's policy of participation in
peace missions identifies the need for consultations on
peacekeeping mandates as an important determining
factor for our effective participation in peacekeeping
operations. Consequently, my delegation has, on
various occasions, underlined the need for the creation
of a system of more meaningful consultations between
TCCs and the Council during all phases of
peacekeeping operations, from conceptualization to
termination.

My delegation was therefore pleased to note the
adoption of resolution 1327 (2000) of 13 November
2000, in which the Council commits itself to
significantly strengthen the existing system of
consultations at the various phases of a peacekeeping
operation. We are particularly pleased that the Council
has acknowledged that consultations may now be
initiated by troop contributors, because this increases
the opportunities to hold such consultations.
Furthermore, the recommendations of the Special
Committee on this question certainly complement and
build on the provisions of resolution 1327 (2000), and
we hope that the Council will implement them. Of
particular importance to us in this regard is the need to
adhere to the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter
when the use of force is authorized by the Council.

You rightly point out, Mr. President, that the
above-mentioned improvements to the system of
consultations are part of an ongoing process which was
initiated almost a decade ago. The practice has,
however, almost never accorded with the spirit of the
commitment to enhanced consultation. The momentum
created by the Brahimi report thus needs to be
sustained to ensure that consultations are not pseudo-
consultations, but that they provide for real interaction.
They must become the platform for a genuine exchange
of views during which key role-players can express
their concerns and interests. The quality aspect of
consultations also places particular responsibility on
the Secretariat to improve access to information in
order to facilitate a free exchange of views between
TCCs and the Council.

In the discussion paper, a pertinent issue is raised
regarding the sufficiency of the current arrangements
for consultations. My delegation believes that the
Brahimi report's recommendation on subsidiary bodies,
in accordance with Article 29 of the Charter of the
United Nations, remains valid and should be pursued in
the Council's efforts to continually improve the system
of consultations.

In conclusion, I would like to reassure the
Security Council that South Africa remains ready to
participate in the promotion of peace and security
around the world. President Mbeki summed up South
Africa's role in peacekeeping when he said:

"Our men and women from our National Defence
Force have been selected to serve with United
Nations peacekeepers in the Congo, Ethiopia and
Eritrea and may be called upon to assist in Sierra
Leone. None of us will ever forget the
extraordinary humanitarian work our Air Force
did to rescue 15,000 flood-stricken Mozambicans.
Many of us will not be aware of the subsequent
work done by our Air Force to distribute ballot
papers in Mozambique, as our contribution to that
country's efforts to consolidate its democracy. We
salute that distinguished South African, Nelson
Mandela, who has spared no effort to bring about
peace to the sister republic of Burundi and wish
him success in his difficult task."

