Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa for his
valuable statement and for his efforts in leading the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA). I would also like to thank Ambassador Tete
Antonio and Mr. Sylvain-Goma for their briefings.

We have had the pleasure of hearing Mr. Moussa
say that the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) is carrying out its role in full,

justifying the hopes that we have placed in it,
particularly given the current situation in Central
Africa. In that regard, we are grateful to Gabon for
hosting the Office and helping it function well. We
commend the Special Representative's visits to the
region and for his preparations for the 33rd ministerial
meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, to
be held at early next month in Bangui.

We affirm the importance of UNOCA's
responsibility for improving cooperation in Central
Africa with regional organizations such as the
Economic Community of Central African States, as
well as with United Nations agencies and missions in
the region, in order to strengthen stability and security,
to combat piracy in Equatorial Guinea and

repercussions from the Libyan crisis - including
weapons trafficking and incursions by armed
combatants - to promote the role of women, and to

mitigate the impact of economic and other crises,
which is particularly important. We emphasize the
Office's importance as an instrument of preventive
diplomacy and as an effective and affordable resource
for preventing conflicts in that strategically important
part of the world.

As an institution with regional dimensions, the
Office is genuinely needed in fighting the dangers
posed by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) in four
countries. We reiterate our condemnation of that armed
group's attacks on civilians, occupation and
terrorization of villages, and use of various methods of
Violence and intimidation, including the abduction of
women and children, which has led to internal
displacement or refugee status for hundreds of
thousands and to the suffering of many in the region.

In that regard, we call for more regional
coordination and international cooperation in putting
an end to the LM's bloody attacks. We welcome the
meeting held under United Nations auspices in
Kinshasa on 29 and 30 September, which brought
together the Chiefs of Defence Staff of the four
countries concerned. We encourage the African Union
to expedite the implementation of its regional
coordinated strategy for combating the LRA, the
appointment of a special envoy, and the establishment
of the regional intervention force and the joint
operations centre. All of this should dovetail with
intensified efforts to deal with the roots of the problem
by encouraging combatants to lay down their arms and
return to society. We can only commend the efforts of
the various United Nations missions in the countries of
the region to help civilians and end the dangers posed
by the LRA.

Finally, we would like to thank the mission of the
United Kingdom for having prepared the draft
presidential statement, which we support.

