Mr. C6 (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French): As
I begin my statement, Mr. President, I would like to
reiterate the congratulations of Guinea-Bissau for the
outstanding way in which your country, Equatorial
Guinea, assumed the presidency ofthe Security Council
during this particularly busy month of February. Your
presidency, which ends today, will bear the hallmark
of efficiency. Suffice it to mention the valuable and
fruitful debate (see S/PV.8473) held yesterday at your
initiative on cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations in silencing the guns in
Africa by 2020. In addition, the Council unanimously
adopted landmark resolution 2457 (2019), which will
go down in the annals of relations between the African
Union and the United Nations.

Allow me to also express our gratitude to you, Sir,
and to all the members of the Council for the visit to
Bissau on 15 and 16 February. The Council's visit on
the ground provided an opportunity for it to meet all
the protagonists in the country's political life as well
as members of civil society. In the course of its visit,
which was certainly brief but nevertheless rich in
lessons, the Council was received by our country's most
senior officials, including in particular the President of
the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Jose Mario Vaz, and
Prime Minister Aristides Gomes, with whom members
had frank and instructive exchanges.

We wanted to participate in this meeting of the
Council because it marks, on the one hand, the last
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
in its current configuration, after almost 20 years of
presence in our country, and, on the other hand, because
we wanted to take this opportunity both to express our
gratitude to the Security Council for its support during
all those years and to reiterate to Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres our great appreciation for his personal
commitment on behalf of Guinea-Bissau and its people,
as well as to assure him of our full support in carrying
out the ongoing reforms of the United Nations system.
Resolution 2458 (2019), which the Council just
adopted, follows the recommendations of the Secretary-
General for the reconfiguration of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea Bissau, the
restructuring of the United Nations presence in our
country and a new hierarchy of tasks. The changes and
other structural adaptations and way of functioning set
out are truly a new approach based on the experiences of
the past and the reality on the ground. The restructuring
clearly responds to a major concern for rationalization
and the need for a greater impact on the course of
events, including a real impact on the population and
the socioeconomic development of our country.

Since the opening of the United Nations Office in
Guinea-Bissau in 1999, our country has experienced
recurring political instability, which sometimes makes
it difficult for some to illustrate the achievements of
the United Nations in Guinea-Bissau. In that regard,
we would like to reassure the members of the Security
Council and the international community in general by
emphatically saying that the presence of UNIOGBIS in
our country has been of great value. We have witnessed
and benefited during all the years from the constructive
engagement of the different teams that have come to
our country, as well as from the important role played
by the successive Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General. I would like, here and now, to pay
tribute to them and thank them very sincerely on behalf
of my country.

This is also the time and place to pay tribute,
on behalf of my country's highest authorities, to His
Excellency President Muhammadu Buhari of the Federal
Republic ofNigeria and His Excellency President Alpha
Conde' of the Republic of Guinea, as well as to our
subregional organization, the Economic Community of
West African States, and all its leaders, to which we are
grateful for their crucial role in maintaining peace and
stability in Guinea Bissau.

The active presence of our partners in Guinea-
Bissau has greatly contributed to initiating several
reforms, particularly in the areas of defence, security,
justice, the rule of law, gender equality and the
promotion of national reconciliation. With regard to the
latter, which remains vital, I would like to underline the
important contribution of UNIOGBIS to the preparation
and the realization of the work that led to the signing by
the political actors and civil society of a stability pact
and code of conduct in View of the legislative elections
scheduled for 10 March.

We are in a process. It is therefore a question of
continuing and deepening the reflection, with a view to
enabling Guinea-Bissau to take ownership of the new,
more dynamic, more effective and less costly approach
to cooperation with the United Nations system as a
whole. We hope that all the steps leading up to the closure
of UNIOGBIS in 2020 will be completed according to
the established plan. The transition phase should be a
period during which the authorities of Guinea-Bissau
are be able, through a permanent dialogue with the
United Nations, to benefit more from the experience
accumulated by the country team on the ground. This
new form of cooperation must extend to all agencies,
bodies, funds and programmes, in order to consolidate
the gains already made in the areas I mentioned, and
thereby enable our country, Guinea-Bissau, to create the
conditions for harmonious, sustained and sustainable
development in a climate of peace, security and lasting
political stability.

The meeting rose at 10.30 am.
