Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I warmly
thank the Secretary-General for his important briefing
and assure him of France's full support for the approach
that he has just set out. I also thank the American
presidency for having convened this meeting. The issue
bringing us together today, peacekeeping and the men
and women serving in peacekeeping operations - the
Blue Helmets - are very much the identity and very
face of the United Nations.

I should like to make three specific points.

My first is that United Nations peacekeeping
operations save lives every day; their work is invaluable.
In the past, in Namibia, Cambodia, El Salvador,
Slovenia, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Timor-Leste and Cote
d'Ivoire, and today in the Central African Republic,
Mali, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South
Sudan, Lebanon and Darfur, Blue Helmets have been
preventing clashes, protecting civilians and clearing
the way for political processes. They do so at a low cost,
because the peacekeeping operations budget accounts
for only 0.5 per cent of the world's annual global
military expenditure. This is therefore an essential and
responsible investment.

The major traumas that have taken place since
the Second World War occurred where peacekeeping
failed - I am thinking here of Srebrenica and
Rwanda - and where peacekeeping was not present,
such as in Syria. Those failures are rightly etched
into our collective memory. But we all know that
Blue Helmet bases frequently represent a vulnerable
population's only hope in the face of armed groups that
terrorize, loot and kill, their only way out and their only
recourse, quite simply, for even a chance at survival.
Who else would want or be able to ensure the protection
of civilians in so many dangerous theatres? On the other
hand, who would want to be responsible for abandoning
the peoples of South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo or the Central African Republic to their fate?
In that regard, I would like to commend the actions of
the almost 110,000 men and women who are deployed
and working today to avoid such tragedies, and to pay
tribute to the more than 3,400 peacekeepers who have
lost their lives on mission since 1948.

My secondpointis thatUnitedNations peacekeeping
is constantly under review and continues to be
committed to improving and moving forward. There
has been an ongoing focus on improving peacekeeping
for years, and much has already been done. The most
recent integrated and multidimensional operations are
based on a concept whereby their mandates revolve
around both immediate and vital priorities, such as the
protection of civilians and human rights, and longer-
term tasks, such as support to political processes,
reforms and the restoration of State authority, which
are a guarantee of effectiveness and a successful,
sustainable exit from a crisis. Those mandates require
an integrated approach on the part of all United Nations
actors, including funds, agencies and programmes. The
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General have
become the conductors orchestrating the continuum
of peace, security and development that we try
to encourage.
On the operational front, peacekeeping missions
are now expected to protect civilians actively and
robustly, as the recent actions of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)have
shown. We have been scaling up troops, capacities and
leadership, as well as training, equipment, intelligence,
medical support, language capacities - which the
countries of la Francophonie have worked particularly
hard to advance - air support and police components.
That list is not exhaustive, but these are all areas that
are evolving significantly. This is a big effort, and the
troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat have
put a great deal into it. Thanks to that progress, United
Nations operations can bring the greatest legitimacy
and the most comprehensive approach in responding
to a conflict. National operations such as those that
France is deploying in the Sahel and the Central
African Republic can act only as supplements, not
substitutes. But the United Nations is not always the
right tool or the only one. That is where partnering with
regional organizations makes sense, and we support the
joint United Nations efforts with the African Union
under resolution 2320 (2016), based on comparative
advantages and in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.

Does that mean that all is well? No, but my third
point is that we have to make the right diagnoses and
be firm in administering the cures. Some difficulties
arise from specific situations, while others are more
systemic. Sexual abuse has undermined peacekeepers'
integrity and their calling as protectors. Serious failures
of the imperative to protect civilians, in South Sudan
and elsewhere, are still shocking. From maintaining our
zero-tolerance policy on sexual abuse to investigating
mandate failures, we must do everything possible to
correct and prevent such serious dysfunctionality. But
overall, our diagnosis must be fair, since some of the
structural difficulties of peacekeeping are outside an
operation's control. If some remain for too long, or if
others seem too timid, that is because they can succeed
only if they are based on the triple foundation of a
unified Security Council, the joint political willingness
of the parties involved to emerge from conflict, and
troops who are determined to implement their mandate.

Based on those considerations, France urges that we
draw various conclusions that can enable us to continue
to adapt peacekeeping to our current challenges. Those
conclusions include, first, closing an operation and
transferring its responsibilities to the country team
when a mandate is fulfilled, as is currently the case
with the United Nations Operation in Cote d'lvoire and
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. To
that we could add the United Nations Mission in Liberia
and the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo, which have largely achieved their objectives.
Drawing the right conclusions also means recognizing
that some missions - such as the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, MINUSCA and the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon - must be maintained because they play a
vital role, despite the frustrations that can result from
the slow pace of political processes.

Drawing the right conclusions also means
continuing to work to ensure that the operations are
truly in a position to succeed. There are several elements
to that. The first is encouraging the Security Council
to be united in directing operations. That support is
essential to their success. The second is strengthening
our support to political processes, including when they
are driven by our regional partners, as in South Sudan.
Every effort should be made to ensure coherence in our
collective action and in achieving results. We should
remember that for those political efforts to succeed, the
violence has to stop and civilians have to be protected.
The third is structuring relationships with host States so
that we can have a genuine exchange of commitments
and responsibilities. That is why we support mutual
commitment frameworks and making them routine. The
fourth is continuing our efforts to give operations the
right troops, skills and equipment for their mandates.
That requires maintaining a tripartite partnership
among the Council, the Secretariat and the troop- and
police-contributing countries, to which France is an
active contributor. Lastly, drawing the right conclusions
means being ambitious and demanding in our efforts
to better integrate United Nations peacekeeping into
its global environment and the peace continuum that
the Secretary-General is promoting, with France's
full support.

Why has peacekeeping, which began as an ad hoc
concept, seen its ambitions and its resources grow in
this way? Because it is a tool for all of us, and because
it has been proving its usefulness for 60 years. We
commend the significant discussion we have had
today i for which I would once again like to thank the
United States presidency - since it will enable us to
make our collective action stronger and more effective
than before.

