The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Gabon.

In turn, I would like to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy
for his briefing, which was very informative regarding
the latest developments on the situation in Afghanistan.
My gratitude goes, of course, to Ambassador Tanin for
his statement, which, among other things, reflected the
Afghan authorities' determination to abide by their
commitments in the context of the reconstruction
process in their country.

Since 6 January, when the Security Council last
debated the situation in Afghanistan (see S/PV.6255),
one significant development in the Afghan situation
was the organization in London, on 28 January, of the
International Conference on Afghanistan at the
initiative of the British and Afghan Governments and
the Secretary-General. The priorities identified at the
Conference were endorsed by the international
community and mark a new phase in the process of
transferring to Afghan authorities the full management
of their country's affairs in the fields of security, good
governance and economic and social development.
Gabon supports that approach and the commitment of
the Afghan authorities to implementing the priorities
contained in the plan of action adopted at the London
Conference.

During this decisive phase, the efforts of the
international community aimed at constructing this
country, must be continued and strengthened. I would
like to renew our full support for United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for the
central role it plays, not only in the coordination of
international civilian actions in Afghanistan, but also,
more comprehensively, in the process of developing
the country. We reiterate our solidarity with the men
and women who, within the framework of this Mission,
are working in the field, especially given the constant
threats to their security.

Gabon also welcomes the efforts by other players
in Afghanistan: the European Union, NATO and the
United States of America. The future of Afghanistan is
being built today, despite the many challenges that
continue to threaten the country's political and
economic stability. It is thus in our interest to renew
our commitment to a peaceful, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan. That is why we support the extension of
UNAMA's mandate for a further 12 months.

The next conference, which will be held in Kabul
in a few months, will afford the Afghan Government
and people a new opportunity to reaffirm their
determination to build the future of their country
themselves.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Given that the Council has scheduled
consultations at 3 p.m., I ask the members of the
Council that we complete this meeting, with the hope
that it will end by 3 o'clock at the latest. I request all
speakers to limit their statements to five minutes to
ensure that the Council can end its meeting on time.

I invite the representative of Canada to take the
floor.
Mr. McNee (Canada) (spoke in French) At the
outset, I would like to convey my gratitude to Under-
Secretary-General Le Roy for his very useful
presentation this morning.

As the Secretary-General stresses in his latest
report (S/2010/ 127), the coming months in Afghanistan
will be crucial with regard to the transition to a greater
Afghan leadership. There has already been
considerable progress in that direction during the last
three months, with a London conference that was very
fruitful and the deployment of much-needed additional

forces, especially in the south of Afghanistan. It is now
important for the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community to live up to their London
commitments. It is essential that the United Nations
and the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. De Mistura, play a central role as we
move toward our common goals. Mr. De Mistoura has
one of the most challenging posts in the United
Nations. He can count on Canada's full support.

In the past three months many Afghans and
members of the international community have lost their
lives or been injured. These sacrifices weigh heavily on
all of us. Canada, which grieves its own losses, shares
the pain of all those who have lost loved ones.

Canada looks to the Security Council to renew
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) so that it remains robust and
enables the Mission to continue its work on a whole
gamut of essential issues. Canada believes that the new
mandate should take into account the development of
the situation in Afghanistan. It should provide
UNAMA with the direction it needs to continue to play
a preponderant role in the coordination of the
international effort with regard to Afghan elections.
The mandate should also reflect the transition-oriented
spirit of the London Conference and authorize the
Mission to play fully its political role and its role with
regard to coordination of international aid.

Furthermore, UNAMA's human resources also
need to be strengthened as a matter of urgency, as its
staff numbers and ability to fulfil its core tasks have
been severely affected in recent months.

(spoke in English)

The London Conference heralded the hope for a
new transition phase for Afghanistan. It emphasized to
the Afghan public, as well as to the domestic audiences
of countries engaged in the reconstruction effort, that
the Government of Afghanistan intends to strengthen
Afghan leadership in delivering security and support to
the well-being of Afghans. However, the challenge is
now for us all to follow up on the commitments of the
London Conference.

Canada recognizes that the Afghan authorities are
progressing along the difficult road of transition in
assuming increased responsibility for security. That
will require Afghanistan and its international
community partners, including UNAMA and NATO, to
work closely together to implement a well-coordinated
transition strategy that is based on a careful assessment
of conditions on the ground and that provides the
Government with the capacity to protect its civilians.

There are many challenges, not least of which is
the increased rate of violence caused by insurgents still
fighting efforts to establish a stable and prosperous
Afghanistan. Canada welcomes President Karzai's
emphasis on reconciliation and high-level efforts to
achieve an inclusive Government. Reconciliation and
reintegration will play an important complementary
role to stabilization and development. Canada
welcomes the holding of an Afghan peace jirga and
hopes that it will provide an opportunity for
substantive exchange and consultation between
different Afghan communities and civil society on
reconciliation.

In addition, because increasing violence has also
targeted women and girls - especially those in the
public sphere i it is essential that women's
participation be a central feature of the upcoming
peace jirga and Kabul conference as Afghans work
together to build consensus on building peace.

The Kabul conference will be an important
opportunity for the Afghan Government to present
progress and for the international community to lend
its voice of support to positive outcomes. Canada is
looking to the Afghan Government to demonstrate
progress in several areas prior to the conference.

In particular, the London Conference included
extensive commitments on electoral reform. Canada
strongly supports the need for electoral reforms ahead
of the September elections, but we note with concern
reports that changes have recently been made to the
electoral law that may decrease the independence of
the Electoral Complaints Commission. Canada stresses
the crucial importance of undertaking all reforms in a
transparent manner, in consultation with civil society
and Afghan citizens themselves.

The international community also needs to live
up to its London commitments to better coordinate its
efforts with those of the United Nations and other
international partners in support of the priorities of the
Afghan Government. Canada urges the United Nations
system and the rest of the international community to
follow through on the commitments from London to
enhance donor coordination under UNAMA's lead and
Afghan direction, to make international assistance

more efficient and effective until the Government of
Afghanistan is able to fully take on this role. It will
also be important for the United Nations to work in
close cooperation with the new NATO Senior Civilian
Representative to ensure a synergy of mandates and
efforts.

It is important not to lose sight of the overall
vision of an Afghanistan where a democratic
Government fulfils all its essential roles, including the
delivery of basic services, the provision of effective,
transparent and accountable governance, the protection
of its citizens, economic development and the
protection and promotion of the human rights of all
Afghans, including women's rights. The international
community and the Government of Afghanistan must
continue working together towards making this vision
a reality.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Peter Schwaiger, Charge d'affaires of the
European Union delegation to the United Nations.


