The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council this year, I should like take this
opportunity to extend a very warm welcome to
everyone and to wish a fruitful new year to all
members of the Security Council, the United Nations
and the Secretariat.

On behalf of the Council, I would also like to
extend a warm welcome to the new members, namely,
Azerbaijan, Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo.
We look forward to their participation in the work of
the Council. Their experience and wisdom will be of
invaluable assistance in the discharge of the Council's
responsibilities.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
express the Council's gratitude to the outgoing
members - Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon,
Lebanon and Nigeria 4 for their important
contributions to the work of the Council during their
term in 2010 and 2011.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President: I should like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
His Excellency Mr. Vitaly Churkin, Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the
month of December 2011. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Churkin and his team for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (S/2011/814)


The President: Under rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of South Sudan and the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
2

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Herve'
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2011/814, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.


