Mr. Mavros (Cyprus): At the outset, I would like to
express our deep sadness about the death ofAmbassador
Vitaly Churkin, a prominent and highly experienced
diplomat who skilfully represented Russia at the United
Nations for more than a decade and contributed to the
promotion of the United Nations agenda.

It is an honour to participate in today's discussion
focusing on conflicts in Europe and their impact
on international peace and stability. I would like to
start by joining the previous speakers in conveying
my Government's congratulations to the Ukrainian
presidency of the Security Council for convening
today's important meeting.

Cyprus aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union (EU), and would like to
add the following remarks in its national capacity.

As a country that since its independence has relied
heavily on the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations in maintaining its independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity, Cyprus fully abides by the
principles of the United Nations and international law.
In the same way, Cyprus shares the concerns already
expressed as regards the multiple challenges putting
international peace and stability at risk. To that end,
Cyprus fully subscribes to the statement made on behalf
of the European Union, as regards the importance of
further strengthening cooperation between regional
and international organizations. Closer cooperation and
strategic coordination at the regional and international
level can lead to a more targeted and effective response
from the international community to existing threats
and dangerous developments.

We would like to thank Ukraine for including
Cyprus in the concept note of today's open debate (see S/2017/108, annex). Cyprus has been on the agenda of
the Security Council since 1963. The United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus is an example, in our
view, of an efficient, cost-effective peacekeeping
mission and a pioneer for gender parity in peace
operations. The political track of the mission also
constitutes an example of positive collaboration with
the European Union, whose role is catalytic in the
efforts for a solution that will be fully compatible with
Cyprus rights and obligations as an EU member State.
Cyprus reiterates its profound appreciation to the
Security Council and the Secretary-General for their
continuous efforts towards the peaceful and lasting
solution of the Cyprus question, in line with international
law, the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the European Union acquis. The ongoing negotiating
process has reached a critical juncture. The convening
of a conference on Cyprus, under the auspices of the
Secretary-General, to address the international aspects
of the problem i namely, security, which comprises the
most fundamental elements of an eventual settlement,
specifically the withdrawal of foreign troops, and the
abolition ofthe anachronistic system of guarantees - is
a watershed in the whole process.

We sincerely hope that all parties involved will
demonstrate the requisite degree of commitment and
political will so that the effort will yield results. We
are most grateful for the Secretary-General's personal
involvement and for the Security Council's strong
signal of unity and support for the effort. Since the
issues at hand fall within the remit of the Security
Council, as the body with primary responsibility for
the preservation of international peace and security, we
consider it important to stress that the Council has an
inherently particular role to exercise in that regard.

The successful outcome of the ongoing negotiation
process in Cyprus has the potential to establish Cyprus
as an international paradigm of peaceful co-existence
and prosperous collaboration between its citizens,
irrespective of their ethnic, cultural and religious
backgrounds. Such a development will not only
transform Cyprus into a model country of stability
and predictability for the region, but will also bear out
the catalytic role of the SecurityCouncil in promoting
international peace and stability.

