Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would first like to thank
Under-Secretary-General O'Brien for his faithful and
striking account of the scale of the humanitarian crisis
in the three countries he just visited. For the sake of
brevity and the President's call for concision, I will
focus on the situation in Yemen, while also touching on
some political and security issues, which, as has been
rightly noted by Mr. O'Brien and reinforced by Egypt
and other delegations, directly affect the humanitarian
issues in all three of these countries.

Like other speakers, we are concerned by the
worsening humanitarian situation in Yemen and urge
all the parties to ensure the sustainable delivery of
humanitarian supplies, without which millions of
Yemenis are at risk of famine and death. We welcome
the first humanitarian truck's delivery of vital medical
equipment to Taiz city. However, we deplore the fact that
Mr. O'Brien was prevented from visiting Taiz, and echo
his call to all the parties to the conflict to accept their
responsibilities under international humanitarian and
human rights law, including guaranteeing sustainable,
full and unimpeded humanitarian access.

Ukraine remains convinced of the urgent need
to put an end to the violence in Yemen and reach a
sustainable political solution to the conflict. In that
context, we are increasingly concerned about the surge
in rocket attacks launched by Houthi forces in Yemen
on targets located within Saudi Arabian territory and
on maritime vessels operating near Bab Al-Mandeb.
Keeping that important shipping passage safe and
secure is of paramount importance. The Al-Houthi-
Saleh forces have also increased their use of ballistic
missiles. We call for such attacks to cease immediately
and urge that the necessary steps to be taken to
de-escalate the situation. In that regard, it is vital that
any further weapon shipments to the Houthi-Saleh
forces be blocked if we are to prevent escalation of the
conflict. Delivering ever more sophisticated weaponry
to the Houthi fighters is not going to help the situation.

Achieving a negotiated political solution to the
conflict in Yemen continues to be complicated. We
reiterate our support to Special Envoy Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed in his pursuit of such a solution, and we
welcome his recent efforts to revive the talks, as well
as Jordan's contribution to them. Without meaningful
dialogue, the results may be disastrous, and the only
party to benefit from that would be the terrorist groups
that are increasingly active in Yemen. It is disconcerting
to see Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula continue to
demonstrate its ability to expand its operational support
base in Yemen and exploit the deep lines of division in
war-torn Yemeni society. We must work collectively to
prevent that from happening.

