Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Ms. Bintou
Keita, for her valuable briefing on the situation in
Haiti and the role of the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH). I would
also like to thank Ms. Susan D. Page, former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
MINUJUSTH, for her efforts in leading the Mission in
Haiti. We wish the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. La Lime, all the best in her new
tasks. I also welcome the presence and participation
of Ms. Leona Marlin-Romeo, Prime Minister of Sint
Maarten, in this meeting.

I would like to focus on three main aspects: the
political, security and humanitarian situations.

First, with regard to the political situation, we
followed the latest address of His Excellency President
Moise in the aftermath of a wave of violent protests
in many parts of Haiti after the elimination of all
Government subsidies on fuel. The address ushered in
a number of political reforms and initiatives that helped
to reduce tensions, including accepting the resignation
of the national Government and calling for national
consultations with all active political parties in Haiti
to form a new Government and to combat all forms of
corruption. The President also focused on advancing
the national economy by adopting a number of reforms
related to rationalizing Government spending and
promoting public investment without prejudice to the
basic needs of Haitians.

I would like also to commend the efforts of Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Diallo and his good offices, in cooperation with the
diplomatic corps in Haiti, in order to support the rule
of law and stability in the country. We also welcome
the appointment of the new Prime Minister, Jean Henry
Ceant, and we hope that he will enjoy the confidence
of the Parliament. We look forward to the adoption of
necessary measures to implement the required priorities
and reforms in all fields.

Secondly, with regard to the security situation,
given its important impact on all other aspects in
Haiti, we welcome the significant improvement and
the decrease in documented crime rates. However, we
call on the national authorities to take full advantage of
the expertise of MINUJUSTH in that respect in order
to develop and increase the efficiency of the Haitian
National Police and to maintain the progress achieved
in security and stability while strengthening State
judicial institutions, ending impunity and preventing
corruption in accordance with the timeline stipulated
in the exit strategy of MINUJUSTH. In that regard, we
look forward to the strategic assessment to be submitted
next March.

Thirdly, pertaining to the humanitarian situation,
there is no doubt that despite recent developments,
the situation in Haiti remains fragile. There is a need
for increased cooperation between the people, the
national Government, civil society organizations and
the private sector, on the one hand, and the United
Nations and donors, on the other, which would help
Haiti to successfully survive this critical and very
important stage in its modern history. With hard work,
there is still time, despite a potentially difficult start, to
achieve political stability and sustainable development
by adopting short-term plans to meet the needs of the
people along with critical mid- and long-term plans.

I would like to highlight a number of elements
that should be taken into consideration to improve the
humanitarian situation in the country, including, first,
implementing the United Nations approach to cholera,
which has helped to considerably reduce the rate of
transmission; secondly, assisting national institutions
in building capacity to prepare for the hurricane season;
thirdly, accelerating the implementation of reforms
in the national judicial system; fourthly, addressing
overcrowding in prisons; and fifthly, engaging Haitians
in human rights awareness-raising programmes
organized by MINUJUSTH.

In conclusion, I would like to commend
MINUJUSTH on its efforts to build on the gains that
have been achieved in Haiti in the past few years and to
promote security, stability, and long-term sustainable
development by supporting the work of the Government
in the area of the rule of law.

