Mr. Marker (Pakistan): Allow me warmly to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January. Having
had the privilege and the pleasure of serving with you on
the Council, I have no doubt that your wide experience and
diplomatic skill will guide the work of the Security Council
to a highly successful conclusion. On behalf of my
delegation, I also wish to take this opportunity to express
deep appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador Manzi
Bakuramutsa of Rwanda, for so capably accomplishing the
work of the Council in December 1994.

I also wish to convey my delegation's respect and
welcome to the Foreign Minister of Italy, His Excellency
Mr. Antonio Martino.

The Pakistan delegation once again expresses its
deep concern at the grave situation that continues to
prevail in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Despite the strenuous efforts of the international
community, the root cause of the prolongation of this
unfortunate tragedy remains unaddressed. This is, quite
clearly, the aggression by the Bosnian Serbs against the
legitimate Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina. These
acts are rendered all the more outrageous by the refusal
of the Bosnian Serbs to accept the peace plan presented
by the Five-Nation Contact Group, by their continued
defiance of United Nations resolutions and by the
continuation of their abhorrent practice of "ethnic
cleansing".

The Pakistan Government, along with other members
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, has always
believed that only stern and effective measures by the
Security Council could rectify the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We believe it is essential that the resolutions
of the Security Council should be effectively enforced, in
particular those that authorize the use of force and air
strikes. The lack of resolve in fully implementing these
resolutions has emboldened the Serbs in their
intransigence and enabled them to continue their assault
on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

My delegation, which voted against Security Council
resolution 943 (1994), did so because we were firmly of
the view that it was beyond the capacity of a small
number of monitors to certify the uncertifiable. The fact
that the Bosnian Serb authorities have been able to
continue their military aggression has, regrettably,
justified our earlier apprehensions.

My delegation has carefully studied the Secretary-
General's letter (S/1995/6), together with its annex, the
report provided by the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia. We find the contents of the latter
document to be both unsatisfactory and disturbing. The
report of the resource limitations, while commendable in
its accuracy, is also, by the same token, somewhat
incriminating. If we add to this the nature and the reality
of porous borders, then the implications become obviously
ominous, and reports of the Bosnian Serbs' receiving
substantial military assistance should therefore come as no
surprise.

It was the expectation of the Pakistan Government
that the prolonged refusal by the Bosnian Serb party of
the five-nation Contact Group peace plan would

 

automatically trigger the action agreed upon by the
members of the Contact Group against the defaulting party.
Meanwhile, let it not be forgotten that the Bosnian
Government has, despite the iniquitous nature of the
territorial adjustment, given its agreement to the peace plan.

In conclusion, my delegation would wish to reiterate
the decision of the Seventh Islamic Summit Conference,
held in Casablanca from 11 to 15 December 1994, which
expressed its opposition to the lifting of the sanctions
against Serbia and Montenegro, as well as any easing of
sanctions, until such time as Serbia and Montenegro fully
implements the following conditions: first, recognizes the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina within its
internationally recognized boundaries; secondly, accepts the
placement of United Nations forces on the borders for
effective monitoring; and thirdly, implements the five-
nation Contact Group peace plan, including full withdrawal
from all occupied territories of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
