Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank the President for
having convened today's meeting to discuss, yet again,
another numbing development.

Mr. Staffan de Mistura's latest update provides a
bleak picture on the challenges that we face in Syria. Just
four days ago, we received a strong and clear message
from the Secretary-General in this very Chamber,
(see S/PV.7774) highlighting our collective failure on
Syria. I recall that all Council members, and even the
Syrian representative, expressed hope and support for
the 9 September agreement between the United States
and Russia. Everyone in the Chamber agreed that
there is no military solution to the conflict. We are
all in agreement on need to abide by the cessation of
hostilities, adhere to international law, protect civilians
and allow humanitarian deliveries.

Alas, just when we thought that things could not
possibly get any worse in Syria, we were gravely
mistaken. We are again shocked by callous air strikes
against civilians in Aleppo, carried out using incendiary
weapons and bunker-buster bombs. Hundreds of people
were killed or wounded, many of them children. Babies
and children were trapped in the rubble and crushed
to death. Nearly 2 million people are left desperately
without access to running water as the city's main
water pumping station was destroyed, placing children
at the particular risk of water-borne diseases.

Malaysia condemns the latest military escalation
in Aleppo, which constitutes a flagrant breach of
the agreed cessation of hostilities and seriously
undermines the 9 September agreement. The latest acts
of aggression dash whatever benefit of the doubt we had
accorded to the conflicting parties. It raises questions
about the commitment and sincerity in upholding their
obligations on the cessation of hostilities.

Malaysia calls on the conflicting parties not to lose
sight of peace and to use every window of opportunity
to urgently recommit to the 9 September agreement,
particularly to cease fighting. I reiterate our demand
for the conflicting parties to respect international
humanitarian law, including in providing unfettered
humanitarian access and in protecting civilians and
civilian infrastructure, including children, relief or
rescue personnel, schools and hospitals. I also echo
the call by the Secretary-General for independent
investigation and accountability on the various acts
of atrocities against civilians that may constitute
war crimes.

In conclusion, Malaysia views favourably the
initiative by France to create a credible and effective
monitoring mechanism to oversee and report on the
ceasefire and humanitarian access. Malaysia stands
ready to engage constructively on that proposal. At this
point, we must not give up hope. We must not despair. We
need to urgently move beyond verbal condemnations or
pronouncements and we need to come up with effective
and concrete actions that would make a difference to
thousands of Syrian lives on the ground.

