Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts. I would also like to acknowledge your
willingness to organize numerous public meetings of
the Security Council that are open to all Member States
without sacrificing the effectiveness of the Council. I
should also like to congratulate Ambassador Smith on
being named Executive Director of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), as well as to
thank him very much for his briefing today. That
briefing shows a clear awareness of the need to help
States to equip themselves with the skills and
knowledge required to implement the necessary
measures in the fight against terrorism. We fully
support the changes he has made with regard to
CTED's working methods and the Assessment and
Technical Assistance Office.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made later by the Ambassador of Mexico on
behalf of the Rio Group.

The United Nations initiated a coherent response
as soon as the international community realized the
grave threat to international peace and security posed
by international terrorism. The adoption of resolution
1267 (1999), in October 1999, launched the
development of a robust institutional mechanism to
respond to this new threat. Subsequently, given the
international emergency resulting from the terrorist
acts committed at the beginning of the century, the
Organization increased the number of committees,
commissions, offices and programmes to combat
terrorism and prevent the threat that it poses to the
peace and security of all.

Two important processes were thereby launched.
First, a normative process was begun under a body that
was essentially executive in nature. We should devote
time in the future to evaluating that process. The
second process, which is the subject of our discussion
today, was the development of a very ambitious
institutional mechanism - one that requires greater
coordination. That may perhaps be due to a sense of
urgency as well as the Council's own limitations as an
intergovernmental political body of a basically
executive nature. Those circumstances gradually led to
an institutional model that would be able to tackle the
most urgent tasks, but one that we believe lacked the
necessary coherence. The passage of time since our
first response has allowed us to identify and overcome
some of those limitations. We now have a better
understanding of the scope of the challenges that we
previously could only guess at.

We have also discovered strengths there were not
previously apparent. In that regard, the adoption of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy was a milestone. In
2006, we decided by consensus to make an effort to
promote a response to terrorism that would be system-
wide, coherent and effective. The challenge we now
face is how to translate our previous agreements into
specific actions, in particular as regards the speedy
institutionalization and launching of the task force to
implement the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism. Costa Rica believes that it is of fundamental
importance that we strengthen communication and
coordination between the main committees,
departments, commissions and programmes active in
this area. We also believe that, under the guidance of
the General Assembly, it would be desirable to
strengthen the efforts and initiatives recently being
developed by various entities of the United Nations
system.
Costa Rica, of course, supports renewing the
mandate of the Executive Directorate. However, we are
certain that the coming two years and a few months
should allow us all to expedite the intensification of the
efforts to which I have referred.

The United Nations must, once and for all, be
able to have at its disposal an executive body that
comprises the mandates, resources and technical
capacities necessary to combat terrorism.

