Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): First of all, it is my pleasure to
express our delegation's satisfaction at seeing the
Council chaired this month by the representative of our
sister Republic of the Congo, with which my country
has excellent relations, characterized by the seal of
trust and mutual respect.

I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this meeting of the Council. The
active participation of the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Secretary-General, the Vice-President of the
General Assembly and the representative of the
Peacebuilding Commission clearly illustrates the
importance that our universal Organization attaches to
the role that the Security Council should play in the
prevention and resolution of conflict, especially in
Africa.

07-4920]
The persistence of conflicts in Africa has given
rise to serious and complex problems, including
massive flows of refugees, internally displaced
persons, the spread of infectious diseases, the
proliferation of weapons and drugs, the destruction of
crucial basic infrastructure and the devastation of
ecosystems and the environment. It is essential that the
international community as a whole realize that the
stability and prosperity of Africa is important for all
humankind, and that the development and
improvement of its well-being requires appropriate
actions both by Africans themselves and by their
bilateral and multilateral partners.

With regard to preventing conflict in Africa, there
is a need to ensure the coherence and operational
effectiveness of existing mechanisms. For example, the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, whose twenty-
sixth ministerial meeting will be held in Cameroon
next week, is among the appropriate frameworks for
cooperation in identifying destabilizing factors in order
to rebuild lasting trust at the regional level.

With regard to peacebuilding, concrete relevant
initiatives usually include disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programmes, the
strengthening of political and judicial local institutions,
efforts to promote reconciliation among the population,
security sector reform and respect for human rights and
the rule of law.

We commend the Office of the Secretary-
General's Special Adviser on Africa for facilitating the
holding of the second United Nations Conference on
DDR and Stability in Africa, which was held in
Kinshasa from 12 to 14 June 2007. The meeting was a
success in terms of the quality of the debate, the level
of participation and the relevance of the
recommendations made. I would therefore like to
emphasize the importance of such conferences, as well
as to call for the incorporation of the recommendations
made at the Conference into peacebuilding strategies
for post-conflict societies.

Transitional justice - whose goal is to provide a
feeling of justice for all citizens, to establish or renew
civic confidence and to reconcile peoples and
communities - has a key role to play in conflict
prevention and resolution.
Organized crime, whether national or trans-
national in nature, and the greater firepower and higher

07-4920]
numbers of weapons, both legal and illegal, as well as
their level of availability, have been identified as
contributing factors in the outbreak of conflict.

Faced with the inability of national judicial
systems to meet the new challenges in re-establishing
justice in post-conflict societies, relying on truth and
reconciliation commissions alone is not enough. We
must further consider using prosecutorial mechanisms
to punish the perpetrators of serious crimes, without
neglecting the issue of providing reparations to the
victims of those crimes. That is the role currently being
played by the International Criminal Court. In that
connection, the role of the Court in the prevention of
conflict and the consolidation of peace in post-conflict
situations should be underlined.

It is important that justice trump politics and
diplomacy at a certain stage in peace processes. In that
regard, I should like to reiterate our appeal for the
establishment of an international criminal tribunal for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where millions
of innocent people have lost their lives following
breaches of the peace. Such a body could further
contribute to avoiding such outrageous situations as the
one that prevails in my country today, where notorious
murderers, perfidious generals and warlords are the
primary interlocutors of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and therefore of the United Nations.

With regard to providing solutions, I would like
to urge the ratification of, and prompt adherence to,
legal and related instruments, such as the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes
Region.

We should also underscore the need to integrate
civil society into conflict resolution processes in
Africa, given the fact that the tools traditionally
employed to manage crises have become largely
useless on the continent.

Beyond those considerations, in addition to
adopting and implementing policies aimed at economic
recovery, reducing poverty and improving governance,
education is the best and safest investment we can
make to bring about peace in Africa and the world,
both today and in the future. In that regard, we must
instil the ideal of peace in the educational system,
especially as regards young people. It is important that
we make them aware of the importance of the values of
tolerance and diversity, as well as teaching them the

virtues of ethical values based upon traditional
heritage, all the while providing them with an opening
to the world to allow them also to gather universal
values.

In order to ensure implementation and follow-up
vis-a-vis the prevention and resolution of conflicts, one
important step is to strengthen the Secretary-General's
capacities for mediation and good offices efforts, in
accordance with the 2005 World Summit decision that
established a Mediation Support Unit in the
Department of Political Affairs. Moreover, the
Peacebuilding Support Office should be strengthened
by substantially stepping up the work of the
Peacebuilding Fund.

We could also consider establishing a system to
ensure that regional organizations, and especially the
African Union, enjoy predictable and long-term
financing for their peacekeeping operations. Such an
initiative could be undertaken by strengthening
cooperation - for example, through the partnership
mechanisms that exist between the peace and security
entities of the United Nations and the African Union -
in the areas of conflict prevention and resolution,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

