Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by thanking the German delegation for
convening this most timely open debate on children in
armed conflict. Allow me also to express our gratitude
for the presence of the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and to inform her that she can
count on our full support for the accomplishment of her
mandate.

We emphasize the importance of continuing to
draw on the substantive reports submitted by the
Special Representative, which allow us to appraise the
progress that has been achieved as well as any pending
challenges.

Nonetheless, we note that the impact of armed
conflicts and the increase in the number of perpetrators
of grave violations against children remain a source
of concern. This item is on the agenda of the General
Assembly, a forum in which my country has played
an active role every year in seeking to strengthen the
responsibility of that forum of universal composition
in a thematic area that is part of its mandate and is a
concern shared by all.

However, Uruguay also wishes to recognize the role
played by the Security Council through the adoption of
numerous resolutions calling for taking specific actions
aimed at ending the illegal recruitment and exploitation
of children in conflict zones. We acknowledge the
contribution made by the International Criminal Court,
which has classified as war crimes acts of sexual
violence and acts of recruitment or enlisting involving
minors under 15 years of age or their use for active
participation in hostilities during armed conflicts, as
well as the actions of the other international tribunals
that have included the protection of children in their
respective remits. In that regard, we believe it is
essential to fight tirelessly against the impunity of the
perpetrators of grave violations against children, which
clearly flouts international law.

We therefore encourage the Security Council to
refer such cases to the International Criminal Court.
Cooperation with national and international courts
is a fundamental step towards ensuring effective
accountability in such situations. My delegation believes
that we must pay greater attention to the reintegration
of children associated with armed groups, as well as
those children who have been the victims of other grave
human rights violations, in particular in cases of sexual
abuse or exploitation.

We highlight the essential importance of effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes for the well-being of all children affected
by armed conflicts. These efforts must enjoy adequate
human and financial resources and must be community-
based in order to facilitate the sustained and successful
reintegration of those children.

The social reintegration of children also implies
the careful consideration of the cases of minors who
have been accused of crimes committed during their
association with armed forces or groups. In such cases,
the children should be primarily considered as victims
and should be treated in accordance with international
legislation within the framework of a judicial system
for minors that is aimed at their social rehabilitation.

