Mr. Srivali (Thailand): At the outset, I would like
to express my delegation's sincere appreciation to the
President for convening today's important open debate
on post-conflict peacebuilding. I would also like to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission for
their important updates and contributions earlier today.

Before I begin, I would also like to align my
statement with the statement delivered today by the
Permanent Representative of Iran, who spoke on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746)
makes many insightful and critical assessments of
international peacebuilding efforts, particularly since
the last progress report issued in 2010 (S/2010/386). The
latest report notes that progress has been significant.
However, it also notes that there is much room for
improvement. It underlines the need for the United
Nations and the international community to continue
to engage sustainably. It also stresses the need to be
in tune with what countries emerging from conflict
require for building lasting peace and for avoiding
relapses into violence. My delegation shares many of
the views expressed in the report and would like to
take this opportunity to engage in the discussion by
stressing a few points that we felt particularly worthy
of reiteration.

First and foremost, we would like to join others who
have stressed the importance of the principle of national
ownership and of hastening and prioritizing economic

recovery and inclusive development in peacebuilding
efforts. Without national ownership, countries
emerging from conflict may lack the foundation
needed to foster national leadership, which is critical
to identifying a meaningful path to sustainable and
inclusive development.

A second and related priority is timely, predictable
and sustainable financing and international support. In
the current global climate of fiscal austerity, the report
rightly mentions the need for mutual accountability
so as to reinforce sustained international support. It
also notes a promising effort to improve reporting on
peacebuilding assistance through improved data. Those
are important exercises, although we appreciate that
the report acknowledges, first and foremost, the need
to sustain international support for peacebuilding as an
essential element of social and economic development
in post-conflict countries. We are sorely aware of the
fact that conflict-affected States lag behind in their
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals,
when compared with other developing countries. It is
also our hope that the incorporation of peacebuilding
considerations into the post-2015 development agenda
will lead to more meaningful commitments in the
future.

Thirdly, my delegation believes that the
international community must continue to focus its
efforts on helping to build strong and responsive
institutions and capacities in countries emerging from
conflict. In the past, Thailand's peacekeepers have also
served as early peacebuilders and assisted in local and
community development, sharing our best practices in
areas such as agriculture, health and water resource
management. We therefore welcome the opportunity
to explore innovative avenues to further expand our
opportunities to assist in the context of strengthening
civilian capacity in the immediate aftermath of
conflict. We feel that the global South has an important
comparative advantage in that respect and can therefore
play a role that could potentially have a great impact
on helping to further consolidate peace in that manner.

Last but not least, we also look forward to further
gains on the part of the international community and
the United Nations system itself in the context of
women's participation in peacebuilding in general and
in conflict resolution processes in particular. Here,
the role of women and the inclusion of gender-relevant
issues will be critical in laying the strong foundations
needed for an inclusive society and sustainable and
inclusive development. In that connection, we also
take a keen interest in the mention in the Secretary-
General's report of the drafting of minimum standards
for gender-responsive transitional justice mechanisms
and guidance concerning reparations for victims of
conflict-related sexual violence. We look forward to
receiving more information from the relevant United
Nations entities involved in those efforts.

As with any worthwhile endeavour, post-conflict
peacebuilding requires sustained focus, attention
and commitment from all of the parties involved.
Continued discussions and debates like this one can
only help to clarify roles and responsibilities and
enhance the coordination of efforts in general and
between pivotal actors such as the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission in particular. They
also enhance partnerships with the wider international
community aimed at taking potentially meaningful
initiatives forward. We will continue to share our
input in that regard and, together with the international
community, continue to seek ways to fulfil what we
view as our common responsibility to assist countries
emerging from conflict to consolidate peace and
prevent further conflict.

