Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing on the
latest intercontinental ballistic missile launch by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

That launch, in blatant violation of numerous
Security Council resolutions, fosters the growing
nuclear threat in the region. Despite immense political
and diplomatic efforts to halt the North Korean
weapons of mass destruction programmes, we have
seen no signs whatsoever of any intention on the part of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to change
its behaviour. The irresponsible North Korean policy
has already seriously undermined the non-proliferation
regime as a whole. In that regard, I wish to recall
the statement of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
Ukraine of 29 November, which states, inter alia, that
Ukraine resolutely condemns the launch of the new
intercontinental ballistic missile Hwasong-lS, which
is capable of carrying a nuclear payload, conducted
on 28 November by the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea.

That deliberate act of Pyongyang, aimed at the
development of even more powerful missiles, as well as
its threats to use nuclear weapons, seriously endangers
not only the security of North Korea's immediate
neighbours but also global security and stability far
beyond the Korean peninsula. Ukraine aligns itself
with all States that have condemned the dangerous
act of Pyongyang and calls upon the leadership of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to stop its
provocations immediately.

I join the previous speakers in commending your
efforts, Mr. President, as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006), aimed at ensuring full implementation of the
Security Council resolutions relating to the Democratic
People's Republic ofKorea. We welcome the significant
expansion of the relevant sanctions regime, in
accordance with the recent Council decisions, as well as
the dynamic outreach activities conducted by both the
Italian Chair and the Panel of Experts. Unconditional
and full compliance with the resolutions are one of the
key prerequisites for lowering the level of the nuclear
threat in the region and curbing the ability of North
Korea to carry out further provocations.

In that regard, we endorse the constructive work of
the Committee during the reporting period, in particular
the update of the control lists of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) , in
accordance with resolutions 2371 (2017) and 2375 (2017),
and the adoption of several implementation assistance
notices. The specific and result-oriented measures
are important for strengthening the effectiveness and
efficiency of the current sanctions regime.

To conclude, I wish to stress that yesterday's
provocation dampened hopes for resuming a dialogue
on the denuclearization of North Korea. Frankly, after
two and a half months of no tests and launches, there
appeared a glimmer of hope that such a dialogue was
not out of reach. However, yesterday's act clearly
demonstrated that the North Korean regime is not
interested in talks. Instead, it is striving recklessly
to entertain the idee' fixe of obtaining the status of a
nuclear-weapon State, which will never be recognized
or tolerated by the international community.

Ukraine stands ready to engage constructively
with all partners to change the current situation and
to move closer to the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula anyway.

