Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2409
(2018), which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). With this
unanimous adoption, the Security Council has once
again shown its unity with regard to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a unity that is an essential
condition for the success of the process under way.

First, the Council has shown its unity regarding
the political and security situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The upcoming electoral period
will be crucial to the future not only of the country but
of the region as a whole. These elections should enable
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for the first
time in its history, to experience a peaceful transfer of
power. The challenge is historic and is being confronted
in a delicate context. Without credible and universally
accepted elections, the stability of the country and the
entire region is at stake. To meet that challenge, several
conditions, which the Security Council stresses in the
resolution, are necessary.

The first is confidence in the technical process
of organizing elections and respect for the electoral
calendar. The Council calls on the Congolese officials
in charge of organizing the elections, and in particular
the Independent National Electoral Commission, to
do everything possible to ensure the transparency and
credibility of the elections. That includes the effective
establishment of the team of international electoral
experts that the African Union, the Southern African
Development Community, the European Union, the
United Nations and the International Organization of la
Francophonie have proposed to deploy.

The second condition is the creation of an open and
peaceful climate in which all candidates can declare
their candidacies and campaign freely without fear
of reprisal. The Council reiterates its call for respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms, starting
with the right to assembly, as well as the need for the
proportionate use of force in the preservation of public
order. It calls for the general ban on demonstrations
to be lifted. It is essential that the violations that have
been seen during the latest demonstrations do not
recur and that the perpetrators be brought to justice. In
this respect, the Council welcomes the establishment
of a joint Congolese commission of inquiry and calls
for the implementation of its recommendations. With
respect to all these aspects, the Council will continue
to follow the electoral preparations very closely and
will work in close coordination with the countries of
the region to facilitate free, credible, transparent and
peaceful elections.

Secondly, the Council has demonstrated its unity
with respect to the role it wishes to give to MONUSCO.
The Mission has two very clear and closely related
priorities: the protection of civilians, on the one hand,
and support for the preparation of elections and the
implementation of the 31 December 2016 political
agreement, on the other. All other Mission activities
must be carried out in support of those priorities.
Without adequate preparation for the elections, the
stability of the country and the security of civilians are
at risk. If civilians are not protected, it is the exercise of
their right as citizens to decide their future that could
be called into question.

Finally, in the resolution, the Council strongly
encourages MONUSCO to pursue the internal
reforms initiated this year following its strategic
review. Progress has been made, and the Mission has
undertaken the necessary adjustments. It is seeking
to be more responsive and mobile and to make better
use of all the tools at its disposal. The integrated
approach to the protection of civilians is welcome, as
is the concept of protection by projection. The Council
has given MONUSCO a clear and achievable mandate
and the means to accomplish its tasks, including
maintaining its troop ceiling. That is an essential point.
It encourages the Secretariat and the Mission, together
with its troop-contributing countries, to pursue these
reforms with ambition.

Beyond MONUSCO, by successfully coordinating
the implementation of the 31 December 2016 political
agreement, it is up to all of us - but first and foremost,
of course, the Congolese themselves, and especially the
regional actors involved under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework agreement, and the region as a
whole - to enable all Congolese to regain confidence
in the electoral process so that free, inclusive, credible
and transparent elections can be held on 23 December.
The measures for easing tensions that are provided for
in the agreement should contribute to this end.

In our view, those are the conditions for the success
of the electoral process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo within the agreed timetable. The unity
we have shown today is an essential asset in this
respect. The Council should rest assured of France's
firm commitment in this direction in support of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

