Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I should like first to thank you, Sir, for organizing this important meeting, which is also quite timely. I also thank Under-Secretary General Rosemary DiCarlo, my sister Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed and Assistant Secretary-General Dieye of the United Nations Development Programme for their briefings. We in Indonesia remain deeply concerned over the ongoing attacks and expansion of terrorist-related groups across Africa, which have caused many casualties among innocent civilian victims. We note from recent related reports of the Secretary-General that attacks by terrorist-related group have been increasing, both in numbers and in sophistication. Many speakers have alluded to that important fact. We also concur with Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, in particular on the point that we cannot address terrorism without addressing the underlying root causes and factors, including development, humanitarian, human rights and security challenges. I believe that that is quite an important point. Indonesia commends the efforts of African countries in combatting terrorism, including through initiatives such as the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, the Multinational Joint Task Force and others. We are of the view that such efforts must continue to be supported. We therefore also welcome the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2020/5earlier today. Having said that, allow me to share three points. First, there is no one-size-fits-all approach to combatting terrorism. Each country and each region faces different challenges with regard to terrorism. They also have different capacities and priorities, which calls for assistance in different forms. It is important to take into account these specificities in each region in designing counter-terrorism approaches. Similarly, the nexus between transnational organized crime and terrorism also often has unique characteristics in each and every region. It should therefore be addressed through tailor-made measures and in accordance with applicable international law. It is also important to give our support to Africa's efforts to combat terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism, as elaborated in the United Nations Global Counter- Terrorism Strategy. Secondly, we must enhance regional cooperation. It is important to advance regional dialogue, to share best practices and expertise, and to learn from each other's experiences in combatting terrorism. In addition, we need to facilitate collaboration in order to strengthen the capacity of African countries in addressing common and pressing challenges. One such challenge is the relocation and return of foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs), relocators and returnees, including their accompanying family members, which present significant challenges to Member States. It is important to ensure adequate national and regional capacities in terms of prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration. In this regard, as mandated by resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017), it is crucially important for Member States to develop and implement comprehensive and tailored prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies, not only for FTFs but, most importantly, for home-grown terrorists. It is also important for countries of the region to be supported in the Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative so as to ensure lasting stability and development, as envisioned in the African Union Agenda 2063. Thirdly, we must promote a soft approach to counter-terrorism, in addition to other approaches. Apart from law enforcement, we need to continue promoting a soft approach in preventing and countering terrorism and to adhere to a comprehensive approach. This can be done, inter alia, by spreading the message of peace, moderation and tolerance in order to turn back negativity and, at the same time, by amplifying credible positivity. We should also enhance the involvement of religious and community leaders, women and young people in combating terrorism. It is equally important to limit the environment in which terrorist groups can operate and address the underlying grievances that can be exploited by terrorist groups. Preventing and combating terrorism is one of our priorities as a non-permanent member of the Security Council. We are also at the forefront in promoting tolerance and an integrated approach in combating terrorism and extremism, in line with the four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. To conclude, all countries of Africa, supported by the international community, should work together in advancing integrated and coordinated strategies to counter terrorism so as to achieve the goal of a peaceful, stable and prosperous Africa. The international community should lend its utmost support, including in development and humanitarian assistance, so that terrorists do not have an excuse to exploit gaps in development. Indonesia is in solidarity with the people of Africa and will maintain its support for Africa through various initiatives and projects.
