Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow me
to join previous speakers in congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month, and in thanking your
predecessor. I would also like to express our
appreciation for your decision to convene this urgent
meeting of the Security Council to address the latest
aggression and atrocities of the Israeli regime.

The international community has witnessed with
outrage and indignation yet another round of Israeli
aggression and an escalation in its persistent policy and
practices of State terrorism and war crimes against the
Palestinian people. The recent Israeli aggression
against the Palestinian people, especially in the Gaza
Strip and in Beit Hanoun, has raged in flagrant
defiance of the most basic principles of international
law and the fundamental provisions of the United
Nations Charter. It has been described by the Israeli
regime's own officials as one of the largest of its kind
against the Gaza Strip, once more displaying for all to
see the lawless nature of that regime.

More than 100 Palestinians, including several
women and children, have been killed so far; over 350
have been wounded, and many of them are in critical
condition. The international community was deeply
shocked and appalled to learn that 19 Palestinians,
including women and children, were massacred in cold
blood, and dozens of others wounded, when the Israeli
regime shelled homes in Beit Hanoun yesterday. To
add to the misery and suffering of the innocent
Palestinian civilians, the Israeli regime has, in many
cases, even blocked medical crews from gaining access
to the injured and the dead in Beit Hanoun, and has
placed hospitals in the area under siege. It has even
attacked and killed Red Crescent Society paramedics in
the Gaza Strip in yet another flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law.

As Palestinian officials have said, the destruction
wreaked by the latest Israeli aggression against Beit
Hanoun is worse than anything the town has suffered
as a result of past Israeli aggression. There is no
electricity, the people have no water or food, telephone
lines have been cut and infrastructure is damaged.

The magnitude of the crimes of the Israeli regime
in Beit Hanoun was partly reflected in the recent
statement by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) in Gaza, which has called the situation there
"desperate", adding that
"Death, destruction and despair are the terms to
describe the situation [which] is very grim There
is destruction and devastation everywhere The
entire population has been living in fear."

The Israeli aggressors and assassins have
callously spared no effort to deprive Palestinian
civilians of even their basic necessities and continue to
perpetrate crimes and acts of brutality which are
reminiscent of the savagery committed in medieval
times.

We strongly condemn the aggression, war crimes,
crimes against humanity and State terrorism of the
Zionist regime perpetrated systematically against the
Palestinian people over the past six decades. Its recent
acts of brutality are equally appalling and must be
strongly condemned. It is evident that this latest
example of brutality, which, like the numerous
previous ones, has targeted civilians and vital civilian
infrastructure, is an act of collective punishment and a
war crime, carried out in defiance of the most basic
principles of international law and international
humanitarian law. It is imperative that the international
community at long last truly address the situation and
prevent these terrorist designs against the Palestinians
from continuing.

Regrettably, owing to the inaction imposed on the
Security Council by certain permanent members, all of
these crimes continue to be committed -there has
been no meaningful action by the Council. Indeed, the
impunity with which the Israeli regime has carried out
its crimes so far has emboldened it to continue and
even to increase its aggressive policies and terrorist
acts.

The international community and the Security
Council must take resolute measures, which are long
overdue, to counter these illegal, aggressive and
criminal policies and actions by the Israeli regime, to
stop its war machine and its acts of State terrorism and
to help put an end to the violence brought about by the
persistent illegal occupation of Palestinian territory. As
the ongoing aggression seriously threatens
international peace and security, the Security Council
has an enormous responsibility under the Charter to
take necessary and prompt steps with a View to putting
an end to this aggression. We hope that, recognizing
the need for taking decisive action in the face of this
new escalation in the region, all members of the
Security Council will live up to their responsibilities in
properly addressing this grave situation and, as a first
step in this regard, adopt the draft resolution before the
Council.

Indeed, the Council should take the calls and
concerns of the international community about the
Zionist regime's aggressive policies and inhuman
practices in the occupied territories more seriously and
stop the Israeli regime from insolently making a
mockery of the international community and of the
Security Council by hypocritically preaching peace
here and carrying out acts of terror, horror and
barbarism and crimes against humanity in the region,
particularly in the occupied Palestinian territory.

