Ms. Tagliavini: As of this moment, fighting in the
eastern part of Ukraine is very probably going on. The
two documents signed by members of the Trilateral
Contact Group and representatives of certain areas
of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions at the meetings
in Minsk - the protocol of 5 September and the
memorandum of 19 September 2014 - continue, to
our understanding, to be valid and to be binding upon
all signatories. Indeed, they are the two ground-laying
political and legal instruments on which the ceasefire
in eastern Ukraine and other issues related to the
ceasefire are being based.

It must be acknowledged that much of the fighting
has stopped since the signing of the Minsk documents,
but there continues to be fighting at some strategic
locations, among which are the city outskirts of the Black
Sea port Mariupol and around Donetsk airport. The
fighting is severe, involving use of heavy weaponry. It
is costing the lives of servicemen and civilians, together
with many persons severely injured on an almost daily
basis, not to mention the very substantial losses in terms
of infrastructure, facilities and personal property. As
yet, there are no signs of it letting up - there are many
who even fear a worsening of the present situation, as
we are receiving reports about a continuing military
build up in the conflict zone.

That is, in the briefest of terms, the status of
the implementation of the ceasefire as of now. The
question is what must be done to overcome the obvious
shortcomings. It goes without saying that the central
issue now is to make sure that all signatories are keeping
their commitments and doing so in good faith and in
strict compliance with the agreements in the first place.
There is a similar need to carry out other important
provisions related to the ceasefire, among which is the
full respect for the so-called line of contact, separating
the opposing forces and serving as a reference line
for the withdrawal of heavy military equipment to an
agreed distance back from the line.

I would like to recall that the signatories to the
Minsk documents also committed to the withdrawal
of all foreign and illegal armed formations, military
hardware and militants and mercenaries from the
territory of Ukraine. There is naturally a continued
need to strictly observe the political elements of the
Minsk commitments as well. In that context, I wish to
underline with all clarity that the so-called elections held
in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions on
2 November of this year were called unacceptable and
invalid by the Government of Ukraine, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and a
large majority of the international community, while
another signatory Power to the two Minsk documents
spoke of respecting the expression of will of the
population without going any further.

It is clear from the foregoing that the implementation
process for the documents signed in Minsk is now
at a crossroads. On the one hand, we have achieved
progress, with a ceasefire holding long stretches of
the conflict area. There has also been no new major
military operations since the signing. Among further
positive results, I would note the release of hundreds of
hostages and illegally detained persons, which needs to
be continued.

On the other hand, we are faced with examples of
blunt disregard for certain commitments undertaken
in Minsk, as we see the continuation of fighting at the
number of important places covered by the ceasefire.
There has also been a lack of proper understanding
of, if not open disregard for, certain political elements
of the Minsk documents, as shown by the so-called
elections that took place in November in some areas of
the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
It is against this background that I repeat my
call for strict observance of all the provisions of the
Minsk arrangements. I also invite all parties to the
conflict to join me in an effort to further develop the
peace process by agreeing to additional elements for
the implementation and the further strengthening of
arrangements signed in Minsk on 5 and 19 September
2014.

One of those elements should be an inclusive
political dialogue, which may also include round-table
discussions with a broad spectrum of participants.
There is also an urgent need for the elaboration of a
comprehensive economic rehabilitation programme,
and even more so for providing humanitarian assistance
to the population in the conflict zone, keeping in mind
that winter conditions are already setting in.

Last but not least, I wish to point out that a sustained
ceasefire between the opposing forces will never be
achieved without complete and firm control over the
international border between Ukraine and Russia, and
that additional efforts are needed to reach that goal,
based on the provisions of the Minsk documents.

In concluding my remarks, let me reiterate my firm
beliefthat the conflict in eastern Ukraine can be solved
only by peaceful means and at the negotiation table. We
see the two agreements signed in Minsk as milestones on
that path. In the effort to achieve their implementation,
I feel united with my friend and colleague the Chief
Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission,
Ambassador Ertugrul Apakan.

