Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I welcome you,
Foreign Minister Rodriguez Gomez, as our President,
and I also welcome the presence of Ministers from
Angola and Spain. We thank Venezuela for organizing
today's open debate. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing, which we thoroughly endorse.

The international community today faces more
concurrent crises, and of greater complexity, than
at any time since the creation of the United Nations.
In that sense, the Security Council's mandate to
maintain international peace and security is more
relevant and necessary than ever. But the challenges
we face - intractable civil wars, entrenched local
and regional politics, sophisticated and well-resourced
transnational terrorist networks - are very different
from those envisaged at the time of the establishment
of the United Nations.

The Council has responded to those dynamic
and evolving threats by adapting its response 4 for
example, through the evolution of peacekeeping, the
development of peacebuilding and of protection-of-
civilians mandates, the deployment of political
missions and innovative responses to the emergence
of regional health emergencies. The Council can claim
many achievements as a result, in terms of conflicts
resolved and lives saved.

But the Council needs to continue developing and
evolving its approach ifit is to be effective in fulfilling
its mandate. In recent years, its capacity to do so has been
sorely tested. The Council did not create the complex
conflicts that dominate the international landscape
today. But its ability to act decisively to prevent,
manage and, in some cases, even respond to those
crises has often been found wanting. The Council has
been slow to act to prevent clearly emerging crises. And
political divisions within the Council have hamstrung
its response to full blown crises - Syria being the most
obvious recent example. We Council members can and
must do better. New Zealand is focused on doing what
it can to address those shortcomings. Today I wish to
focus on five areas in which we believe the Council
needs to improve its game.

First, we need a more genuine focus on practical
problem-solving. For permanent and elected members
alike, Council membership brings with it the solemn
responsibility for preventing and resolving conflict.
Yet during our time in the Council, very few of the
discussions in which we have participated could be
characterized as genuine attempts at problem resolution.
What we have seen instead are set-piece statements,
rigid positioning and attempts to publicly embarrass
and undermine other Council members, even within
our so-called informal consultations. Put simply, few
Council members appear to be coming to the Chamber
or to the Consultations Room with ideas on how to
solve problems or even to engage seriously on them.
While we are all culpable, the worst offenders are those
who bear the greatest responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations- the permanent members. That
must change. New Zealand is focused on practical
steps that can be taken to achieve even modest progress
in improving the dynamics and performance of the
Council. As we set out during our presidency in July
of last year, we will continue to push for more informal
and unscripted conversations focused on agreeing on
pragmatic and constructive solutions. Ultimately, what
is required is a change of culture and of mindset.

Secondly, the Council must live up to its rhetoric
on conflict prevention. The Council currently finds
it extraordinarily difficult to respond quickly and
effectively to emerging crises. For example, despite
growing evidence of a crisis, it took the Council almost
six months to respond to the calls by New Zealand
and some others for a Council visiting mission to
Burundi. By the time the Council did respond, the
scope for the mission to have a meaningful impact had
shrunk dramatically. Syria presents an even starker
example of thit failure. For five years, the Council has
remained almost completely passive in the face of the
deepening conflict, paralysed by disagreements among
its permanent members. The international community
and the Syrian people are paying the price for that
failure, and will continue to do so for decades to come.
Seven years after its last resolution on the matter, the
Council remains unable to agree a collective response
to the growing instability in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories and the steady erosion of a basis
for a negotiated peace.

The Council has a clear responsibility to act in such
situations, and it has a range of tools at its disposal
for doing so. But it remains strangely reluctant to use
them, with discussions on preventive action generally
becoming hostage to national or bilateral interests, or
bogged down in false dichotomies between intervention
and deference to sovereignty. National sovereignty
must be respected, but it is not the only or paramount
principle in the Charter. We must not allow it to be used
as a shield by those who brutalize their own populations
and undermine regional and global security. Those that
defend such perpetrators on this basis bring discredit
upon themselves and the Council.
It must be possible for the Council to conceive
of ways of engaging early to de-escalate and resolve
crises, ways that are effective, respectful of sovereignty
and sensitive to regional leadership. As we have
seen, the consequences of the Council's failure to act
in preventive mode can have far more devastating
consequences for a country's sovereignty. Part of this
challenge lies in finding better and more collaborative
ways of working with key regional partners such as the
African Union.

Thirdly, we need to sharpen the effectiveness of the
tools available to the Council to discharge its mandate.
The report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) represents an
important opportunity in this regard. Over the balance
of this year we will work with Council colleagues
to implement key recommendations to improve the
effectiveness of Council mandates, including through
greater prioritization and sequencing of tasks and
deployments. We will also continue to advance our
specific proposals regarding enhanced engagement
with troop contributors and other key stakeholders in
the mandate process and enabling more responsible
monitoring and management of risk and performance
through enhanced situational awareness.

As I noted during last Thursday's debate on the
sanctions committees (see S/PV.7620), we can also
improve the effectiveness of sanctions measures by
improving the functioning of our subsidiary bodies.
This means more timely and informed decision-making;
clear strategic direction; and flexibility to respond to
changing circumstances.

Fourthly, we need to encourage a greater culture
of collective decision-making or burden-sharing. The
Council continues to hamper its work by unnecessary
and outdated procedural constraints and rigidities.
There needs to be more scope for all 15 Council
members to make a substantive contribution and for
this to be regarded as a normal and natural way of
operating.

Fifthly, the Council must be more consistent in
supporting compliance with the international rules to
which we have all committed ourselves.

The Charter of the United Nations places the
Council at the centre of a rules-based international
order. It must respond decisively in instances where
such rules are undermined and flouted, such as the
recent nuclear test and ballistic-missile launch by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, or of gross and
systematic abuses of international humanitarian law.

It is particularly important in this regard for the
Council to follow through on its own decisions. We
need to be more honest in assessing their effective
implementation and determining our response where
they have been defied or neglected, or have proved
ineffective or mistaken. This is as true of peacekeeping
mandates and sanctions measures as it is of International
Criminal Court referrals or the obligations imposed by
the Council on parties to a conflict.

To conclude, we cannot afford to lose sight of
the Council's core purpose and its obligation to the
international community and to the millions of human
beings whose lives are being distorted by conflict. The
wider United Nations membership wants to see the
Council delivering better on its primary mandate of
maintaining international peace and security, and New
Zealand does too. That is why we want to work with
all Council members and other interested Members of
the Organization in making a genuine collective effort
focused on solving the problems that the Council is
tasked with confronting.

