Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): The political situation in Guinea-Bissau is concerning, to say the least. That is why the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), which the Niger currently has the honour of chairing, is fully mobilized towards a successful resolution to the crisis. In fact, the latest elections and all the ensuing events have led theinternational community to take note of the swearing in of President Sissoco Embalo. The Niger invites the entire political class to promote the spirit of fair play and to prioritize efforts towards national reconciliation as the best way to ensure a solution to the protracted political crisis, which has had a devastating effect on the country's socioeconomic. situation. My country therefore welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2512 (2020), which we believe to be a balanced text. Through that adoption, the Council is sending a positive signal to the political actors of Guinea-Bissau and expressing its support for ECOWAS and the Group of Five in their tireless efforts to restore stability to the country. Guinea-Bissau's bilateral and multilateral partners must persevere in their determination to implement the Conakry Agreement and the ECOWAS road map. They must also work to preserve the sanctions regime, in accordance with the spirit of the debate of the Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS, held on 9 February, in order to encourage spoilers to place the best interests of the country's people above everything else because that is, ultimately, the only goal of the sanctions. With the extension of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea- Bissau to 31 December and the extension of the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau, the political actors have an opportunity to resolve their differences through dialogue. To that end, the Niger reiterates the African Union's call for the joint mobilization of the international community, particularly the United Nations and the European Union, so as to provide further financial support to the mission in order to enable it to continue its operations until the Guinea- Bissau national defence and security forces are able to ensure the country's security.
