Mr. Morris: May I first express our profound
gratitude to you, Sir, and to all of your colleagues on
the Security Council for the fact that you would be
willing to spend as much time with us as you have
today. You will never know how much your interest in
what we do means to us and to our colleagues around
the world.

Fifty-nine staff members of the World Food
Programme (WFP) have lost their lives in the past 14
years in the line of duty. The work our national and
international staff do is oftentimes under the most
difficult circumstances. The fact that we will be able to
convey the Security Council's interest and the
appreciation expressed by all will be a real boost to our
team. I should also thank the many Council members
that have been incredibly generous in their support as it
relates not only to Iraq, but in fact to our work all
around the world.

First, let me say that, as of 1 June, the 480,000-
metric-ton monthly requirement will be in place. There
will be adequate food in Iraq to feed every single
citizen. Our plan is for WFP to help provide that food
through oil for food resources and through donor
support for the next five months. We are hopeful that
the Ministry of Trade in Iraq will be back on its feet by
then and able to work through its very successful and
substantial distribution system. It has a distribution
system of 44,000 outlets all across the country and it
functions very well.

Once we got into Iraq, we discovered that the
country had more food reserves than we were aware of.
With what we have been able to pull out of the oil for
food programme and with the approximately $500
million our donors have given us, we will have enough

food - together with what is in Iraq's reserve stock -
to feed the people of Iraq through the end of the year.

We are very much focused on the issue of local
purchase. The barley harvest and the wheat harvest are
beginning right now and last a few weeks. The
tradition in Iraq has been for the Government to buy
these crops in their entirety. I think I mentioned this
morning that it had been paying $75 per metric ton. It
costs us about $200 per metric ton to move wheat into
the country. With proceeds from the oil for food
programme, we intend to buy at least one million
metric tons. We will pay $105 per ton for the food. It is
important that the grain board and all of the
infrastructure for acquisition and distribution of locally
purchased commodities be put back in place. We try to
buy locally every time we have the chance.

I am grateful for the emphasis on security. There
is no doubt in my mind that it is everyone's top
priority. My sense is that a lot of the turmoil relates to
the uncertainty of the Iraqi people and to their level of
confidence that a system that has fed them for many
years will still be there. I tried to say this morning that
60 per cent of the Iraqi people get 100 per cent of their
food from the Government and that 100 per cent of the
people get most of their food from the Government, so
we are working at trying to give some degree of
confidence to the Iraqi people that this system will
continue to function.

Members of the Council should know that the
United Nations family works pretty well together on
the ground. The United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the World Health Organization
(WHO), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)
and WFP work as a good team. The Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) gets
part of the credit for that; the United Nations
Development Group gets part of the credit, too. I know
the Council has a great focus on harmonization and on
how we work together as a team. We do that really very
well.

We also work well with the Red Cross. We now
have 10 NGO partners functioning in Iraq all across the
country and doing a good job. We also, I believe, are
working well - at least in our case - with the
Ministry of Trade. I met with the two leaders of the
Ministry of Trade when I was there last Sunday; they
are working with the Office of Reconstruction and
Humanitarian Assistance (ORHA). Every other day
they have a senior staff meeting together with the
United Nations agencies. There is a good sense of
collegiality and of doing our work well together.

We essentially have the food we need to do what
we need to do. We still have a need for some salt and
something called weaning cereals, but those are not
substantial figures that we need to address. We will get
that done.

Security, in part, is being provided by the
occupying militaries, but in the long run this needs to
be provided by local people, and I am pleased with the
commitment that people will begin to be paid in two
days. Security guards have not been paid for a long
time, and it is very difficult to ask them to come back
and resume their occupation when they do not have any
confidence in compensation.

I am grateful for the high praise that many here
have given to the United Nations country teams and
their national staff. We had 800 people with the World
Food Programme in Iraq work right through the
conflict, and they did a superior piece of work.

I think that those are my comments. Once again, I
am grateful for the privilege of being here and for the
importance and value the Council attaches to the work
that all of us do as it relates to issues of international
security.

