I would like to thank the Russian Federation for convening this important annual open debate. We also thank the briefers for their valuable contributions. The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), 20 years ago, marked a reassertion of the long-held demands to eradicate gender inequality as a prerequisite for inclusive development and sustainable peace. From its inception, the women and peace and security agenda has existed in alignment with the central purpose for which the Security Council was established - to maintain international peace and security by ensuring justice, promoting the rule of law and safeguarding fundamental freedoms for all without distinction. On the occasion of the twentieth anniversary, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is proud to join Member States in recognizing and celebrating the robust framework established by resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent Council outcomes on women and peace and security. We pay tribute to women civil society, the early architects of that agenda, and call attention to the wider guiding framework established under general recommendation No. 30 of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. Today, however, with the underrepresentation of women in peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding, escalating levels of sexual and gender-based violence in many situations of conflict, significantly underfunded regional and national gender policies and action plans, women civil society under increased threats of violence, increasing numbers of displaced women and children and the gendered impact of the coronavirus disease in conflict-affected countries and regions, we must urgently address the significant gaps in translating the existing normative framework into action. To do that the Security Council must ensure that gender analysis and a commitment to gender justice guide all deliberations, outcome documents, operations and actions. Gender equality, partly expressed through the full, equal and meaningful participation and leadership of diverse women in peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, is attainable only with the elimination of all forms of gendered violence and discrimination. Indeed, the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/946) points to an urgent need to remove the structural barriers and intersecting discrimination experienced by women, in support of gender parity in participation and leadership. The sustained advocacy of women's organizations and the political will that have led to the significant participation of Colombian women in formal mechanisms to monitor the peace agreement and to trace the implementation of its gender provisions must become the norm, rather than the exception, across all conflict- affected countries and regions. Similarly, we applaud the efforts of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti as it works with the Government of Haiti on issues such as gender-responsive policing and the scourge of sexual and gender-based violence. We expect to hear more with regard to that issue at the briefing by Police Commissioners next Wednesday. The current funding model for advancing gender equality remains unpredictable and insufficient. We acknowledge the Secretary-General's call for compliance with the recommendations of the High-level Task Force on Financing for Gender Equality, specifically as it relates to increasing funding to women's organizations, the funding of gender action plans, the widespread promotion of gender budgeting and the role of the Peacebuilding Fund in promoting gender and age-responsivepeacebuilding initiatives. In that regard, we urge the donor community to comply with its minimum official development assistance commitments to conflict-affected countries, including for the advancement of gender equality. There can be no pursuit of global peace that ignores the gendered forms of insecurity threatening half the world's population. We must equally insist that there can be no pursuit of development without the equal leadership and participation of diverse women.
