The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of May, I would like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Sir Jeremy Greenstock,
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, for
his service as President of the Security Council for the
month of April 2001. I am sure that I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Greenstock for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo

Letter dated 12 April 2001 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (8/2001/357)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Angola, Burundi, Canada, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Japan, Namibia,
Rwanda, the Sudan, Sweden, Uganda and the United
Republic of Tanzania, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, His Excellency
Mr. Leonard She Okitundu.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. She
Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a
seat at the Council table.


The President: I welcome the Special Envoy of
the President of the Rwandese Republic, His
Excellency Mr. Patrick Mazimpaka.
At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Mazimpaka
(Rwanda) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: I welcome the Minister of State
for Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation of
Uganda, His Excellency Mr. Amama Mbabazi.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mbabazi
(Uganda) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: I welcome the Minister of
Finance of Burundi, Mr. Charles Nihangaza.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nihangaza
(Burundi) took the seat reserved for him at the
side ofthe Council Chamber

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mangueira
(Angola), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Akasaka
(Japan), Mr. Andjaba (Namibia), Mr. Erwa
(Sudan), Mr. Norstrdm (Sweden) and Mr.
Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania) took
the seats reserved for them at the side of the

Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Ms. Safiatou Ba-N'Daw, Chairperson of
the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Ms. Ba-N'Daw to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 12 April 2001 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council transmitting the
report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
document S/200l/357.

I should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to the following documents:
S/200l/378, letter dated 16 April 2001 from the Charge'
d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Uganda to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; S/200l/402, letter dated 24 April
2001 from the Permanent Representative of Rwanda to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council; and S/2001/433, letter dated 1 May
2001 from the Permanent Representative of Burundi to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

On behalf of the Security Council, I would like to
welcome Foreign Minister She Okitundu of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Minister of State
Mbabazi of Uganda and Minister of State Mazimhaka
of Rwanda. We look forward to their remarks. We also
welcome Ms. Ba-N'Daw, Chairperson of the Panel of
Experts.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank our
colleague Ambassador Mutaboba of Rwanda for his
service to his country and the United Nations. We wish
him a safe journey home and extend a warm welcome
to his successor, Ambassador Gasana.

Today's meeting occurs against a backdrop of
sadness and outrage in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the international community. Six
representatives of the International Committee of the
Red Cross were brutally murdered on 26 April.

In the presence of Foreign Minister She
Okitundu, we extend our condolences to the families of
the four Congolese victims. In the presence of our
Colombian and Swiss colleagues, we extend the same
message of sympathy for their nationals, who also lost
their lives in the service of our common humanity.

We express the hope that the perpetrators of this
crime will be brought to justice. We all need to work
for the safety and protection of humanitarian personnel
throughout the world and support those who seek to
alleviate human suffering caused by conflicts that we
seek to resolve.

I would like to note also that our discussion today
takes place 15 months after the last United States
presidency of the Security Council, and we also
discussed the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Much has changed, but much remains to be
done, and our discussion today on this important topic
should be seen in the context of this Council's
determination to help bring the tragic conflict in the
Congo to an end.

I shall now give the floor to Ms. Safiatou Ba-
N'Daw, Chairperson of the Panel of Experts on the
Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.


