Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting on the situation in the Middle East,
specifically the tragedy in Lebanon. I wish to thank the
Secretary-General's Special Adviser, Mr. Vijay
Nambiar, and the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. J an Egeland, for their briefings.

We are appalled by the violence that is going on
and saddened that the United Nations Security Council
has not been able to do the minimum required of it
under the United Nations Charter, which is to call for
an immediate ceasefire. We totally reject the deliberate
and systematic undermining of international law and
international humanitarian law and affirm in the
strongest terms the time-honoured moral values of
justice, equality and respect for the sanctity of human
life to which we are all equally bound.

The methods and actions of Hamas and Hizbollah
are objectionable. Peaceful settlement rather than
violent resistance to the occupation is the answer. The
captured Israeli soldiers deserve and must obtain their
freedom immediately. But fairness also demands that
we do not pretend that there are no innocent victims of
Israeli operations, the so-called collateral damage.
More often than not, we hear of pre-emptive actions
but are offered little evidence. No human life should be
so easily dismissed as collateral damage. If we lower
the standards of international norms of behaviour, it
will come back to haunt us. So we must always be
vigilant and consistent in defending our shared values.

Lest our position be misunderstood, let me
emphasize that it is not Israel's sovereign right to
protect its civilian population and territorial integrity
from aggression that is at issue. It is the manner in
which Israel, a respected democracy in the Middle
East, has gone about exercising that right. The
asymmetry in the death toll is marked and disturbing,
and it is growing steadily. Lebanon is under complete
siege, its land, air and sea under a relentless Israeli
blockade. The reality of Israel's absolute military
dominance in the region belies the oft-repeated claim
that this powerful country must take extreme measures
to protect itself, even if that means laying waste
another sovereign State that obviously is very weak.

What can justify the sudden displacement of over
half a million people and the death of over 300 others,
including children? While some countries have the
means to evacuate their privileged citizens from the
relentless bombardment and wanton destruction going
on, where do the displaced Lebanese go? Is this war
really about dismantling Hizbollah? The use of force to
combat terrorism has often proved to be
counterproductive.

My delegation is deeply concerned by reports of
the conditions imposed by Israel on the troops of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), as
lucidly described by the Secretary-General yesterday.
As a member of the United Nations, Israel has an
obligation to ensure the safety and security of all
United Nations personnel, who should not be made to
suffer for their selfless response to international duty.

It is regrettable that Israel has rejected as
premature the clarion call by the Secretary-General and
the international community for an immediate
cessation of hostilities. That was to allow diplomacy to
assume a central role in the search for a lasting
solution to the conflict. We are convinced that it is in
the interest of all parties to heed the Secretary-
General's call, because there can be no military
solution to the crisis. Continued fighting would only
worsen the situation and cause further disenchantment.

In that connection, the set of proposals
announced by the Secretary-General yesterday merits
serious consideration, and my delegation fully supports
them. The proposed deployment of an expanded
international peacekeeping force along the Blue Line is
of utmost importance. We hope the parties will agree to
that deployment. However, peacekeeping is one thing,
while counter-insurgency is entirely different. The
effectiveness of such a mission would depend mainly
on its military capabilities. Certainly, such a force must
be larger in size than UNIFIL and must have a broader
mandate if it is to be stronger than the militias on the
ground. In the meantime, we await the details on the
exact location, size and composition, as well as the
mandate, of the proposed mission.

In conclusion, I must reiterate my delegation's
expectation that this Council will live up to its
responsibilities under the Charter as the organ with
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It must not allow its
integrity to be compromised by failing to take a firm
position on the situation in Lebanon, and it must be
seen to be doing so by the interested public.

It is not too much to ask of this Council, which
has been known to be vocal and ready to act on
situations deemed as potential threats to peace and
security elsewhere, to react to an on-going war in the
most volatile region of the world.

The minimum that the Council can do is to
support the Secretary-General's appeal, which has been
echoed by some other world leaders, for an immediate
cessation of hostilities and examine the other elements
of his proposals dispassionately. It is important that we
also assist the Lebanese Government to establish full
control over its territory and to abide by its
commitment to implement resolutions 1559 (2004) and
1680 (2006). We should bear in mind, though, that we
cannot attain comprehensive peace in Lebanon unless
it is linked with the broader Middle East question, at
the core of which is the Palestinian issue.

Ten days into the conflict in Lebanon, the
Council has remained silent. By its silence or perceived
paralysis, the Council is lending credence to
accusations of selectivity and double standards in its
consideration of issues. Who can fault those who are
agitating for a comprehensive reform of the Security
Council?

