Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): The serious situation in
Sierra Leone is a matter of global concern in which the
United Nations and the Security Council must take up their
full responsibility. We could not agree more with the
Secretary-General when he wrote to you, Mr. President,
stating
"At stake is a great issue of principle, namely,
that the efforts of the international community for
democratic governance, grounded in the rule of law
and respect for human rights, shall not be thwarted
through illegal coups." (S/1997/776)

Sweden strongly supports regional efforts, notably by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), to peacefully restore the democratic order in
Sierra Leone. When the region in unison has asked the
Security Council to contribute to these efforts by increasing
the pressure on the coup leaders, it has our full support.

We believe that efforts made jointly by the United
Nations and ECOWAS will greatly enhance the possibility
of achieving our common aim: that the military junta
relinquish power and make way for the restoration of the
democratically elected Government and a return to
constitutional order in Sierra Leone.

By voting in favour of this draft resolution, Sweden
wants to contribute to a solution by peaceful means,
without the use of armed violence and without innocent
civilians as victims.

Sanctions are an important instrument available to
the Security Council. Using them means taking on a
serious responsibility - a responsibility which Sweden
does not take lightly. In particular, when dealing with
economic sanctions great care must be taken to prevent
innocent civilians from being made to suffer twice, first
under an unlawful regime and then under international
sanctions. The Council must always be guided by
humanitarian considerations.

Appropriate measures have to be taken to allow
humanitarian assistance to reach those in need. In the
deliberations preceding today's decision, Sweden has been
guided by these considerations. Sweden supports the draft
resolution before us.

