Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): 1
thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his
briefing on the situation in Ukraine and the preliminary
report published by the Dutch Safety Board on the
tragic incident of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7.
We also extend our thanks to and acknowledge the
leadership of the Netherlands through Foreign Minister
Franciscus Timmermans, whom we welcome to the
Security Council.

Argentina supported and co-sponsored resolution
2166 (2014) adopted on 21 July, in which the Security
Council, highlighting the need for a full, thorough and
independent international investigation into the incident,
recognized the efforts to undertake an international
investigation of the incident. In that context, we
welcome the briefing on the preliminary report on the
investigation of the incident coordinated by the Dutch
Safety Board, in which experts from the International
Civil Aviation Organization, the European Aviation
Safety Agency and concerned Member States took
part. We take note of the preliminary conclusions and
await the presentation of the final report with interest.
We hope those conclusions will enable us to determine
unequivocally and objectively what led to the downing
of the plane. It is also important that the possibility that
there is criminal responsibility for this be clarified,
and if that should be the case, that those responsible
be held accountable for their actions to the full extent
of the law. In order to ensure that the investigation can
continue to progress, safe, full and unhindered access
to the site of the crash must be guaranteed.

The downing of Flight MH-l7 took place against
a backdrop of fighting between Ukraine and armed
groups, and it is believable that if the circumstances had
been different, the story would also have been different.
Argentina is very concerned about the deterioration of
the security and human rights situations in eastern and
southern Ukraine, and about the effects of renewed
violence on the civilian population. We emphasize
the importance of finding a peaceful solution to the
difficult situation Ukraine is dealing with through
dialogue and negotiation. For that reason we take a

positive View of the memorandum of understanding
between Ukraine, Russia and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.

However, we must acknowledge that we are
concerned about the fragility of the ceasefire that has
been achieved so far. Given the difficulty in reaching
the agreement, we insist that there can be no peaceful
solution to Ukraine's difficult situation through any
unilateral acts, and we therefore call on all parties to
implement the measures agreed on in the memorandum.
The only possible settlement can be one reached
through dialogue and negotiation, with due respect for
Ukraine's autonomy in handling its domestic affairs and
avoiding any confrontational rhetoric or intervention in
a State's internal affairs, whether political, military or
economic. The parties must respect human rights and
international humanitarian law without exceptions, and
must guarantee due accountability for any violations or
abuse of them.

