It is good to see you, Mr. President, and it is always good to hear from Special Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas about his work. West Africa, as colleagues have already noted today, faces a number of challenges, but the new threat of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has brought its own negative political and economic effects. Therefore, we welcome Mr. Chambas' briefing today on how the impact of the crisis is evolving. We very much thank Ms. Ibrahim for her passionate description of the challenges facing her country and the region as a whole. With growing instability and the COVID-19 crisis, 2020 has proven and is showing to be a critical year for the future of West Africa and the Sahel. West Africa will see five presidential elections between October and December, including in Guinea, Cote d'Ivoire, Burkina Faso, Ghana and the Niger. We look to the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel to play a constructive role in encouraging those elections to be free, fair and transparent. Countries in West Africa and the Sahel are also grappling with significant threats to peace, security and stability owing to the confluence of internal political tensions, the COVID-19 pandemic, violence by armed groups and a worsening food security and humanitarian situation. The United States has long engaged with countries in the region to strengthen health systems to respond to this type of disease outbreak - and our steadfast support will continue. The Trump Administration has allocated more than $12 billion to benefit the global response to COVID-19, including vaccine and therapeutics development, preparedness efforts and humanitarian assistance. This is in addition to more than $170 billion in United States investments in global health and humanitarian assistance throughout the last decade. We are concerned, though, about increasing instability across the Sahel, specifically in parts of Nigeria. We strongly condemn the horrific violence - by terrorists and criminal groups alike - that has taken so many lives. We support the efforts of the countries involved to counter violent extremist groups and continue to stress the need to protect civilians and instil citizen confidence in regional security forces and Governments. States undermine their own credibility when authorities, especially security forces, violate or abuse human rights. We call on regional Governments to strengthen State institutions and provide good governance to their citizens to improve stability in the Sahel. We also share Special Representative Chambas' concern about violence spreading further across the region. The United States is taking policy and programmatic steps to address violence emanating from the Sahel into coastal West Africa, especially since the 10 June attack in northern Cete d'Ivoire and the 2019 kidnapping for ransom in northern Benin. In Mali, we are monitoring the recent demonstrations, where protestors are calling for President Keita's resignation. We call on all actors to engage in dialogue and restraint and reaffirm the right to freedom of peaceful assembly, including for the purposes of peaceful protest. We support the high-level delegation of the Economic Community of West African States, sent to find a sustainable solution to the unrest, including concerns over National Assembly seats, where the initial outcome was overturned by the Constitutional Court. We continue to oppose any efforts towards an extra-constitutional change of Government in Mali. We further trust that Council members will join us in urging the signatory parties of the Algiers accord to meet the implementation benchmarks in the recently renewed mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. That would substantially bolster efforts to stabilize Mali and the broader Sahel.
