Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the Peacebuilding
Commission's submission to the Security Council of
the first report on its work. We thank you, Sir, for your
timely convening of this meeting, which offers us a
good opportunity to exchange views.

The Chinese delegation thanks Ambassador
Gaspar Martins of Angola for his outstanding work,
and congratulates Japan on assuming the chairmanship
of the Peacebuilding Commission. We trust that, under
the leadership of Ambassador Yukio Takasu, the
Commission's work will be fruitful in the coming year.

Last week, in the General Assembly's discussion
of the Peacebuilding Commission, speakers generally
expressed their high appreciation for the Commission's
work in its first year. Its accomplishments include the
virtual completion of its organizational and procedural
work and the provision of assistance to Burundi and
Sierra Leone in their peacebuilding processes through
country-specific configurations. At the same time, all
speakers expressed their high hopes for the
Commission's work in the year ahead.

It is generally believed that the Commission faces
the following urgent tasks: coordinating with the

United Nations system, playing its value-added role to
the full, adequately negotiating the balance between
partnership and ownership, and exploiting its
catalysing functions. In that regard, the Chinese
delegation wishes to make the following observations.

First, the Peacebuilding Commission should
identify its appropriate relationships with the organs
and bodies of the United Nations system. Within the
United Nations, the Commission should strengthen its
interaction with the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council. In the
field, it should make full use of the resources of
various projects, funds and peacekeeping missions so
as to avoid institutional duplication, resulting in waste.

Secondly, the Commission should effectively
play its value-added role. Given the high expectations
of the people of Burundi and Sierra Leone, the
Commission's work must yield palpable results. It
should complete and improve on the integrated
peacebuilding strategies and swiftly formulate simple
tracking and monitoring mechanisms so as to ensure
that all sides fulfil their obligations. The priority areas
identified in the strategies should not only include
human rights protection, justice and security sector
reform, but also address with equal urgency the root
causes of conflict, such as poverty and uneven
development.

Thirdly, the Commission should adeptly manage
the balance between partnership and ownership. In the
partnership between the international community and a
given country, embodied in the Peacebuilding
Commission, the former provides necessary assistance
to the latter. A partner can only be a participant,
however; a country's fate lies in its own hands. The
international community should avoid taking over.

Fourthly, the Commission should establish close
ties with the Peacebuilding Fund. Although the
Commission cannot micromanage the Fund, a natural
relationship exists between them. Established priority
areas should be the focal points for support from the
Fund. The Secretary-General should provide the
Commission with more timely briefings on the
operation and implementation of the Fund's projects so
as to ensure consistency and transparency in its
management.

The Security Council is part of the umbrella
under which the Peacebuilding Commission functions

and should therefore strengthen communication
between them, ensuring interaction through formal
meetings and informal exchanges. The Council can
guide the Commission's work and should, to the
greatest possible extent, solicit the Commission's
expert recommendations so as to devise flexible and
workable guiding principles. Moreover, in light of
specific issues on its agenda, the Security Council can
study potential new subjects for the Commission's
consideration.

