Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs Lowcock and World
Food Programme Executive Director Beasley for
their briefings.

First of all, I would like to strongly reaffirm
France's full support for the efforts of Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths and Lieutenant General Lollesgaard. I
reiterate France's full confidence in them.

As we have just heard, after weeks of deadlock,
the parties managed to meet again at the beginning
of the week within the Redeployment Coordination
Committee (RCC) and agree on the general principles
for implementing the first and second phases of
the Hudaydah agreement on the ground. This is an
encouraging step, and we welcome the resumption of
talks. However, that is only the first step. The parties
must now implement the agreed points quickly and
concretely and remain engaged in good faith within the
RCC and with the Special Envoy.

While we have just unanimously renewed the
mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hudaydah Agreement for six months (resolution 2481 (2019)), France reiterates its full support for the Mission.
Its presence on the ground is crucial for observing
and facilitating redeployment, as provided for under
resolution 2452 (2019), but also for enabling the parties
to rebuild trust. The increasing operationalization of
the force is a good thing, and we call on the United
Nations to continue to deploy its full capabilities on the
ground. It is the responsibility of the parties to ensure
their safety and free movement.

The efforts of the Special Envoy are all the more
important given the regional security situation, which
recently began to deteriorate. The current tensions in
the Gulf are extremely worrying. They could have an
impact on the situation in Yemen and the readiness
of the parties to move forward in their discussions
for the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement
and, beyond that, to find a political solution to the
current conflict.

France has been very clear: we strongly condemned
the most recent attacks perpetrated and claimed by the
Houthis, including those on the airport at Abha, which
have already resulted in one death and left dozens
wounded. These attacks are unacceptable and must
stop. We therefore call on all parties to refrain from
any escalation that could further destabilize the region
and jeopardize the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement in all its dimensions and the resumption of
discussions for a peaceful solution. In this regard, the
military redeployment announced by the authorities of
the United Arab Emirates, in particular in Al-Hudaydah,
could provide an opportunity for de-escalation. We
hope that this decision could be used to facilitate a
political solution to the crisis by all parties.

We remain very concerned about the continuing
deterioration of the humanitarian and security situation.
It is more essential than ever to protect civilians,
including women and children, as they are particularly
vulnerable. Nearly 2 million of them suffer from severe
acute malnutrition.

I wish to reiterate our full support for the
humanitarian actors and their efforts in this difficult
context. They too must be protected. Commercial and
humanitarian access, which must be guaranteed, has
been further hampered by the closure of the road between
Aden and Sana'a, but also by other obstructions, namely,
the Houthis, which is unacceptable at a time when, as
Mr. Beasley has just described it, the country is still at
risk of starvation. We therefore call on the parties to
make every effort to facilitate the implementation of
the humanitarian response plan and ensure that action
is taken in full respect of the principles of neutrality,
independence, impartiality and humanity.

I will conclude by emphasizing that we must
not lose sight of the fact that our collective goal is to
find a political solution to the current conflict. The
Stockholm Agreement is a first step in facilitating
the establishment of trust between the parties. That is
why achieving results in its implementation will help
contribute to the resumption of political discussions.

A military solution cannot and must not be an
option. Relaunching these discussions to reach a
comprehensive and inclusive political agreement,
taking into account the diversity of Yemeni actors,
including women and civil society representatives, is
the only real prospect for putting an end to the conflict
and the humanitarian crisis. The mobilization and unity
of the Security Council are our greatest asset when it
comes to moving forward on this difficult path, but it
is the only option for restoring the peace to which the
Yemeni people aspire.

