Ms. Juen (Austria): At the outset, let me thank the
Secretary-General for presenting his report (S/2012/376)
and Under-Secretary-General Amos, Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovie, and International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) Director Spoerri
for their instructive briefings.

Austria aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the European Union, the Group of Friends
on the protection of civilians and the Human Security
Network.

The Secretary-General's most recent report on the
protection of civilians is a very good basis not only for
stock-taking but also for discussing topics that have been
identified as emerging protection issues and that should
receive more attention in the Council's deliberations.

Austria welcomes the report's highlighting of
the dangers for journalists in conflict situations. We
underline the obligation of all parties to conflict to
ensure the protection of civilians, including journalists
and other media workers and professionals. The
Council has unequivocally condemned such attacks
in resolution 1738 (2006), and we encourage Council
members to consider the situation of journalists in
armed conflict in a more proactive and systematic
manner in country-specific discussions, including by
calling on parties to put an end to such attacks.

As impunity continues to be widespread, Member
States should constantly be reminded of their obligation
to prosecute those responsible for violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law.
In order to ensure accountability for serious crimes,
such as in the present situation in Syria, the Security
Council should promote and make use of the full
range of justice and accountability mechanisms at the
national and international levels, including referrals to
the International Criminal Court.

The fight against impunity and the prevention of
future crimes, including through the sharing of best
practices and lessons learned, will be key elements of
the resolution on the safety ofjournalists that Austria
intends to submit to the Human Rights Council this fall.

Withregardtotheuseofexplosiveweaponsindensely
populated areas, we share the Secretary-General's
concern about their humanitarian impact. Austria
welcomes the Emergency Relief Coordinator's appeals
in that regard and supports the ICRC view and the
Secretary-General's recommendation that explosive
weapons with a wide-area impact should be avoided
in densely populated areas. Under international
humanitarian law, their use is not prohibited as such,
but the heightened risk of indiscriminate harm and the
appalling civilian suffering they cause when used in
such areas should be reason enough for us to consider
this issue more in depth, including the possibility of
developing stronger international standards. More
systematic data collection, the refinement of national
policies on the use of explosive weapons and conducting
post-strike analysis are important in that respect.

Let me also mention that, in order to improve
our understanding of protection challenges and to
effectively respond to them, civilian casualty recording
by parties to conflict should receive more attention. The
practice of offering amends to civilians harmed during
armed conflict, which may range from the recognition
of the harm caused and public apologies to assistance
to victims, has increased recently, and we welcome the
efforts made by the International Security Assistance
Force and the African Union Mission in Somalia in that
regard.

With a view to the imminent negotiations on an
arms trade treaty, Austria would like to underline its
full support for an outcome that should set robust,
ambitious and legally binding norms for the regulation
of the international trade in arms. It should prevent
international transfers of conventional arms, inter
alia, if there is a substantial risk that those arms will
be used to commit or facilitate serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law,
including the perpetration of gender-based violence.

Let me conclude by stressing the importance of
appropriate predeployment training of peacekeepers, as
reflected in resolution 1894 (2009). Two new missions
with protection of civilians mandates were established
by the Council last year, among them the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), which was faced
with an outburst of inter-communal ethnic violence
in Jonglei state at the turn of the year. As the Force
Commander ofUNMISS highlighted before the Council
last week (see S/PV.6789), early-warning activities and
assistance by the Mission to the host Government were
decisive in preventing a further escalation of violence.

In that regard, it is important to emphasize our
common responsibility to provide missions with
key resources and to prepare peacekeepers in the
implementation of protection mandates. We welcome
the protection of civilians training modules prepared
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support and encourage troop- and
police-contributing countries to make use of them.

Austria has committed itself to proactive
implementation of resolution 1894 (2009) and is
currently developing an interdisciplinary training
course on the protection of civilians that will be open to
national and international participants who are senior
decision-makers of armed forces, police and civilian
administration, as well as other civilian stakeholders
and experts.

