Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Twenty-three
years ago, I sat behind my Ambassador as the Security
Council discussed Rwanda. It was the most horrible
experience. As I prepared to come here on my posting
this time, I was often asked by my colleagues: What
will be your Rwanda moment? I think it has probably
arrived. Then, as now, there were credible reports
coming in of atrocities being committed. Then, as now,
there was someone at the table, a party to the conflict,
that had their own View. But in the end the truth came
through.

I choose to believe the Secretary-General when
he comes to the Council and tells us there are credible
reports of atrocities being committed. I choose to
believe the Secretary-General and the people working
for him when they say the issue is not terrorism, but it
is barbarism.
This was a scenario we had desperately hoped to
avoid when we worked with Egypt and Spain to try to
adopt a Council draft resolution to stop the violence
and provide orderly access for the United Nations
and other humanitarian partners to support the needs
of the beleaguered city. We made the same plea in
consultations last week when we sort of came to some
rough agreement about what we might say to the media,
except that the one important point we asked for - that
the United Nations must be involved in the access and
in the evacuation arrangements - was not allowed to
us by Russia. That is the problem we have today. The
United Nations is not on the ground. The United Nations
is not able to verify. So it is no good coming back and
telling us that you have done all of these reports and
investigations, because no one is there to check on you.

The tactics being used in eastern Aleppo go against
basic humanity. Such short-term tactics do nothing to
counter terrorism. They fuel radicalization and, rather
than hastening the end of the war, they make peace
more distant.

We share the criticisms of the Secretary-General
of the Council's failure to act. We have called attention
to those failures repeatedly over the past months. We
have tried to remedy that failure by putting forward
draft resolutions to address the issue. And we have
failed. We have failed. In one sense it is a collective
failure of the entire Council. But in another sense, it is a
specific failure because a permanent member has used
a veto to prevent Council action to address a serious
humanitarian crisis. That veto, in our View, is against
the deep spirit of Article 27, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations, under which we all operate. And
it is a cynical attempt to use a provision to advance
military aims of one of the participants to the conflict.

The Secretary-General has come to us in this
urgent meeting and said that we need to act, we need
to do something to address the situation. We urge
Russia, we urge Iran, we urge Syria to work with us.
We can only focus on the immediate right now. But
saving lives must be our focus of attention. We need to
get the United Nations on the ground. We need to get
the United Nations able to help people - those who
want to leave be allowed to leave and those who need
humanitarian assistance to get it when they can.
Of course we know that peace and stability will be
restored ultimately only through a return to dialogue,
reconciliation and meaningful political change. But
those things seem very far away right now. Let us,
right now, concentrate on what has to be done in the
immediate hours.

