Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): We
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report, as well as Mr. Abe for his briefing. We would
also like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate today on such a crucial issue.

It is well known that conventional arms are the
weapons that are responsible for the greatest number of
victims in the world today. We are aware of the scourge
that light weapons, in particular, constitute in this
regard. We support and are taking an active part in the
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. In this regard, we welcome the adoption by
the General Assembly of resolution 58/241 of 23
December 2003, by which is was decided, in particular,
to set up a working group to negotiate an international
instrument to identify and trace small arms.

That is not the only aspect of the problem,
however. The question of brokering and the issue of
end-user certificates also merit the attention of the
international community. But work on identifying and
tracing represents the first step towards a treaty to
control the illicit trade in small arms.

I would like once again to congratulate, on behalf
of my country, Ambassador Anton Thalmann of
Switzerland, who has just been appointed to chair the
work of that group. As soon as the Swiss candidacy
was announced by the President of the Swiss
Confederation in the General Assembly, the President
of the French Republic assured him of the support of
France. As the Council knows, our two countries have
worked together for a long time with a view to making
progress on the identification and tracing of small
arms. France will work actively to make progress on
the elaboration of such an instrument. I would like to
reaffirm our hope, expressed during the fifty-eighth
session of the General Assembly, that any such
instrument will be legally binding.

Combating the illicit trade in small arms is of
major concern to the international community. As
emphasized in the United Nations Programme of
Action, that concern is global, regional and national. In
Europe, the conflict in the former Yugoslavia and the
political changes that have taken place in Eastern
Europe have resulted in the dangerous proliferation of
small weapons throughout the European continent.
Today, we are finding such arms in our own territory.

France remains particularly concerned about the
continued increase in the illicit proliferation of small
arms and light weapons on the African continent - a
major factor in the destabilization of States there. I
would like to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the need for greater cooperation and
involvement on the part of the international
community, together with the African continent, in
combating the traffic in small arms and light weapons.
We believe, in particular, that specific attention should
be paid to this issue within the framework of the post-
conflict processes in Central Africa, including the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as in West
Africa, where an important role should be played by
the Economic Community of West African States - as
mentioned earlier by the Ambassador of Benin - as
well as by the peacekeeping operations that have
already been set up and that will be set up in Liberia
and cote d'Ivoire.

It would be useful to develop the regional
dimension in combating the illicit trade in small arms
as part of our effort to counter the proliferation of
weapons. In this regard, information exchanges on
various regional experiences should be more actively
promoted, including in the framework of the United
Nations. In that spirit, France, together with the
Netherlands, submitted this year to the General
Assembly a draft resolution on the promotion, at the
regional level in the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe the United Nations Programme
of Action on the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects, to facilitate the sharing of
our experience within that body, which has already led
to the publication of eight best practices guides. We are
pleased that the draft resolution was adopted by
consensus. In the context of sharing information,
France can see only advantages in having the OSCE
best practice guides distributed by the Secretariat to
Member States as soon as possible.

