Mr. Gillerman (Israel): I have listened very
carefully to my Palestinian colleague. Strangely, some
key words were ominously missing from his statement.
There was no mention of Hamas, terror, Qassam
rockets or the abduction of Corporal Gilad Shalit. I
truly believe that, when discussing the question of
Palestine, the members of the Council deserve better.

While we are greatly concerned about the
situation in Palestine, we feel it would be wrong to
divert attention from what the Council has so intensely
been engaged in over the past month, namely, the
situation in Lebanon and the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006). This is our foremost
responsibility and we must commit all our efforts to
making it happen. However, as a lot has been said in
the Council about the humanitarian situation in Gaza, I
would like to inform the Council that we, too, are very
conscious of the humanitarian needs in the Gaza Strip.
I received word only this morning that 3,772
truckloads of food, medical equipment and other
supplies have already entered Gaza in the past two
months; 664 empty trucks have left Gaza with the
intent of returning full with new supplies. All this has
been done in close cooperation with the United Nations
and with the international community's representatives
dealing with these humanitarian issues.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Ibrahim Gambari for his briefing. The reason we are
here today, however, goes back many years - far
beyond this report. Six years ago, Israel withdrew all
its presence from southern Lebanon, fulfilling its
obligations to the international community as outlined
in resolution 425 (1978). Six years ago was the time
for action, when everything we have discussed today
and in the past month could have been avoided.

There were other opportunities along the way.
Resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006) also outlined
the plan for a new reality in Lebanon, which was clear
in its call for Lebanon to exercise its control over all its
territory and govern just as would be expected of any
other responsible State. The unconditional
implementation of those resolutions could have
prevented the events of the past month. But the
willingness to implement the resolutions was wanting.
As a result, Lebanon found itself hijacked by evil and
occupied by terror.

All the while, Israel found itself in an intolerable
situation. Just over its northern border with Lebanon a
state within a State continued to grow, unchecked by
the Lebanese Government. And so Hizbollah grew
monstrously, spreading its claws throughout Lebanon
and amassing large caches of weapons, thanks to the
backing of neighbouring Syria and Iran, its evil
sponsors.

On 12 July 2006, Hizbollah blatantly violated the
Blue Line and crossed into Israel. In the process, it
killed eight Israeli soldiers and abducted two others.
Israel, like any other State, has the right and duty to
defend its citizens from Hizbollah's attacks - and it
did so. Over the past month, the peoples of Israel and
Lebanon have had to pay a heavy price.

Resolution 1701 (2006) is an opportunity -
perhaps the last opportunity - to rectify the mistakes
of the past and usher in a new reality. Resolution 1701

(2006) is our best chance for reversing the corrosive
decay of Lebanon and all that came with it -
Hizbollah, a state within a State, and its masters, Syria
and Iran, whose President denies the Holocaust while
preparing the next one and openly calls for the
destruction of Israel and for wiping it off the map,
while acquiring the capabilities to do so.

We trust in resolution 1701 (2006) to create a
new Lebanon free of such terrorizing occupiers. But
there are obstacles to implementing the resolution, and
those issues raise serious concerns. We must join
forces in order to overcome them.

Allow me, Mr. President, to highlight some
important points from resolution 1701 (2006). The first
is the crucial issue of the abducted soldiers - Udi
Goldwasser and Eldad Regev. We are facing here a
grave humanitarian issue. Each day that passes without
their release is crucial. Israel views the immediate and
unconditional release of those soldiers as the primary
backdrop to the creation of a new reality on the ground.
Each one of you, by raising your hand, has pledged to
work for their release. We urge you to fulfil that
responsibility.

The second point is the strength and composition
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL). A clear and unequivocal mandate needs to
be outlined for UNIFIL - one that its donor countries
can achieve. With a clear and effective mandate,
countries contributing to the robust UNIFIL force can
commit wholeheartedly and without hesitation.

UNIFIL must have not just the manpower but
also the willpower to help the Lebanese Government
reach this new reality. At the moment, UNIFIL's
strength is uncertain. A weak UNIFIL does not fulfil
the interests of Lebanon or the region, and it writes
Hizbollah a blank cheque to continue to do as it
pleases.

UNIFIL's manpower should reach 15,000 troops,
so that its presence can be felt in the areas deployed. It
must be a robust force, comprising quality, professional
and well-trained troops. UNIFIL must also be
geographically distributed. At the 15 ,000-troop mark, it
should be able to spread itself across southern
Lebanon, in parallel with the Lebanese army.
Beginning south of the Litani River, UNIFIL must be
seen and felt.

The Lebanese army's deployment in the south is a
welcome contribution. Since the adoption of resolution
1701 (2006), we have witnessed encouraging meetings
between Lebanese commanders and the Israel Defense
Forces. But we have also seen Hizbollah terrorists
disappearing into the shadows, with no definitive
action taken to prevent their re-emergence.

That brings me to the third concern. The rearming
of Hizbollah is a blatant Violation of the ceasefire. The
embargo is the cardinal instrument of resolution 1701
(2006). There is no doubt that Syria and Iran wish to
rearm Hizbollah and prevent the emergence of a new
Lebanon. Giving them the opportunity to rearm
Hizbollah will have catastrophic ramifications for the
region and the world. If we cannot enforce an embargo,
we send a message to the terrorists and their State
backers that we will permit them to continue their ways
of terror.

In order to prevent that, mechanisms are needed
to supervise the Syrian-Lebanese border and to monitor
the Lebanese seaports and airports. UNIFIL needs to be
there, but a policy that addresses how States can
enforce the embargo also needs to be articulated. In the
absence of enforcement powers, Hizbollah, Iran and
Syria will laughingly continue to ignore the embargo,
as they are at this very moment.

An embargo does not mean merely preventing
arms from crossing the border; it also means putting an
end to Syria and Iran's manipulation of Lebanon and
its people. During the recent fighting, Israel captured a
22-year-old Hizbollah terrorist by the name of Hussein
Ali Suleiman, who admitted to having undergone
extensive training in Iran, along with many other
Hizbollah terrorists. Other Hizbollah terrorists in
Israeli custody have disclosed that Iranian
Revolutionary Guards visited their fortified positions
along the Israeli border.

If Lebanon asks the Security Council for help, the
Council must be willing and able to step forward and
give Lebanon a hand. The task of creating a new reality
in Lebanon is too important to be the sole work of one
State. And, as history has shown us, neglecting to
implement the resolutions adopted by the Council
comes at all too high a price.

The Middle East is a region caught between rifts
of extremism, where radicals engage in fierce battles
that have no rules of play. Israel finds itself lodged
between those currents, trying to navigate a peaceful
solution to the turmoil and allow civilization to grow
and prosper as it should.

While our attention has largely been focused on
the north, on Lebanon, Israel has also been attacked
from the south - by Hamas, operating in Gaza.
Regrettably, the forces of extremism have taken hold
there as well, and Gaza today is a haven for terrorists
and their unsanctioned activities. Indeed, if unchecked,
it may be a preview to the next Lebanon.

Hamas has also abducted an Israeli soldier. It has
been two months since Gilad Shalit was kidnapped by
terrorists who crossed from Gaza into Israel. Along
with his abduction, terrorism has continued, including
the launching of Qassam rockets at southern Israeli
communities. These rocket attacks impose an
intolerable situation upon Israel and place its citizens
in constant danger.

But there is a way to a new Palestinian reality as
well. It begins with the immediate and unconditional
release of Gilad Shalit. It begins with a halt to the
Qassam rockets and terror attacks. It begins with an
end to all forms of terror and with the uprooting of
terrorists who wilfully endanger the region.

Israel has been blanketed from north to south by
these forces of extremism, by Hamas, Hizbollah, Syria
and Iran - the quartet of terror - whose evil knows
no bounds. This quartet of terror must be defeated. It is
a threat not just to Israel, but to the entire world and to
civilization as we know it. The implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) is a first step towards defeating
that threat.

The outcome of the next few weeks and the
months ahead is ours collectively to decide. The
Security Council, representing the international
community, possesses that power. Where will we go
from here? Will we succeed in implementing these
resolutions? Will we succeed in implementing them
quickly? Will we work together as partners to enforce
an embargo and put an end to the poisonous Syrian and
Iranian influence in the region?
These are the questions with which we are being
tested. Resolution 1701 (2006) is, indeed, a test: a test
for Lebanon, a test for the Security Council, a test for
the international community. If we do not pass this test,
we will have lost our chance - perhaps our last
chance - to free Lebanon from the forces of terror and
bring about a new reality.

We can pass this test, but it cannot be done by

any one of us alone. We must partner together and

become a unified force and a unified voice on

terrorism, on extremism and on the forces that threaten
the way we live. We must grasp this opportunity.

Resolution 1701 (2006) can be our success story.
It can be the story we tell to our children and
grandchildren when we recount this region's complex
history. It can be the story we take pride in as the
defining moment when we rose to the occasion and did
not let the terrorists seize power over us. Resolution
1701 (2006) is that story. But it remains the duty of the
international community and of the Security Council to
ensure that it comes true.

