Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening today's open debate, which
provides an opportunity for reflection on the situation
in the Middle East. We commend Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his very lucid briefing and for sharing his
perspective in the search for peace in the Middle East.

Nigeria aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the Permanent Representatives of Uzbekistan
and Venezuela on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and the Non-Aligned Movement,
respectively.

For too long, the situation in the Middle East has
remained a matter of concern to the international
community. Today's debate opens against the backdrop
of a tense situation in Gaza, where a new energy crisis
is now unfolding. Nigeria recognizes the fact that
reform of the Gaza Electricity Distribution Company
is essential to improving revenue collection and
transparency, in line with international standards.
The authorities in Gaza must ensure that collection
rates are improved and that revenue collected in Gaza
is judiciously utilized in order to keep the fuel and
electricity supply flowing.

Indeed, the social, economic and political
consequences of the impending energy crisis should not
be treated with levity. Palestinians in Gaza, who live in
a protracted humanitarian crisis, can no longer be held
hostage by disagreements, divisions and closures. It is
imperative for all parties, including the international
community, to act in concert and ensure the early
resolution of the vital issue of energy for Gaza. The
United Nations must play a vital role in achieving
this objective.

Our unequivocal message, today as always, is a
simple one. There should be an independent State of
Palestine existing side by side with a secure State of
Israel, free from threat and intimidation. 1 have no doubt
that the entire Council is united on this. Speaking with
one voice, it is important for the Council once again to
call on the parties to resume direct negotiations without
further delay on all the permanent status issues, in
particular borders, security, the status of Jerusalem and
the return of Palestinian refugees.

Each of the parties can play an important role
in fostering peace. To that end, we call on Israel to
take concrete steps to freeze all settlement-related
activities in the West Bank and East Jerusalem as a
confidence-building measure. On their part, Palestinian
leaders must also signal their readiness to return to the
negotiating table by making enhanced efforts to forge
unity and deal with militancy and other internal security
challenges. It is beyond doubt that neither military
might nor militancy will resolve the protracted conflict.
It is obvious that the current stalemate in the Middle
East peace process is neither ideal nor sustainable. Both
sides must take concrete steps to return to negotiations
on the basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Quartet road map, the Madrid principles, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the relevant agreements between
them. Nigeria supports the efforts of the international
community towards establishing an environment
conducive to a return to meaningful negotiations to end
the occupation and resolve the long-running conflict.

Another phenomenon that compounds the situation
in the Middle East is the threat of terrorism. It is
expanding and intensifying, affecting a greater number
of countries in the region. Terrorist groups have laid
claim to territory and set up administrative structures.
They are gaining access to significant funding streams,
which they use to support their destablizing activities.

Criminalizing the financing of individual terrorists
and terrorist organisations, impeding the movement of
foreign terrorist fighters, implementing relevant United
Nations sanctions regime and taking multilateral action
are some of the most potent weapons in the arsenal
of the international community in the war against
extremism and terrorism. It is imperative to strengthen
international cooperation in order to effectively combat
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and other
terrorist groups. A comprehensive approach within the
scope of the rule of law and due process, respecting
all principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international human rights and humanitarian law, is
essential. This calls for urgent action.

