Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank today's briefers,
Mr. Michael Keating, Special Representative of the
SecretaryGeneral for Somalia, Mr. Francisco Madeira,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women. We are also very pleased to see our new
Ethiopian colleague in the Chamber today. We wish
him every success and are ready to work closely with
him in the Council.

We welcome the progress that has been made
between Mogadishu and the federal states in restoring
Somali statehood. In that context, we want to particularly
highlight the progress made on constitutional reform,
on developing a legislative framework for holding
general elections in 2020 and 2021, and the signing of
an agreement on the sharing of revenues from minerals.

At the same time, we urge all political players
in Somalia to settle their differences exclusively by
peaceful means. We note the mediation efforts that
President Farmajo has made in that regard, as well
as those of the Intergovernmental Organization for
Development and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. Such efforts are particularly
important considering that the challenges to security in
Somalia remain very serious. The terrorist organizations
Al-Shabaab and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant continue to conduct their subversive activities
on Somali territory, and the Somali authorities still
have much to do to put an end to such threats. Effective
joint efforts are particularly needed for the work of
building a national security architecture. The priority
here is ensuring the transfer of responsibility for the
country's security to the Somalis themselves. In that
regard, we would particularly like to thank the African
Union Mission in Somalia, which continues to make a
huge contribution to normalizing life in Somalia. In the
current circumstances, it is important not only to adapt
the Mission to the changing situation on the ground
but also to ensure that its reconfiguration goes hand in
hand with the establishment of Somali law-enforcement
structures. We are ready to discuss the modalities of
financing AMISOM. from the United Nations budget.

Progress in building the State and creating viable
institutions of authority, especially on the social front,
is no less important. The acute humanitarian challenges
that the country is facing must be addressed as soon as
possible. We support the calls to ensure women's active
participation in that process.

The most recent developments in the region have
made it possible to speak with hope for the future of
the Horn of Africa. The positive momentum that began
with the normalization of relations between Ethiopia
and Eritrea has spread to the entire subcontinent.
We believe that the steps taken by the States of the
region, including Somalia, to restore good-neighbourly
relations between their peoples will ultimately bring
the stability and prosperity they desire. We wish the
countries of the Horn of Africa every success along
that path, and we are ready to support them in every
possible way.

I would also like to express my gratitude to Michael
Keating for his helpful work on the Somalia dossier for
the past three years. We wish him success in all his
new endeavours.

