Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I wish to convey our pleasure at seeing
you, Sir, preside over this meeting. I also thank your
delegation for having made the arrangements for us to
meet today with the President of Rwanda.

My delegation welcomes President Kagame
warmly and thanks him for coming here to have this
dialogue with the Council on the situation in the Great
Lakes region and its implications for international
peace and security.

Last week in this Chamber, in connection with
President Kabila's visit, we expressed our firm resolve
to defend the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and of the countries of the Great Lakes
region. We also stated our clear intention to require the
signatories of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement to fulfil
their commitments to establish peace in the region and
we expressed our desire to promote a swift deployment
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in favourable
working conditions.

Today, we would like to make precisely the same
points to the President of Rwanda, because we feel that
this is indeed a window of opportunity to promote
peace in Africa. We were pleased to hear him speak of
renewed support for the Lusaka process and for the
United Nations presence in Congolese territory. We
believe that this is the moment for the entire world to
witness action being taken towards peace by the
political leaders of the Great Lakes region, such as a
ceasefire in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a
disengagement of forces monitored by the United
Nations, an orderly withdrawal of foreign forces and a
normalization of the security situation along the
borders.

Two actions provided for in the Lusaka
Agreement are of great importance to stability in the
region. The first is the disarmament of the armed
groups operating in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; the second is the repatriation of their members
to their respective countries of origin. In this
connection, we would greatly appreciate any remarks
the President of Rwanda may wish to make on the
repatriation of refugees and other persons of Rwandese
origin currently living in Congolese territory.

We recall with deep pain the events of 1994 in
Rwanda, which gave rise to many of the problems
currently engulfing the Great Lakes region. We believe
that the proper administration ofjustice in Rwanda and
gradual reconciliation among the Rwandese people are
an inherent part of a lasting peace in the region. The
course of justice must be firm towards the perpetrators
of genocide so that the Rwandese communities can
look to the future with confidence.

As members of the international community, and
in particular as members of this Council, we are
prepared to offer and guarantee our assistance.

