Mr. Lowcock: I concluded my briefing to the
Security Council last month (see S/PV.8355) with a
question: Would the agreement reached between the
Russian Federation and Turkey on Idlib provide only
a moment of respite, or would it represent the start of
a more stable future for millions of civilians in that
part of the country? We have seen a glimmer of hope
in the weeks of relative quiet since the agreement
was reached. It is extremely important for millions of
people in Idlib that that remains the case. The stakes
are very high because the alternative is humanitarian
suffering on a scale that would overwhelm all ability
to respond, devastating a population that is already
weakened through years of conflict, displacement
and deprivation.

The United Nations and its partner organizations
continue to reach people in need throughout Syria. Over
the first seven months of the year, in total across the
country, an average of almost 5.5 million people were
reached with life-saving assistance every month. In
September, nearly 2.5 million people were reached with
food aid from Damascus. That includes some people in
areas that have recently come under the control of the
Government, with assistance often delivered through
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.

However, in many areas that recently changed
control, the United Nations has not had sustained
access. We have discussed this with the Syrian
authorities, who have made clear that areas under their
control should now be reached in a comprehensive
and regular manner from Damascus. They have also
agreed to facilitate a greater number of missions and
that we can more systematically deploy United Nations
personnel with aid that is often delivered in partnership
with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. We look forward
to the rapid implementation of that approach. It will
allow our teams on the ground to undertake essential
independent assessments of the situation and see more
of who is being helped and how. At the same time, we
will continue to submit plans for Government agreement
for crossline access into north-west Syria.

That leads me to a broader point I wanted to make
about the approach we are taking to assessing and
meeting humanitarian need across Syria. The United
Nations mandate for humanitarian action, set by the
Council in its series of resolutions and also by the
General Assembly in resolution 46/182, adopted in
1991, requires us to consult the Government. We think
that is very important. At the same time, our mandate
also emphasizes the principles of independence,
impartiality and neutrality in humanitarian action, in
particular to ensure that assistance is provided on the
basis of need, and not driven or determined by any
other considerations.

The humanitarian system, as the Council knows,
is financed on a voluntary basis. The main questions
I am asked by all those whose help I seek in financing
humanitarian action everywhere around the world are
always the same. How do you know what the needs are?
And how do we know, if we give you money, that it
will really get to the people who need it most? If people
whose money we are seeking are not persuaded by the
answers we provide to those questions, my experience
is that they do not give us the money we ask for.
Ensuring that we work on the basis of the humanitarian
principles is therefore both a matter of complying with
our mandates, as we want to and as we must do, but it is
also a matter of practical necessity.

I have discussed those issues in detail with the
Government on a number of occasions in recent weeks.
The discussions have led to important agreements in
extending the United Nations ability to assess needs as
comprehensively as possible, fully in compliance with
our mandate, as we prepare the humanitarian needs
overview and the United Nations-coordinated response
plan that we will be publishing for Syria for 2019. I
hope to be able to report progress to the Council in
carrying out expanded needs-assessment exercises in
the next few months.

The United Nations cross-border operation from
Turkey has continued to reach hundreds of thousands
of people in need every month. It has been scaled up
in recent weeks to ensure pre-positioning of assistance
as a contingency measure in the event of a military
escalation, as well as to provide winterization support.
Nearly 1,000 trucks are delivering plastic sheeting,
winter clothes and boots, heaters and stoves. Critical
supplies also continue to be delivered into north-east
Syria through the Al-Yaarubiyah border crossing
from Iraq.

In the first nine months of 2018, over 750,000
people on average each month were reached with food
aid through United Nations cross-border activities.
Sustaining that is essential for those in need, in terms
of both providing aid and supporting service delivery.
It is for that reason that the extension of the provisions
of resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2393 (2017) remains of
the highest importance. The Secretary-General in his
report (S/2018/947), and I now, call upon the Council to
renew the resolution for another 12 months.

Cross-border operations continue to be very
closely managed and monitored. We continue to take
every step possible to ensure United Nations operations
meet the highest standards. The way we do that was
reviewed in detail earlier this year at the request of
the Council, and we reported on it to the Council in
June (S/PV.8296). We train implementing partners and
local authorities on the implementation of international
humanitarian law; we advocate for principled delivery
of assistance with non-State armed opposition groups
inside Syria; and we have developed a code of conduct,
signed by most non-State armed groups operating in
north-west Syria, committing to respect international
humanitarian law. We also take all possible steps to
ensure compliance with money-laundering and counter-
terrorism legislation applicable to the United Nations.

Let me turn to other areas of concern in Syria.
In Rukban, on the Syria-Jordan border, the United
Nations - in cooperation with the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent - had prepared to undertake a large delivery
of assistance from Damascus for 50,000 people,
a vaccination campaign for approximately 10,000
children and a rapid needs assessment. The convoy
was planned for Saturday, 27 October, but reports of
insecurity along the route forced us to postpone it. The
population at Rukban has not received assistance since
January this year and they are increasingly desperate.
There are continuing reports of children dying due
to poor sanitary conditions and a lack of health care.
That dire humanitarian situation cannot be allowed
to continue. The United Nations is ready and willing
to proceed with the convoy immediately. Therefore,
my message to all concerned is to please make the
necessary arrangements to ensure the security of the
humanitarian personnel and the accompanying convoy
so it can proceed without delay.

Intense fighting continues to affect civilians along
the east bank of the Euphrates river in southern parts
of Deir ez-Zor governorate. There have been reports of
dozens of civilian deaths and more injuries as Syrian
Democratic Forces, supported by international coalition
Forces, engage in hostilities in the final remaining
enclade in Syria of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). Approximately 7,000 people have been
displaced from Hajin due to fighting in recent weeks.
Up to 15,000 people remain trapped inside ISIL-
controlled areas. An attack by ISIL on one ofthe camps
where displaced people were staying has reportedly
resulted in the death and injury of civilians, as well as
the abduction of more than 100 people. Some of them
have since reportedly been killed.

While I remain concerned about the situation in
Raqqa, I want to report that the United Nations has had
increasing access to the area. A September assessment
visit by the World Health Organization found that health
needs in Raqqa remain great, with an acute shortage of
all levels of health-care services in the city. Assistance
also continues to be provided to Raqqa city and the
north-east, with the United Nations and our partner
organizations now reaching over 600,000 people each
month. In summary, and in conclusion, there are five
areas where we now seek the support of Member States
and the Security Council.

First is in the continuing implementation of the
agreement between the Russian Federation and Turkey
and the prevention of a military onslaught on Idleb and
the surrounding areas. The humanitarian impact of
that would be, as we have repeatedly told the Council,
absolutely devastating to the civilian population.

Secondly is the renewal for another year of
resolution 2165 (2014), in particular to sustain cross-
border aid essential to support and protect more than
3 million civilians in Idlib e most of whom are women
and children - and for essential supplies and services
across the north of Syria.

Thirdly, we seek support in ensuring that our United
Nations-Syrian Arab Red Crescent humanitarian convoy
is granted secure access to Rukban camp immediately.

Fourthly, we seek support for our efforts to improve
access, needs-assessment and evidence-gathering on
how the resources we have raised are being used.

Finally, we need continued and more generous
financing for our current humanitarian response plan.
While I am - on behalf of millions of Syrians who
are the beneficiaries - extremely grateful for the
$1.7 billion we have raised so far in 2018, this year's
plan is still less than 50 per cent funded.

