Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank High
Representative Mogherini for her briefing. Today's
meeting provides another useful opportunity for the
Council to engage another significant regional partner,
following our meetings last month with the African
Union (see S/PV.7694) and the League of Arab States.

New Zealand is a strong supporter of close
collaboration between the United Nations and regional
and subregional bodies. Such bodies are essential
partners for the Council in delivering on its mandate
to maintain international peace and security. Indeed,
the effectiveness of the Council often rests in large
part on its cooperation with regional organizations.
It is in all our interests to ensure that the engagement
between the Council and the regional bodies is as
effective and productive as possible in preventing and
resolving conflict.

New Zealand has deep and long-standing ties with
the European Union (EU) and many of its member
States have contributed to our development and our
history. Those ties remain of deep importance and
continuing relevance to our country. The European
Union is an active and indispensable partner of the
United Nations on a wide range of security-related
challenges, including peacekeeping, humanitarian
assistance, non-proliferation and combating terrorism.
Naturally, the EU plays a particularly important role in
maintaining peace and security within its immediate
neighbourhood. For many years, it has played central
role in supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina's security
and stability through its leadership of the European
Union Force Althea stabilization force. The EU also
continues to play an essential role in facilitating
dialogue aimed at normalizing relations between the
authorities in Belgrade and Pristina.

The crisis in neighbouring Ukraine has been a great
concern for the EU and its member States, as it has been
for New Zealand. We acknowledge the EU's ongoing
role in supporting the implementation of the Minsk
agreements and the objective of a lasting resolution
of the crisis that is fully consistent with Ukraine's
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

As the High Representative has reminded us, in the
Middle East the prospects for the two-State solution are
diminishing. As a member of the Middle East Quartet,
the European Union has a key role to play in ensuring
that the peace process is revived through its support
to the Palestinian Authority and to the United Nations,
and through the various contributions of its 28 member
States to encouraging the parties back to the negotiating
table. New Zealand supports any constructive attempt
to move the Middle East peace process forward. In
particular, we have advocated for the Council to live
up to its responsibilities and to take action to get the
parties back to the negotiating table. We look forward
to the release of the Quartet report, and are encouraged
by the High Representative's assurance that it will be
made public soon. We also welcome the information
that it will contain specific recommendations on
rebuilding confidence and on encouraging the parties
back to meaningful negotiations.

Given the special relationship between the Quartet
and the Council, we look forward to the Council having
the opportunity to consider the Quartet's report and
recommendations when released. We also welcome
France's hosting of the ministerial meeting in Paris
last Friday and hope that it can contribute momentum
towards resuming negotiations between the parties.

As others have said, in Syria the peace process is
faltering and the humanitarian situation is disastrous
and deteriorating. We are in serious danger of letting
slip the best chance we have had in five years to end the
conflict. We must not let that happen. The international
community, collectively and in its constituent parts,
needs to do all it can to reduce the fighting, increase
aid and the get the parties back to negotiations on a
political transition. We encourage and welcome the
EU's use of its influence to help make that happen.
We also acknowledge the significant humanitarian and
development assistance that the EU and its member
States have provided to mitigate the human cost of
the Syrian conflict and address its spillover effects
in the region. In addition to the more than 1 million
irregular migrants who entered the EU last year, many
more continue to make the perilous journey across
the Mediterranean. As we are all too aware, many are
perishing in the attempt. As the United Nations has
reported, the death toll in 2016 to date is higher than at
the same point last year.

New Zealand sponsored resolution 2240 (2015)
relating to the international efforts to intercept vessels
off the Libyan coast suspected of migrant smuggling.
We are ready to consider other contributions EU
countries could make, in partnership with the Council,
to support safety and stability in the Mediterranean as
part of a comprehensive approach to addressing the
challenges of irregular migration. We also welcome
the EU's continued efforts to support the Government
and people of Libya in achieving peace and stability,
including through its support to the Libyan security
sector and much-needed humanitarian, reconstruction
and economic assistance.

Finally, I want to acknowledge the very important
role played by the EU's regional partnerships,
particularly in Africa. For example, the EU continues
to play a significant role in Somalia through its
development assistance under the Somali New Deal
Compact, the European Union Military Training
Mission in Somalia, the European Union Naval Force
ATALANTA counter-piracy mission in Somalia and
its ongoing funding for stipends for the troops of
the African Union Mission to Somalia. The EU also
continues to play a vital role in support of stability
in Mali and the Central African Republic through its
military training missions to strengthen the capability
of local armed forces.

Those are just a few examples of the EU's
investment of effort and resources towards our common
goals of maintaining international peace and security.
We look forward to further deepening cooperation in
the strategic partnership between the United Nations
and the European Union in the years ahead.

