This is a significant year for women, and Thailand joins the international community in celebrating not one but two milestones, namely, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Platform for Action and the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. Thailand welcomes this year's Security Council open debate's timely focus on reflecting on achievements and challenges in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent related resolutions over the past 20 years. While the international community recognizes that women are effective agents of change in society and can contribute significantly to durable peace, their representative numbers in United Nations peace operations and in peace processes worldwide remain low at all levels. The challenges in implementing the women and peace and security agenda will only be compounded by the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) global pandemic, where women and girls are being disproportionately affected. This year's annual report (S/2020/946) of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security reiterates the linkages between elements of the agenda and international peace and security and focuses, among other things, on the current and predicted setbacks with regard to the agenda, partly due to the effects of the pandemic. Gender-responsive COVID-19 response and recovery must therefore form part of the full and effective implementation of the women and peace and security agenda beyond the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000). The effort will need to be mutually reinforcing of all the elements of gender equality from both the Sustainable Development Goals and the women and peace and security agenda. Sustainable peace can be achieved only when there is an integrated and inclusive approach that incorporates development and human rights for all, including women. The empowerment of women and girls and gender equality are key elements in conflict prevention and the promotion of international peace and security. On our part, Thailand has continued to increase the participation of women in peace and security. Thai women personnel continue to contribute positively to our peacekeeping missions. Their ability to access communities and build trust reflects their valuable skillset. We are pleased to have reached a high ratio of women peacekeepers to male peacekeepers. We will continue our work to further promote their participation at higher levels. It is with our firm belief that, with political will and moral obligation, we can - and we will - narrow down that gap with the robust implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the women and peace and security agenda in a holistic manner.
