Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Ladsous and Mr. Fedotov
for their comprehensive briefings. We look forward to
renewing the tradition of personal presentations by
the heads of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and meetings of the Security Council. We
reaffirm our support for the work of Mr. Jan Kubis. We
are also grateful to Ambassador Tanin for his interesting
briefing.

Everything we have heard today serves to
confirm that it is impossible to tackle the problems in
Afghanistan solely with military means. We need to
formulate a strategy of sustainable development for the
country for the post-2014 period, as well as establish
measures and international community for long-term
stabilization, including in the socio-economic sphere.
We look forward to substantive discussions on national
and regional development programmes for Afghanistan
during the Tokyo conference.

Russia is willing to participate in the rebuilding of
the Salang tunnel and the nitrogen fertilizer factory and
power plant in Mazar-e-Sharif, as well to build several
hydro-power stations. Together with our Afghan
partners, we have begun to modernize the Kabul
house-building factory. One of the priority areas for
our cooperation is to revive and develop Afghanistan's
minerals and raw materials base. We believe that good
examples of regional cooperation could include the
project to create a system of CASA-lOOO substations.
Russia, without waiting for other potential partners to
come forward, has announced its willingness to invest
$500 million in that regard. We are also willing to help
with the building of the TAPI pipeline.

Regardless of the form national reconciliation
takes, a leading role must be played by the Afghans
themselves. Dialogue with the armed opposition
should be built upon the three well-known principles.
The insurgents must renounce violence, recognize the
Constitution and sever ties with Al-Qaida. We must not
be tempted to weaken those principles in order to achieve
dialogue. That would become counter-productive. We
must effectively support the Security Council sanctions
regime as a key counter-terrorism instrument.

We are concerned by the idea of replacing ISAF
with another military presence in Afghanistan and in
neighbouring States, as that could lead to additional
instability. Any residual military presence should not
counter the interests of Afghanistan's neighbours and
other countries in the region. Full clarity is necessary
in the possible planning of a new NATO operation
in Afghanistan, including its mandate, strength and
mission. Such an operation should be sanctioned by the
Security Council, however, only after the ISAF mission
reports to the Security Council on the implementation
of its mandate. In that context, we view the participation
of NATO representatives at our meeting today as
NATO's recognition of that necessity.

Yet, we are forced to note that the reports we have
received from Brussels tend to embellish the general
picture. In order to understand what is necessary and
what remains to be done in order to rectify the situation,
we need an objective analysis - 2014 is almost upon
us.
One of the most pressing problems is the
illegal production, trade and trafficking of drugs in
Afghanistan, which is a threat to international peace
and stability. According to the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), opiate production
in the country in 2011 soared by 61 per cent and the
surface area of poppy fields expanded by 7 per cent.

In that respect, a top priority - above all for the
Afghan Government but also for the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) - is to destroy the
poppy fields and infrastructure for the production of
drugs. We are not convinced by the arguments against
the practice of chemical destruction of drug crops,
which has been tried and tested in other parts of the
world. Excessive lenience in combating the drug threat
will not help to win the hearts and minds of ordinary
Afghans, but will only win the hearts and minds of the
drug barons who exploit them.

We must make full use of the experience of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) in
intercepting drug trafficking and the related financing
sources. Our proposal to forge counter-drug interaction
between the CSTO and ISAF remains on the table. I
recently met here in New York with a senior NATO
official and was pleased to hear that NATO was open to
pragmatic cooperation with the CSTO on that specific
matter. We look forward to an official, positive response
from NATO.

A good example of collective work was the
16 February ministerial conference in Vienna of the
partners of the Paris Pact initiative on combating illicit
trafficking in Afghan opiates. It guaranteed progressive
development of the Paris-Moscow process, which is
helping to shape a broad international coalition against
the Afghan drug threat.

For our part, we are ready to continue assisting our
Afghan friends in combating illicit drug trafficking,
training personnel and equipping the counter-drug
units, on a bilateral basis as well as through the United
Nations and regional formats.

We see great potential in the implementation of
the training programme for Afghan drug police at the
all-Russian advanced training centre in Domodedovo. It
was launched as part of a UNODC regional programme
for Afghanistan and neighbouring countries based
on concerns that despite the efforts of the Afghan
authorities, supported by a sizeable foreign military
contingent, extremists continued to actively operate
throughout the country, gaining ground in regions
where security responsibilities had been handed over
to the Afghans.

In particular, we are concerned by the situation in
northernAfghanistan, where, following counter-terrorist
operations, terrorists are being flushed out, creating a
direct threat to the security of our Central Asian partners
from the Commonwealth of Independent States.

Instability in Afghanistan is significantly fuelled
by the increasingly frequent cases of desecration and
blatant war crimes committed by foreign troops, as well
as cases of erroneous air strikes that lead to numerous
civilian victims. We need to step up our efforts to
prevent such incidents.

The drawdown of foreign troops should be offset
by increasing the combat readiness of the Afghan army
and police until they are in a position to fully guarantee
their country's security. It would be unwise to establish
an artificial timeline for a pull-out.

In such conditions, what is particularly relevant is
the regional dimension of interaction when it comes to
Afghanistan. We support the announcement on 14 June
during the Kabul conference, of a channel for regional
cooperation, including through the implementation of
confidence-building measures.

The socio-economic recovery of Afghanistan is
a top priority for us in that respect in the context of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and
the CSTO. We welcome the adoption, at the summit of
SCO heads of State and Government held in Beijing
on 6 and 7 June, of the decision to give Afghanistan
observer status in the organization, which also
provides it an opportunity to join in the work of the
regional counter-terrorism structures and the practical
implementation of the SCO counter-drugs strategy for
2011-2016.

