At the outset, we wish to thank Ambassador Huang Xia, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, for his briefing and hope that he is safe and well in Nairobi. We take note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region (S/2020/272), dated 3 April 2020. While tensions remain, the Great Lakes region has witnessed positive developments in the security and political fields. Now that the Ebola crises appear to have winded down, the region is faced with a new challenge in the form of the coronavirus (COVID-19) disease. We must seize the current momentum to make progress in overcoming old and new challenges for peace and sustainable development. Allow me to make a number of pertinent points. First, we welcome the substantial positive progress that has been made in the region. We are encouraged by the steps taken by President Felix Antoine Tshilombo Tshisekedi to improve diplomatic relations and cooperation between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its neighbours. We commend the steps taken by other leaders in the region to de-escalate tensions, including the peaceful negotiations commenced between Rwanda and Uganda and the progress achieved in the regional context by Uganda, Burundi and Tanzania. However, obstacles and challenges persist and must be collectively addressed. It is crucial that the root causes of the conflict be tackled. Life in the Great Lakes region has been marred by conflict, distrust and humanitarian challenges for years. We join in the concern voiced by the Secretary-General with respect to the persistent threats to human rights in the region, as well as the efforts some have made to undermine friendly relations among countries in the region. Peace and stability remain fragile. Threats by armed groups and the illicit exploitation and trade of natural resources continue to be the source of much of this fragility. I joined the Secretary-General in calling on all national, regional and international stakeholders to redouble their efforts to implement their commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and to address the root causes of conflict so as to enable the region to achieve its immense potential. Secondly, the work of regional organizations and the United Nations missions in the region should be supported by the Council. We recognize the role played by regional and subregional organizations, including the guarantors of the PSC framework agreement, which was signed by 13 countries in the region. The International Conference on the Great Lakes Region is playing an important role for peace by preventing the illicit movement of natural resources. Peacekeepers are playing their role in winning the hearts and minds of the locals to support the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process. We are proud to inform the Council that Indonesian peacekeepers in the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have been successful in assisting the DDR process by engaging with the local communities, winning their hearts and minds. The support of the international community, through regional and subregional organizations, will enable the Government to reintegrate them into society with a view to preventing a relapse. 13/30 14/30 Thirdly, during this global COVID-19 crisis, the provision of relief in connection with the humanitarian situation must be prioritized. We must pay attention to those in dire need of assistance, who include 5 million displaced Congolese, 330,000 Burundian refugees and other vulnerable persons - women, children and the disabled. Partnership by the international community is needed to overcome this challenge. For its part, Indonesia will continue its cooperation with countries in the region through the Bandung Spirit of 1955 as we celebrate the sixty-fifth year of the Asian-African Conference. Addressing the complex peace and security challenges in the region is indeed not an easy task. We will therefore continue our support for the efforts made by the Special Envoy to pursue lasting peace and positive progress in the region. For its part, Indonesia will remain committed as a true partner for Africa in maintaining peace and security.
