The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Special Envoy Griffths and Under- Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings. China commends their efforts to promote a ceasefire among all parties to the conflict in Yemen and to improve the humanitarian situation in the country. China has been closely following the situation in Yemen. We support the call for a ceasefire made by Secretary-General Guterres and Special Envoy Griffths. We welcome the announcement made by Saudi Arabia, on behalf of the coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen, of a two-week unilateral ceasefire in Yemen. That is indeed progress. We also welcome the positive statement made by Yemeni Government in that regard. We hope that all parties will make further efforts to ensure a full and sustained ceasefire. All efforts should be made to reach a political settlement in Yemen. We know there are many challenges ahead, buta political settlement represents the only solution to the Yemeni issue. For that purpose, we need a United Nations-led comprehensive and inclusive political process. We support the work done by the Mr. Griffiths to that end. It is imperative that all parties in Yemen strengthen their political will and engage in broad dialogue and consultations. We urge all parties to implement the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement. We call for greater efforts towards the cessation of violence and the building of mutual trust. It is apparent that the lack of mutual trust is hindering the political process. We sincerely hope that, with the coordination of Mr. Griffiths, all parties can maintain close contact with one another. We are also concerned about the grim humanitarian situation in Yemen, especially in the light of the current circumstances of the global spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We do hope that the international community, including the Security Council and the humanitarian agencies on the ground, can pay close attention to the pandemic's potential impact on Yemen. We urge all parties to join hands in fighting the pandemic together as it is in the best interests of all Yemenis. We also hope that all parties concerned can ensure unhindered humanitarian access, which is extremely important at this moment. We echo the call of Under-Secretary-General Lowcock about the lack of funding. We hope that donors can maintain their financial support. The international community should continue to offer assistance to the Yemeni people for their economic recovery and social development. For our part, we will do our best to provide medical assistance to the Yemeni people to combat COVID-19. We are currently providing assistance through bilateral channels for Yemen's economic development and will continue to do so.
