Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I also would like to thank the High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. lnzko, for his briefing.

France fully associates itself with the statement to
be made shortly on behalf of the European Union. I will
focus my remarks on three points.

First, concerning the political dynamics, the
Bosnian people were able to exercise their democratic
duty last October and to choose new representatives.
A great many things in fact remain in need of
improvement; testimony to that is the fact that the
process for appointing the executive was significantly
delayed and was not finalized until the end of March.
However, we are pleased to see a new team in place,
both at the level of the two entities and at the State
level, where the tripartite Presidency has quickly gotten
to work and has been collaborating constructively with
the Office of the High Representative and with the
European Union.

The task facing the Bosnian authorities is
considerable, and Bosnians expect their leaders to
demonstrate that they are capable of facing it. Refusing
to succumb to rhetoric that exacerbates ethnic
divisions, the Bosnian people as a whole have shown
that their priority is socioeconomic improvement. Year
after year the country has remained powerless in the
face of a major issue: seeing young people take their
talents abroad because of the lack of opportunities and
prospects for the future. We urge the Bosnian authorities
to act to improve the situation as rapidly as possible.

Secondly, I would like to consider a very important
topic, that is, the European integration of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Above all, the goal is to improve the
socioeconomic conditions ofthe country. For that reason,
we relaunched the European Union initiative with
regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina, including European
integration, which remains a strategic priority. That is
a wish expressed by the Bosnians themselves, despite
what some outside Bosnia and Herzegovina might want
to believe. The lack of movement of the last few years
could not reasonably continue, while most neighbouring
States experienced considerable progress along this
path. It is in that spirit that the European Union has
decided to lend new momentum to the process, which,
I reiterate, meets the wishes of the Bosnian population.

The formation of a new governmental team provides
an ideal opportunity to take a further step towards
integration, and we welcome the positive reception
to date to the European Union initiative by Bosnia
and Herzegovina - on the part of the Presidency, the
Parliament and the main political forces in the country.
The written commitment undertaken by the authorities
should open the path for the socioeconomic reforms
so sorely needed by the country, which will enable
it to become closer to its European neighbours. The
logical result of that commitment is the Stabilization
and Association Agreement, which will enter into force
in a few weeks and which we welcome. The upcoming
Bosnian presidency of the Council of Europe, which
begins on 19 May, will provide an opportunity for
Bosnia and Herzegovina to affirm its desire to become
closer to Europe and to the fundamental principles
guaranteed by the European Convention on Human
Rights, so dear to the heart of the European Union.
Finally, I would like to say a few words on the
existing institutional framework. The whole of Europe
wishes to participate in the transformation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and to contribute its integration as
a united, sovereign country that enjoys full territorial
integrity. In that regard, it is unacceptable that the old
nationalist ideas are still voiced, thus endangering the
unity and stability of the country. We reiterate our call
for an end to any actions or rhetoric likely to divide
the country. Our message is clear: there can be no
questioning of the territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We also call upon all parties to cooperate fully with
the High Representative, in keeping with the Dayton
Accords, which constitute the reference framework
for the international community's role in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I would like to pay tribute to the High
Representative and his team for their commitment and
dedication to uphold the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which for 20
years now has preserved peace. At the same time, the
consideration of the reconfiguring the Office of the
High Representative should continue. That conclusion is
based on the fact that the persisting political difficulties
force us to re-craft and adapt our strategy. Maintaining
the exact framework and mechanisms established at
the end of the 1990s does not serve the needs of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina people at a time when the
situation in the country and the region has considerably
evolved. We wish to reinforce the cohesiveness of the
international mechanism on Bosnia and Herzegovina
by seeking complementarity between the Office of the
High Representative and that of the European Union,
the leadership of which is recognized today.

I cannot conclude by mentioning a very painful
memory. We are preparing to commemorate the sad
twentieth anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre,
described as genocide by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. We hope that the
country will be able to demonstrate that it has been
able to overcome old grudges and demonstrate national
unity. The future of Bosnia and Herzegovina requires
closer cooperation between the entities that compose
it on the basis of equality and mutual respect. In that
regard, intercommunity reconciliation is essential to
consolidate a sense of belonging to a common history
and destiny, which is a requirement for the construction
of a common future. The European Union, like France,
will assist Bosnians in the process.

