Ms. Bishop (Australia): I thank Mr. Feltman and
Foreign Minister Timmermans for their briefings. I
extend Australia's deep gratitude for the professionalism
and empathy that the Netherlands has shown in
responding to this terrible incident. I particularly thank
Minister Timmermans for his personal commitment
and compassion and Malaysian Foreign Minister
Anifah Aman for his vital contribution to the recovery
efforts. We welcome their presence here today.

Almost two months ago, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2166 (2014) (see S/PV.7221). Its vote that day reflected the outrage of the
international community in response to the shooting
down of a commercial aircraft in commercial airspace
over eastern Ukraine, killing all 298 passengers and
crew. Resolution 2166 (2014) voiced our collective
condemnation of that horrific act and our determination
to hold those responsible to account. The resolution
expresses full support for a thorough and independent
international investigation into the atrocity, in
accordance with international civil aviation guidelines.
We demanded that armed groups in control of the crash
site refrain from any actions that may compromise the
integrity of the site and provide safe, secure, full and
unrestricted access to the appropriate investigating
authorities. At that time, I called on Russia to use its
influence over those armed groups in control of the
crash site to allow full and safe access for the recovery
of remains and personal belongings and investigation
efforts.

Within days of the downing, in accordance with
the provisions of the Convention on International Civil
Aviation, Ukraine agreed to a Dutch-led investigation
that would meet the International Civil Aviation
Organization's guidelines, namely, an independent
investigation with broad international participation,
drawing upon experts from Australia, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Italy, Malaysia, Russia, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom and the United States, as well as the European
Aviation Safety Agency and the International Civil
Aviation Organization.

Ukraine moved quickly to provide support for
recovery efforts at the crash site despite the ongoing
conflict, with the actions of armed separatists
restricting and, at times, preventing access to the site.
Due to Ukraine's efforts to comply with its obligations
under resolution 2166 (2014), Dutch, Australian and
Malaysian experts were able to spend six days in
late July searching the crash site. Our experts did a
remarkable job, carrying out their demanding forensic
work in the midst of a conflict zone.

That international team, supported by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), was able to access areas of the crash site
that had not previously been searched and to recover
remains and a substantial number of personal effects
belonging to those on board Flight MH-17. In the
end, the security conditions became too dangerous to
continue and the external destabilization of eastern
Ukraine intensified. However, those efforts resulted
in the collection of invaluable evidence to support an
effective investigation.

I acknowledge the efforts of the Dutch Government
in coordinating the dignified repatriation of the victims
of Flight MH-17 to Eindhoven Air Base. That gave
some comfort to the grieving families. I commend the
Dutch Government's strong leadership of the criminal
investigation. The authorities in the Netherlands have
worked painstakingly to identify the victims. As of
today, 19 September, 225 victims have now been
identified by the identification commission in The
Hague, including a number of Australians. Substantial
progress has been made, but the identification process
has been slow given the circumstances of the crash.
That is no consolation to the families and friends from
around the world, including from Australia, who are
grieving the loss of their loved ones and are yet to bring
them home.

Australia welcomes the release on 9 September of
the preliminary report of the Dutch Safety Board. The
first official account of the tragedy was prepared in
strict accordance with the International Civil Aviation
Organization guidelines. The report draws on data
from the black boxes, satellite imagery and photos from
the crash site. Its findings are based on an objective
analysis of the available evidence. That is vital for
a transparent and accountable investigation. It is a
welcome step forward in achieving the full, thorough
and independent international investigation demanded
by resolution 2166 (2014).

In accordance with annex 13 to the Convention on
International Civil Aviation, the preliminary report
does not attribute blame or liability for the incident. That
is the role of the multinational criminal investigation
currently under way, led by the Dutch Public Prosecution
Service. Lest there be any misunderstanding, I reiterate
that that is the domain of the criminal investigation.

The Australian Government's initial assessment
was that Flight MH-17 had been shot down by a
surface-to-air missile. The preliminary report has not
stated any conclusions but the aircraft damage shown
in the report is certainly consistent with our view. We
continue to demand that international investigators be
allowed to return safely to the crash site of Flight MH-
17, consistent with resolution 2166 (2014). Australia is
committed to returning to the site, once it is safe to
do so, in the company of our Dutch and Malaysian
partners.

We are deeply concerned by reports that OSCE
observers were gravely endangered during the course
ofa recently agreed monitoring mission. The observers
were shelled en route to the site and later threatened
with violence by armed groups. Such incidents show
that it is still unsafe to return to the site. Let me be
clear. The security situation around the site and in
much of eastern Ukraine has deteriorated because
of Russian support to armed separatist groups. That
support continues. It must cease.

In adopting resolution 2166 (2014), the Council
demanded unanimously that those responsible for
the atrocity be held to account. The international
community and, above all, the victims' families, expect
that this will happen, and this must happen.

