It is a pleasure to brief the Security Council today on the situation in Central Africa and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) remotely for the second time this year due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The pandemic seems generally under control in the subregion, with only 13,470 active cases as of 7 December among a total of 88,422 cases and 1,614 deaths officially reported since the beginning of the pandemic. However, the number of infections in some countries has been increasing again in recent days, thereby delaying the lifting of some of the restrictions imposed to counter the evolution of the pandemic. The trends across Central Africa clearly indicate that the early measures enforced by the Governments of the subregion to contain and reduce the spread of the pandemic have proved effective. However, that effectiveness comes at a high socioeconomic cost, as the economic slowdown triggered by the pandemic and the different restrictive measures have further depleted the already limited capacity of States to provide basic social services to their populations. I would like to encourage bilateral and multilateral partners to provide their support to all countries in the subregion to help them continue to fight the pandemic and address its economic, sociopolitical and security impacts. I also appeal to international financial institutions to continue to facilitate the release of emergency assistance for all COVID-19- affected countries in Central Africa. Notwithstanding this particular context, which impacted the smooth implementation of UNOCA's mandate, I was able to engage with key United Nations, national and international partners in the subregion on various issues, including during my recent visits to Cameroon and the Republic of the Congo. On | December, I convened a meeting of the Heads of United Nations presences in Central Africa, during which we agreed, among other things, to strengthen coordination in supporting regional efforts to address the impact of climate change, prevent election-related violence and fight against hate speech. I am pleased to report that the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) has reached a key milestone in its institutional reform process, with the swearing-in of its new Commission on | September, including its President, Ambassador Gilberto da Piedade Verissimo, its Vice-President and five Commissioners. The convening of two ordinary summits of Heads of State and Government is further evidence that regional leaders are determined to enhance regional integration and address peace and security issues in Central Africa. I was therefore pleased to witness such commitment at the eighteenth ordinary summit of ECCAS, held in Libreville on 27 November, which adopted the ECCAS Indicative Strategic Plan for 2021-2025 and the Priority Action Plan for 2021 and decided to appoint a mediator and deploy an election observation mission for the upcoming presidential and legislative elections in the Central African Republic. Ahead of the summit, UNOCA has been engaging with the new Commission to identify joint priorities for the years ahead, notably on conflict prevention and regional integration, and enhance coordination among international partners for the implementation of the 2021-2025 Indicative Strategic Plan. While the reformed ECCAS institutions are gradually becoming operational, the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa (UNSAC) remains a relevant forum, where the countries of Central Africa discuss and make recommendations aimed at addressing regional peace and security challenges. The fiftieth UNSAC Ministerial Meeting took place virtually on 4 December. The Committee reviewed the regional peace and security situation, discussed the situation in the Central African Republic and held a debate on the impact of the coronavirus disease on peace and security and on peaceful electoral processes in Central Africa. The Committee adopted declarations on the two latter issues, stressing the need to reinforce regional cooperation in addressing them. Several countries of the subregion have been preparing for the holding of elections, including Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad, the Republic of the Congo and Sao Tome and Principe. On 6 December, Cameroon successfully held its first-ever regional elections aimed at finalizing the decentralization process in the country, including the implementation of a special status for the North-West and South-West regions. In the Republic of the Congo, political consultations to discuss preparations for the 2021 presidential election took place on 25 and 26 November, with the participation of opposition parties. In Chad, following the recommendations of the second national inclusive forum, convened by the authorities from 29 October to 1 November, on 3 December amendments to the Constitution were voted on. The amendments included the creation of the position of Vice-President, the re- establishment of a Senate and a court of auditors as well as the reduction of the minimum age from 45 to 40 years to stand as a candidate in a presidential election. As election preparations continue in the months ahead, I would like to encourage the national authorities and all political stakeholders to promote continued dialogue and consensus on the conditions governing the elections, using political dialogue frameworks where they are in place, as is the case, for instance, in Chad and the Republic of the Congo, or through ad hoc arrangements. To be effective, such dialogue initiatives should be inclusive in terms of both participation and the issues discussed. I will continue to offer the good offices of the Secretary-General, wherever required, to encourage inclusive and meaningful political dialogue in the countries preparing for elections. Insecurity throughout Central Africa has continued to be a source of concern, including where it has a cross-border dimension, particularly in the Lake Chad basin and the Gulf of Guinea, and with regard to the internal situation in some countries. During my last visit to Cameroon in November, I noted with great concern the continuing violence in the Far-North, North-West and South-West regions. I deplore the fact that the violence in the North-West and South-West regions is now targeting civilians, including pupils and teachers, as well as religious leaders. During my visit, I reiterated the Secretary-General's call on all parties concerned to renounce violence, silence the weapons and stop attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure, such as schools. In that regard, I would like to call on all actors to remain committed to constructive dialogue to end the crisis in both regions and build sustainable peace and development. I note the commitment of the national authorities to taking forward the implementation of the presidential plan for the reconstruction and development of the two regions, which will be further consolidated through such dialogue and the cessation of hostilities. I am particularly concerned that Boko Haram continues to be a serious threat in the Lake Chad basin with the increase in attacks and kidnappings, inter alia. Terrorist groupshave continued to intensify theirattacksinCameroonandChadandtorefine their modus operandi, as demonstrated by a recent attack on the night of 24-25 November, in which four Chadian soldiers were killed and about 16 others injured after their boat reportedly struck an improvised explosive device in the Ngouboua area on Lake Chad. The need to address the crisis in the Lake Chad basin in a comprehensive manner, including through the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region, cannot be overemphasized. Despite the difficulties caused by COVID-19, the Strategy's regional action plan has been finalized and the eight most affected territories are now in the process of developing their territorial action plans. I would once again like to appeal to the generosity of the members of the Security Council and other partners to provide the resources necessary for the rapid implementation of the regional Strategy so that the populations of the Lake Chad basin can benefit from the peace dividend, which in turn will strengthen their resilience to radicalization and violent extremism. The proximity and similarities between the situations in the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel justify our joint monitoring and analysis and our coordinated response to the challenges there. More concretely, we need to establish links between the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the regional Strategy for the Lake Chad basin in order to avoid duplication, rationalize the use of resources and ensure that the two strategies are mutually reinforcing. In the Gulf of Guinea, maritime organized crime continued to increase, particularly drug trafficking, trafficking in persons and the smuggling of migrants. While welcoming the individual measures and bilateral cooperation initiatives taken by several States in the region to address maritime insecurity, I would like to stress that responses to threats to the security of both States and individuals in the Gulf of Guinea will be effective only if they are coordinated between Central and West Africa through existing mechanisms, such as the Interregional Coordination Centre for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea, the Regional Coordination Centre for Maritime Security in Central Africa and the Regional Centre for Maritime Security in West Africa. My colleague, Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mohamed Ibn Chambas of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, and I agreed to intensify our commitment to interregional cooperation and coordination on maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea, which is one of the main common priorities of our two offices. At its fiftieth Ministerial Meeting, UNSAC recommended the holding of a regional conference on maritime security in Central Africa. Transhumance and conflicts between farmers and herders have continued in Central Africa, as evidenced by recent security incidents in the subregion. On 27 November, the Government of Chad reported that 22 people had been killed and 34 injured in clashes between farmers and herders on the night of 23-24 November in the province of Mayo-Kebbi East. According to the Government, 66 people were arrested following that incident, while the authorities also imposed a curfew in the area. I reiterate the Secretary-General's appeal to Governments and local communities in Central Africa to continue to work together to address the common challenges of transhumance. I also reaffirm UNOCA's commitment to continuing to support ECCAS and its member States for the adoption of a subregional regulatory framework on pastoralism and transhumance. To conclude, I would like to emphasize that these threats to peace and security in Central Africa also affect other regions, especially West Africa and the Great Lakes. That is the case of the instability in the Lake Chad basin that I mentioned. Similarly, the Lord's Resistance Army is currently present in both Central Africa and the Great Lakes region, two regions to which several countries under UNOCA's purview belong. Addressing these threats requires coordination among all affected regions and among the relevant United Nations regional offices. On 23 November, Special Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas and I agreed on a set of joint activities that our offices would undertake with regard to the situations in the Lake Chad region and the Gulf of Guinea, as well as support to the implementation of the Lome declaration adopted at the 2018 joint summit of ECCAS and the Economic Community of West African States on peace, security, stability and the fight against terrorism and violent extremism. I will also continue to hold regular consultations with my colleagues from the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, the United Nations Office to the African Union, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as United Nations Resident Coordinators and regional offices, to address interregional challenges. All these coordination efforts are intended to improve our understanding of challenges in our areas of responsibilities and to better support the affected countries in addressing them.
