The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Syrian Arab Republic.

At the outset, I wish to welcome Mr. Covic,
Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia and
President of the Coordination Centre for Kosovo and
Metohija. We thank him for having taken the trouble to
come to New York to brief the Security Council on the
most recent developments in the situation in Kosovo.

The Syrian delegation has listened very
attentively to the positions and opinions put forward by
the Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Serbia.
We have taken note, with much regret, of the events
that took the lives of two young Kosovans and caused
the injury of others. Syria condemns those acts and
reaffirms its view that all parties must comply with the
agreements reached.

We convey our sincere condolences to the
bereaved families. We call for an end to such acts and
violations, including the attacks to which a number of
Kosovo citizens were subjected today.
Syria welcomes the measures taken by the
Kosovo Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
and the investigation by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to
determine the identity of the perpetrators of the attacks
and to bring them to justice.

Syria reiterates its support for UNMIK and for
the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Kosovo, Mr. Harri Holkeri. We wish him
every success in discharging the tasks assigned to him,
particularly under such circumstances.

In conclusion, allow me to reaffirm once again
our conviction about the need to achieve coexistence
among all citizens of Kosovo, regardless of their
ethnic, racial or religious background. That should
ensure peace, justice and security for all.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council. There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.55 pm.
