Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to thank Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo
for introducing the striking - to say the least - report
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), which
examines in detail the implementation of resolution
1593 (2005). I take this opportunity also to welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Costa Rica, my good friend His Excellency Bruno
Stagno Ugarte, and to assure him that Panama shares
the commitment of Costa Rica - and his own personal
commitment - to the purposes of the United Nations
and of the International Criminal Court; I thank him for
his statement this morning.

I wish also to convey a warm welcome to the new
Permanent Representative of Belgium, Ambassador Jan
Grauls.

In March 2005, through the adoption of
resolution 1593 (2005), the Security Council, for the
first time, referred a specific case to the International
Criminal Court under article 13 of the Rome Statute.
That historic event gave the International Criminal
Court the responsibility to ensure that the war crimes
and crimes against humanity committed in Darfur
would not go unpunished. The Court fully accepted the
task and has undertaken a detailed investigation of
those violations.

The result of the investigation led to arrest
warrants being issued against Minister Harun and
Mr. Kushayb for their alleged commission of war
crimes and crimes against humanity. We trust that those
investigations will identify those guilty of all crimes
committed in Darfur, without distinction between
authorities and rebels. However, after one year since
the issuance of the warrants, the Government of the
Sudan refuses to arrest and hand over those individuals
in compliance with due process. Prosecutor Moreno-
Ocampo has told us that, in addition to failing to
enforce the decisions of the Court, the highest levels of

the Government of the Sudan are taking decisions to
commit, deny and cover up crimes.

In that context, we must emphasize that all
resolutions of the Council are legally binding for all
States Members of the United Nations. The obligations
that arise from resolution 1593 (2005) require the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court, regardless of whether or
not it is a signatory of the Rome Statute. That is why
we demand once again that the Government of the
Sudan comply with its responsibility to the
international community by arresting and placing those
individuals in the Court's custody as soon as possible.
On the other hand, as the Court's report has suggested,
failure to do so and its consequences will lead to the
perception of total impunity, which will only provoke
more violence and complicate efforts to establish the
conditions necessary for peace and security in Darfur.

Last October, in this very Chamber, we
condemned the attack on the African Union mission
base in the city of Haskanita, presumably by groups of
rebels. The Council has also reiterated its concern at
the ongoing violence in Darfur. Accordingly, Panama
fully supports the decision of the Court to investigate
two new cases to determine those responsible for
persistent attacks on the civilian population, especially
the Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa tribes, as well as the
African Union and United Nations personnel
responsible for protecting them. It is precisely such
dedication, impartiality and integrity that will make the
Court's work more relevant and welcome.

Panama cannot disregard Prosecutor Moreno-
Ocampo's clear and dramatic description of the seizure
of lands to which the people of Darfur have been
subjected, or his warning that the violence against
unarmed civilians, the impunity of the perpetrators of
the violence and their protection by the Government
could lead to the disappearance of the people of Darfur.
If that is not genocide, I do not know what else to call
it.

Panama calls on those countries that have signed
the Rome Statute not just to comply with their
obligations under it, but also to ensure that there is an
end to impunity for war crimes and crimes against
humanity. We also call upon those countries that have
not signed the Rome Statute to do so. The International
Criminal Court is an appropriate mechanism for
bringing to trial and judging those responsible for war
crimes and crimes against humanity.

Finally, Panama unconditionally supports the
draft presidential statement presented by the
Government of Costa Rica.

