Mr. Michelsen (Norway): We appreciate this
opportunity to take the floor on the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts, and we thank Nigeria for
organizing this debate. We also thank the Secretary-

General, Under-Secretary-General Holmes and High
Commissioner Pillay for their informative briefings.
We echo previous speakers in expressing appreciation
for the work of Emergency Relief Coordinator John
Holmes over the past three and a half years, and we
commend him for his unstinting efforts during his
tenure.

Over the past 10 years, the United Nations,
including the Security Council, has succeeded in
raising awareness on the need for enhanced protection
of civilians. Through these efforts, new humanitarian
normative standards have been developed and the
protection of civilians is now quite rightly seen as an
integral part of our common security agenda.
Nonetheless, we are seeing a continuing increase in
violations of international humanitarian law. In too
many conflicts, we are witnessing an erosion of the
protection that civilians are entitled to under
international humanitarian law, and we are observing a
widening of the definition of legitimate targets and a
too-liberal interpretation of the rule of proportionality.
Furthermore, we are witnessing deliberate attacks on
civilians, as well as armed non-State actors using
methods that run counter to international humanitarian
law.

The landmark adoption of resolution 1894 (2009)
last November reaffirmed the Council's commitment to
the protection of civilians. I would like to make four
points in this regard.

First, on the application of international
humanitarian law, recent conflicts, such as those in
Gaza and Sri Lanka, are characterized by unacceptably
high numbers of civilian victims and widespread
destruction of civilian infrastructure. There is now an
urgent need to work towards greater respect for
international humanitarian law, including through the
Security Council. In particular, there is a need for an
open and frank discussion on how the law should be
implemented in order to provide adequate protection
for civilians affected by armed conflict. Norway,
together with France and the International Committee
of the Red Cross, have initiated a process to facilitate
such a discussion with the aim of strengthening the
implementation of international human rights law in
today's armed conflicts.

Secondly, on the protection of children in armed
conflict, Norway welcomes the Security Council's
development of an increasingly strong protection
framework for children in armed conflict, most
recently through its resolution 1882 (2009). Such a
framework is key to the protection of civilians and to
strengthening the rule of law in conflict situations.
Still, the lack of decisive action against persistent
perpetrators, as well as accountability measures to fight
impunity, continue to limit the effectiveness of those
efforts.

Norway is encouraged by the Security Council's
expressed readiness to impose targeted measures
against persistent violators of international law who
recruit, sexually abuse, maim and kill children in war.
We support the Secretary-General's proposals to
include the recruitment and use of child soldiers in the
mandate of all sanctions committees and to improve
the flow of information between the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and the relevant
sanctions committees.

Thirdly, on the protection of women and armed
conflict, it is of particular concern that women
continue to be targets of sexual violence in conflict, as
stressed in previous speakers' references to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our top priority
must be to end the vicious cycle of impunity. We must
therefore provide justice for survivors, punishment for
perpetrators and effective deterrence for the future. For
war-affected women, justice delayed is more than
justice denied - it is terror continued.

Abuses against women tend to continue
unchecked when they are not properly dealt with
during peace negotiations and in post-conflict
situations. We must thus continue to enhance women's
active participation in conflict resolution, peace
processes and peacebuilding.

Norway builds civilian peacekeeping capacity in
Africa, together with our African partners. In our
experience, a field-based approach, innovative use of
existing resources, and local support and ownership are
necessary elements in strategies to protect civilians in
mission areas. We welcome the practical inventory
launched by the United Nations Action Against Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) on 30 June, entitled
"Addressing Conflict-Related Sexual Violence - An
Analytical Inventory of Peacekeeping Practice". This
document captures best practices and represents the
first-ever review of efforts by uniformed peacekeepers
to prevent, deter and respond to widespread and
systematic sexual violence.

Finally, on punitive measures, Norway stands
ready to support efforts to increase accountability.
Warfare conducted in violation of international
humanitarian law should carry a strong political
stigma. We support work currently undertaken by
DPKO to develop guidelines for investigating sexual
and gender-based violence in United Nations mission
areas. Effective investigation, prosecution and
punishment are key elements of broader efforts to end
impunity for such crimes.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's
report on the protection of civilians in November, and
we sincerely hope that it will show progress on the
implementation of resolution 1894 (2009).

