Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome to this meeting Her
Excellency Ms. Maite Nkoana-Mashabane, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of sisterly South Africa. We are
honoured to have her presiding over our deliberations
today on the report (S/2011/814) of the Secretary-
General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). I would also like to
take this opportunity to express my warmest
congratulations to the representatives of Azerbaijan,
Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo as they join
the Security Council as non-permanent members.

I would also like to express our thanks to
Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing on the
situation in Darfur. I want to thank him in particular for
clarifying the significant positive developments that
have taken place there. I would like to respond to some
of the minor procedural issues he cited, but in general
his briefing was positive - indeed promising - in
view of the signing of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur.

Our deliberations today on the report before the
Council on UNAMID are taking place as the situation
in Darfur is showing stability on the security,
humanitarian and development pillars. There have also
been significant positive developments, namely, the
fact that the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur has
entered the implementation phase and that the Darfur
transitional authorities have assumed their full
authority, with Mr. Tijani Seise of the Liberation and
Justice Movement (LJM) taking the oath as the Chair
of the Darfur Regional Authority, on 23 October.

Many members of the factions named in the Doha
Document have been appointed as ministers and State
ministers in the central Government and in other posts
in the transitional Authority in Darfur, as Mr. Ladsous
noted earlier. This is a very promising development
that shows that the people of Darfur, who carried arms
until recently, are today in control of Darfur, with the
exception of a few elements that I will discuss later on.

In the past few months, Darfur has witnessed an
increase in the number of refugees and internally
displaced persons, who have voluntarily begun to
return, in the tens of thousands, to their villages. It is
clear to all that they have been reassured of the
stability of the security situation and that their daily
needs in those villages are being met.

The Sudanese Government has for example
allocated the sum of $600 million, as a foreign
component, and 134 million Sudanese pounds, as a
local component, to the reconstruction fund for Darfur
for resettlement and to ensure stability and a life of
dignity for those who return, and also for the
implementation of a number of development projects in
the region.

In that context, we also pay tribute to the tireless
efforts made by the Government in rehabilitating
model villages for the returnees, a project that involved
the provision of solar-generated electricity to 100
villages in Western Darfur and to social clubs, health
centres, schools and other types of installations. These
provide citizens with modern means of communication,
including a number of satellite channels, and with
health-care services. That represents a significant
qualitative leap in terms of development in Darfur,
especially in Western Darfur. Efforts will continue with
a view to rehabilitating all the remaining areas.

In that context, I should also like to recall that the
committee that has been entrusted with the

implementation of the Doha Document, under the
chairmanship of Qatar, is now preparing for an
international conference to be held on 16 January in the
city of El-Fasher, the capital of Northern Darfur, as
part of efforts to promote development.

According to the information I have received, the
following countries and entities will participate in the
conference, whose theme will be the promotion of
stability and development in Darfur: Great Britain,
China, Russia, the United States of America, Canada,
the African Union, Burkina Faso, Chad, Egypt, the
European Union, the League of Arab States, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and UNAMID.
Many other countries are expected to announce their
participation in that international conference. That
shows that peace has taken root in Darfur.

As stated in paragraph 6 of the report before the
Council, the Ceasefire Commission, which was
instituted in the context of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur, has met four times during the period
covered by the report. The signatories to the Document
have provided the required information on the
disposition and locations of their forces, in accordance
with the Document. That will allow the ceasefire
groups to undertake follow-up and verification
exercises; complete the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; and integrate LJM
combatants into the Sudanese Armed Forces.

Let me recall here that the LJM. forces are a
group of 11 rebel factions that have joined the Peace
Agreement. We will ensure that those who wish to joint
the armed forces or return to civilian life can do so.

Sudan, an active Member of the United Nations,
now has vast experience in the disarmament and
reintegration of former combatants, absorbing rebel
movements and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. We can share our experience in that
respect with those that require it.

The examples I have cited confirm that major
strides towards peace are taking place in Darfur. They
make clear the determination of all parties and of the
Government to implement the Doha Document in a
very serious manner. In addition, the parties to the
Document have launched awareness-raising campaigns
in Darfur about the Document, with the assistance of
UNAMID. Here I would like to thank UNAMID for its
efforts in the context of the awareness-raising and
outreach campaign in the countryside. A total of
25 copies of the Document have been distributed to the
non-governmental organization community and to civil
society.

In the context of cooperation by the Sudanese
Government with the international community, I should
like to highlight the meeting of the special
representatives of countries members of the Security
Council that was held in El Geneina, Western Darfur,
last October, and which was attended by
representatives of the African Union and African
elders. That was but one of the significant and positive
developments taking place in Darfur. The meeting was
also attended by representatives of Canada, China, the
European Union, France, Germany, Japan, the Russian
Federation, South Africa, Sweden, Britain and the
United States.

Moreover, the final document of the conference
affirmed that the Doha Document represents an
important step towards peace and stability in Darfur.
The meeting took place in October 2011, and we
eagerly await the arrival of representatives of Security
Council members to assist the Sudan in the peace
effort.

Paragraphs 22 to 25 of the report before the
Council note the improved security situation in the
region, with the exception of a few pockets where
some rebel movements have rejected peace and have
no intention whatsoever of joining the peace process.
They have become desperate following their military
defeat, and have turned to pillaging and armed robbery.
Mr. Ladsous referred to armed gangs that kidnap and
terrorize civilians even in the internally displaced
persons camps; these are the actions of the remaining
armed movements and gangs of pillagers that have
rejected peace. Their only remaining activity is armed
robbery, and they do not hesitate to undertake reckless
suicide missions.

This was manifest when Khalil Ibrahim, the
leader of the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM)
who was killed on 23 December 2011, announced that
the JEM. was preparing to attack Khartoum militarily
and to overthrow the Government. In that context, we
registered a complaint with the Security Council on
29 December, containing documented evidence that
South Sudan is host to many of the JEM. members who
crossed the international border in 79 militarized four-
by-fours carrying more than 350 armed elements of
that Movement. The Council has been apprised of the
12-20459
details of this action. There is no doubt that those
elements are now in the Timsah region, well inside the
1956 borders.

We have asked the Council to urge our brothers in
the Government of South Sudan to extend no
assistance to that force. We have asked that they be
disarmed. We have asked that those who are being
sought by the Government of the Sudan to answer for
their crimes be turned over. Unfortunately, we have
seen no progress in that regard. We request the Security
Council to send a clear and strong message. The
situation is clear. These forces were armed by Colonel
Al-Qadhafi when they were defending his regime in
Libya. When the regime fell, they crossed the border
into the Sudan, and when we chased them they crossed
into South Sudan.

We genuinely fear for the stability and
development of that country, because these armed
forces are capable of reigniting the conflict in South
Sudan. There is ample cause for our fear. Tribal
conflict and mass murder are ongoing in South Sudan.
We are concerned that the weapons of that armed group
will find their way to the tribes, whose combatants will
use them to settle their scores.

As the representative of South Sudan noted, we
are most eager to resolve all pending issues with the
South. A meeting will be convened in Addis Ababa on
17 January under the presidency of Mr. Thabo Mbeki
to address all such issues. I wish to place on record that
we are very sincere in our desire to resolve all
outstanding matters, but that South Sudan has not
reciprocated our sincerity or translated its words into
deeds. Although it claims to be eager to settle these
issues, it is providing unlimited support to the rebel
movements in Southern Kordofan and Blue Niles
states. How can we reconcile its stated intentions with
its actions?

This attitude will not help to build South Sudan
into a modern country. South Sudan needs stability,
security and peace if it is to meet the major challenges
it faces. I believe that ensuring such conditions is the
responsibility of the Security Council. We fear that if
the Council fails to address the situation resolutely and
to send a clear message to the Government of South
Sudan, its actions will have repercussions for the entire
region.

Paragraph 32 of the report before the Council
notes that, "between 1 October and 12 December,

UNAMID carried out 19,644 military and police
patrols". That huge number illustrates the vast
geographical area covered by the patrols, as well as the
stability and security prevailing in the region. The
sheer size of UNAMID - the world's largest
peacekeeping operation - also means that it carries
out the highest number of military and police patrols
anywhere in the world. That illustrates the unlimited
cooperation provided by the Government of the Sudan.
If there are some cases concerning entry visas, then
that must be understood in the context of the very large
number of personnel in the mission. As a Member of
this international Organization, let me say sincerely
that we are very eager to rationalize the budget of the
United Nations.

I see that the official of the Secretariat is holding
a side discussion, which disrupts my statement. I
would request that he pay appropriate attention to my
statement.

In the wake of the prevailing stability in Darfur, it
is high time that the Council consider reducing the
huge number of personnel, which consumes a budget
of almost $3 billion. Should we not utilize that money
for other United Nations projects? We believe that the
existence of remaining pockets of armed movements
should not be a reason for the United Nations to waste
$3 billion monthly. In reality, what we should do is to
put pressure on those armed movements that reject
peace to join the peace process - or to punish them.
Their members are now kidnapping humanitarian
workers and members of UNAMID. We reiterate that
we will continue to cooperate with UNAMID to put an
end to that phenomenon. In that connection, we were
able to liberate the Italian national Francesco Azzara,
who was abducted near Janina two months ago, just as
8
my Government has been successful in securing the
release of other hostages in the past.

In conclusion, let me again say that we will
continue to fully implement all the provisions of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We will not close
the door on anyone who chooses the road to peace. We
hope that today's Security Council deliberations will
result in the adoption of a more positive approach by
the Council that helps to complete the process of peace
and stability, which has now taken hold.

Finally - and this pertains to a piece of
information provided by Mr. Ladsous - the Doha
Document for Peace includes a reference to
establishing special tribunals to try those who
committed crimes during the conflict, including crimes
against humanity, war crimes or armed robbery in
Darfur. A special prosecutor was recently appointed in
that regard. As Mr. Ladsous has said, that prosecutor is
credible and well known for his legal background.
There will be several branches of the tribunal in
Darfur. As I said, that just occurred yesterday. The
Doha Document for Peace also refers to the fact that
the tribunal could receive observers from the United
Nations and elsewhere to monitor its work. That means
that no one who has committed a crime will enjoy
impunity.

