Mrs. Hassan (Djibouti): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having invited my
delegation to take part in this first high-level debate
of the Security Council on the theme "Mercenary
activities as a source of insecurity and destabilization
in Africa".

I wish to convey deep and sincere congratulations to
you, Sir, from your brother, His Excellency Mr. Ismael
Omar Guelleh, President of the Republic of Djibouti
and Head of Government, who wishes to thank you and
your delegation for having highlighted this important
subject during your presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are confident that your country will
carry out its duties with distinction.

(spoke in French)

Equatorial Guinea brings a unique expertise
and perspective to this issue, having addressed it
continuously on the basis of its own experience. The
clarification of the challenges outlined in the concept
note (S/2019/97, annex) before us amply demonstrates
the level of Equatorial Guinea's expertise and wealth
of experience. We wish to express our appreciation
for the briefings made this morning by the Secretary-
General, the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Rwanda, in his capacity as
representative of the Chairperson ofthe African Union,
His Excellency Mr. Paul Kagame,

(spoke in English)

Djibouti takes this opportunity to reiterate
its principled position and commitment against
all violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, as underlined in the report of the
Working Group on the use of mercenaries as a means
of violating human rights and impeding the exercise of
the right ofpeoples to self-determination (A/73/303). In
that regard, we wish to make the four following points.
(spoke in French)

First, the phenomenon of mercenarism poses a
threat to peace, security and international and regional
stability, and is one of the causes of destabilization
in Africa. In that regard, the Security Council and
the United Nations must help to develop responses
in order to eliminate this phenomenon, based on the
recommendations made by the Working Group. Those
must contribute to renewing our political will in this
fight and cover all aspects, such as the recruitment,
training, engagement and financing of mercenaries.

Secondly, my delegation expresses its concern at
the increase in the number of terrorist groups, violent
extremism and transnational organized crime, in
particular human trafficking and drug trafficking in
several areas of Africa that were untouched by armed
conflict before such activity began.

Thirdly, additional efforts should be made,
especially in preparing mandates and funding for
peacekeeping operations, special political missions
and peacebuilding efforts in areas emerging from
conflict and conflict-affected areas. In Africa, it will
be necessary to ensure greater cooperation among
subregional organizations, the African Union and the
United Nations with a view to improving the results of
such activity on the ground.

Fourthly, we also welcome the common position
adopted by the African Heads of State and Government
within the framework of the Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative, the noble aim of which is to save future
generations from the scourge of war.

As a haven ofpeace and refuge in a subregion that is
racked with conflict and armed violence, the Republic
of Djibouti has always been an advocate for the culture
of peace that it draws from the very foundations of its
pastoral traditions, which are based on the notions of
hospitality and exchange. We hope that this high-level
meeting will enable us to strengthen our global response
to the phenomenon of mercenarism by capitalizing on
the efforts undertaken by the international community,
in strict compliance with international law and
international humanitarian law.

