The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of China. China thanks Special Envoy Griffiths and Acting Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham for their briefings. China commends their active efforts to end the conflict in Yemen and to improve the humanitarian situation in the country. There has recently been an escalation in military operations in many parts of Yemen, which has had negative impacts on United Nations mediation efforts and political dialogue among all parties and received extensive attention. In such circumstances. it is imperative that all parties in Yemen strengthen their political will and reach a ceasefire agreement as soon as possible so as to create conditions conducive to resuming comprehensive political negotiations. The only way to end the conflict in Yemen is through an inclusive and comprehensive United Nations-led political process. Yemen's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity must be safeguarded through the joint efforts of all parties to the conflict in Yemen. The Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement are the political outcomes of arduous negotiations between the parties and should therefore be implemented effectively. The signatories should honour their political commitments, the countries of the region should step up their mediation efforts and the United Nations should also continue to play a constructive role. We hope that a large-scale prisoner exchange can take place as soon as possible so as to enhance mutual trust among the parties. China has always maintained communication with all parties in Yemen and will continue to make diplomatic efforts to facilitate the narrowing of differences and the broadening of consensus among the parties. China is also concerned at the humanitarian situation in Yemen. The Yemeni people face multiple difficulties, including the threat of violence, severe shortages of food and commodities, seriously inadequate medical services and natural disasters. Some humanitarian problems are directly attributable to the armed conflict and therefore should be tackled through humanitarian aid and political efforts, while others are the result of economic instability, the degradation of infrastructure and insufficient development capacity. Greater attention should be paid to such problems, and long-term economic and social measures should be taken as soon as possible to address these problems. All parties in Yemen should fully cooperate with the humanitarian relief operations and relevant agencies of the United Nations to provide humanitarian access. We also hope that the United Nations humanitarian agencies will closely follow the situation on the ground, including the spread of COVID-19, in Yemen, and provide full support and assistance to the Yemeni people. China supports the efforts of the Government of Yemen to alleviate the humanitarian crisis and has been providing emergency food aid, medical equipment and other assistance to the Yemeni people, through bilateral and multilateral channels. An agreement on economic and technical cooperation has been signed with the Government of Yemen, and we will continue to deliver more concrete services to the Yemeni people and make constructive efforts so that Yemen can embark on the path to peace and development. I resume my functions as President of the Security Council. The representative of the United Kingdom has requested the floor to make a further statement. (spoke in English) My understanding is that she wishes to take this opportunity to respond to the kind words expressed by members of the Council.
