Mr. Al-Jaafari (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the United States on
assuming the presidency of the Council for this month
and on its efforts to organize and conduct the work of
the Council in a transparent manner. I welcome this
opportunity to brief the Secretariat and the Member
States on the engagement of the Turkish troops in Iraqi
territory without the consent of the Iraqi Government.

Amid heightened global sensitivity regarding the
fight against the terrorist wave that has hit most parts of
the world, on 3 December Turkish forces, estimated at
hundreds of soldiers with a number of armoured vehicles,
tanks and artilleries, penetrated northern Iraq to the
depth of 110 kilometres without the official permission
of the Iraqi federal authorities. This constitutes a
serious Violation of Iraqi sovereignty and the principles
of international law relating to good-neighbourly
relations, mutual respect and non-interference in the
internal affairs of Member States, in accordance with
Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations.

The arguments presented to the media by Turkish
officials to justify their Violation of the borders of a
sovereign neighbouring State are unacceptable to
Iraq. Such military movements constitute a hostile act
under established international rules and norms. Iraq
rejects any military movements of a counter-terrorist
nature without the knowledge and prior approval of
the Iraqi federal authorities. Iraq has previously made
this clear in its letters to the Security Council, which
were reaffirmed again in a letter to the President of the
Security Council dated 11 December 2015 (S/2015/963, annex).

While Iraq welcomes the efforts of the international
community and its assistance to Iraq in its battle against
Daesh, which controls some Iraqi cities, Iraq rejects
any prejudice to its sovereignty. Counter-terrorism
operations within the framework of the international
coalition must be made with the knowledge of the Iraqi
federal Government and after consultations with the
Iraqi armed forces, and in full respect for the provisions
of the Iraqi Constitution and the will and inclusivity of
the elected national Government.

Failure to address any Violation against Iraq's
sovereignty will encourage other Violations of its
security and territorial integrity by other counties.
Iraq has spared no effort and exhausted all diplomatic
channels and bilateral negotiations with Turkey in order
to persuade that country to withdraw its unauthorized
forces from Iraq. On 6 December, the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs summoned the Turkish Ambassador
in Baghdad and presented him with an official protest,
demanding that the Turkish Government issue a
statement clarifying the circumstances and background
of the incursion of the Turkish troops. Baghdad also
received a delegation from Turkey and made it clear
that Turkish troops that had entered the country without
the consent of and coordination with the Iraqi federal
Government must be withdrawn.

The Turkish delegation agreed in principle to
withdraw, but asked for time to declare the withdtrawal
after its return to Ankara. We were surprised that the
delegation refused to withdraw those troops so as to end
this serious Violation of Iraqi sovereignty and security,
which represents a flagrant Violation of the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, the provisions
of international law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. As Iraq is committed to the framework of
international legitimacy represented by the Security
Council, which has a unique responsibility in the
maintenance of international peace and security, Iraq
requests the Council to assume its international legal
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
and to adopt a clear and explicit resolution with the
following provisions.

First, it must condemn the Turkish occupation and
the illegal incursion against the will ofa founding State
Member of the United Nations f the State of Iraq - in
breach of the rules and provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and the norms of international law.
Secondly, it must demand that Turkey withdraw its
troops immediately and ensure, by all available means
and measures, their immediate and unconditional
withdrawal to the internationally recognized borders
between the two countries. It must also ensure the
non-recurrence of such unilateral actions, which
undermine international relations, exacerbate sectarian
and nationalist tensions in the region, and expose
regional and international security to significant risks.

We entrust the security, unity and territorial
integrity of Iraq to the Council, which has stressed,
in all of its resolutions, the inherent right of Member
States, including Iraq, to individual or collective self-
defence, in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of

the United Nations, should it be subject to armed attack.
Iraq will take all necessary measures to end such hostile
acts, which are an affront to good-neighbourly relations
and threaten international peace and security.
