Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the Secretary-General's special report on the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) (S/2004/117), as introduced by Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno this morning. I would
also very much like to join others in warmly
acknowledging the presence of Foreign Minister
Ramos-Horta in the Council again.

Like others who have spoken, we commend the
progress that has been made in Timor-Leste through
the work of UNMISET and its predecessor, the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). We also commend the work that has been
done by the Government of Timor-Leste and the
commitment of international donors to support these
efforts.

New Zealand's principal concern is to see the
important gains made in Timor-Leste safeguarded, and
I think it is fair to say, given the comments that have
been made here this morning that this is very much a
common objective of both the Council members and
the other States who have spoken. The path to
nationhood for Timor-Leste has obviously been a
difficult one, and it should not come as a surprise to
any of us that there is still much to be done.

The role that the United Nations has played in
Timor-Leste has been vital in assisting this new nation.
Bilateral assistance programmes are playing an
increasingly important role, but it is clear that there is
much more to be done in establishing key institutions
and in ensuring that Timor-Leste has been placed on a
firm footing before United Nations support is ended.

In New Zealand's view, it is important for the
international community to do its utmost to continue to
support Timor-Leste through this transition period.
New Zealand therefore fully endorses the
recommendation of the Secretary-General for an
extension of UNMISET for a further year in a reduced
size and with a modified mandate, which would be a
twelve-month consolidation phase.

In New Zealand's view, the composition of the
mission recommended by the Secretary-General is
appropriate, given the requirements on the ground. The
Secretary-General's recommendation represents a
significant further downsizing of the current mission
across the board. There is to be a further reduction in
the number of civilian advisers, and the civilian police
component is to be reduced by a further 50 per cent.
The military component, observers and troops - at
present 1,750 military personnel - is to be reduced to
less than 25 per cent of the current presence, to a
minimum operational level of 350.

New Zealand agrees with the Secretary-General
and the Timor-Leste Government about the importance
of the assurances that would be provided by retention
of a modest military force, as recommended, with
quick-reaction and air-borne capability, to maintain
confidence and stability in the border areas. During the
visit of New Zealand's Minister for Foreign Affairs to
Timor-Leste earlier this month, it was evident that
there is considerable anxiety about this issue in Timor-
Leste - and of course Foreign Minister Ramos-Horta
spoke very eloquently on that issue. It was also very
clear that as yet Timor-Leste has virtually no capacity
to respond on its own to any incidents that might occur
in the border areas. New Zealand remains open to
views on how best to provide those assurances. But
what is important is that they be credible and effective.

New Zealand welcomes the progress in the
bilateral relationship between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia. It will obviously be important to continue to
address border demarcation in the coming months,
including at local level in the border areas, so as to
build up mutual trust and confidence and to work
towards the normalization of local cross-border
relations.

New Zealand also strongly supports the
continuation of the work of the Serious Crimes Unit for
a further year. We also support further action on the
part of the international community to follow up on the
human rights abuses that occurred in East Timor in
1999. We further note the valuable work done by the
Timor-Leste Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation to address lesser crimes and promote
community reconciliation, and the fact that ongoing
donor support will be necessary to enable the
Commission to complete its work.

We endorse the Secretary-General's proposal for
continuing United Nations support for capacity-
building in the public administration of Timor-Leste.
We note that the role of the Government of Timor-
Leste in this process is vital. The Secretary-General has
articulated a number of concerns, particularly on the
need for the Timor-Leste Government to expedite the
development of key aspects of the administration's
legislative and regulatory framework, including the
adoption of legislation in key areas. In this respect, I
would like to mention the civil service act; legislation
for the creation of the Office of the Provedor;
legislation to ensure transparency and accountability;
and an organic law for the police and a defence act for
the military, as well as related regulations and policies
to clarify their responsibilities and relationships.

Much has been achieved in Timor-Leste, but
much remains to be done. Timor-Leste is one of the
poorest countries in the world. It faces enormous
challenges in nation-building and in the provision of
the most basic services, such as in health and
education, to its population, more than half of whom
are under the age of 15. Continued assistance from the
international community, both through the United
Nations and bilaterally, will therefore be vital to
support Timor-Leste in this important consolidation
phase.

