Mr. Motoc (Romania) (spoke in French): Permit
me at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important meeting today. We hope that it
will be able to sound the alarm on the major risks
posed by the political crisis persisting in Cote d'Ivoire.
I would also like to thank Mr. Doss for having
introduced the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
(S/2005/186) and to congratulate him on his
outstanding efforts as Interim Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in recent months.

I should like to warmly welcome Mr. Aziz Pahad,
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa.
The members of the Security Council and the Members
of the United Nations in general have been eagerly
awaiting news concerning the mediation efforts of
President Mbeki. We highly appreciate the personal
commitment of President Mbeki, as well as his energy
and perseverance in carrying out the difficult task
entrusted to him by the African Union (AU). We have
every confidence in his capacity to contribute to the
resolution of the situation, and we are prepared to
support him in his future efforts in that regard.

We must vigorously continue our common search
for a political solution to the crisis. We hope that, at the
3 April Pretoria meeting, all the key C6te d'Ivoire
actors will show that they fully understand the gravity
of the situation and the urgency of working towards a
compromise political solution in the framework of the
peace plan laid down by President Mbeki. I wish here
to reaffirm our appreciation and support for the
involvement of the African Union (AU) in addressing
the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire. We are deeply convinced of
the value added by African management of problems of
this nature.

We have come a long way from the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement to the present peace plan. But
on the ground the signs are increasingly discouraging.
It should now be clear that this process is the only
alternative to a return to violence, which would have
incalculable consequences for the unity and the future
of Cote d'Ivoire and for the stability of the entire
subregion.

Under the initial plan we would already be
completing the disarmament phase. But uncertainty
remains even about the date for that phase to begin.
The Government is not yet functional, and parallel
state structures have been put in place in the north of
the country. Crime is on the rise, and the lack of trust
among the parties is more marked than ever. The
message of the mobilization of militia-type groups is
entirely incompatible with the spirit of the peace
process.

We cannot tolerate any attacks on United Nations
personnel or on civilians. All those who fuel violence
and block the implementation of the peace agreements
must bear responsibility. In our view, now is the time
for firmer action in that regard, including action by the
Security Council.

We were surprised to learn that the perpetrators
of the attacks in Logouale', who were arrested by
UNOCI and handed over to the Ivorian authorities,
were released the next day. The widespread culture of
impunity promotes the persistence of a generalized
climate of intolerance and Violence, which is also
fuelled by the propaganda of hatred. But again, efforts
to get the situation under control are proving
insufficient.

I wish now to comment on the matter of elections
and on the role of UNOCI.

The timetable for the elections seems to be in
jeopardy in the light of the current political tension. It
is critical that the parties deal with major pending
political problems before the elections are held. In our
View, the possibility of an enhanced United Nations
role in the electoral process should be considered in the
light of future developments on the ground. UNOCI
will then continue to play an important role in these
extremely complex circumstances, which pose
numerous challenges.

We would like to see United Nations forces
effectively carry out their mandated tasks, including
those recently defined in resolution 1584 (2005). In
that context, we are prepared to lend support to the
strengthening of UNOCI in line with the Secretary-
General's proposals. In any event, we believe that
analysing its overall mandate could be extremely
useful for a better understanding of the Operation's
limitations and of the possibilities for strengthening its
operational capabilities.

In conclusion, I would stress that on numerous
occasions the Security Council, through its resolutions
and statements, has firmly and clearly communicated
its message concerning Cote d'Ivoire. Through
President Mbeki, the African Union has shouldered the
task of bridging the confidence gap between the two
parties and of relaunching the peace process. But what
is needed is the will of the parties to work together in a
spirit of good faith to attain the shared objective of
preserving the stability and the development prospects
of Cote d'Ivoire in the common interest of the
subregion and the entire African continent.

