Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): I would first like to address the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). We welcome
Prosecutor Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Registrar Adama
Dieng and, especially, newly elected President Dennis
Byron and thank them for their continued contributions
to the Tribunal. We also wish to thank the hundreds of
other staff who on a daily basis dedicate their energy
and skills to the lasting success and legacy of the
Tribunal.

The United States remains strongly committed to
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and
commends its efforts to provide justice and
accountability to the Rwandan people. They are, after
all, the intended beneficiaries of the Court and must
remain its primary focus.

Responsibility for the success of the Tribunal lies
in the hands of many parties. The President, the
Prosecutor and the Registrar must continue to work
towards their completion strategy deadlines, while also
planning for the Tribunal's legacy after its 2010
closure. We applaud the Tribunal's success in meeting
many of its previous trial projections. We also
encourage a continued candid dialogue among all
parties on challenges facing the Tribunal and recognize
our partnership in that process, particularly on residual
and legacy issues.
The success of the Tribunal also rests on the
shoulders of the Security Council and all United
Nations Member States. The completion strategy will
involve transferring some cases to domestic
jurisdictions; the Netherlands has already accepted one.
The Prosecutor has also just filed his first transfer case
to Rwanda's domestic jurisdiction.

Provided the ICTR finds that Rwanda's judiciary
meets the fair trial requirements of rule 11 his, the
United States fully supports Rwanda's bid to receive
all remaining transfer cases. Our Government has met
repeatedly with the Rwandan Government, Member
States and Rwandan civil society to encourage and
support judicial capacity-building efforts, and we ask
all donors to continue their important contributions to
that end.

The Security Council, in the Tribunal's founding
resolution, resolution 955 (1994), stressed the "need
for international cooperation to strengthen the courts
and judicial system of Rwanda" (ninth preambular para). That goal is perhaps more paramount today
than at any time in these past 13 years.

We also call on all Member States, particularly
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Kenya, to
fulfil their international obligation to apprehend and
transfer all ICTR fugitives within their borders.
Reports continue to surface that top fugitive and
alleged genocide financier Felicien Kabuga remains in
Kenya. We support Kenya's previous efforts to
apprehend Kabuga but note that seriously robust and
concrete steps are now needed as the Tribunal begins to
wind down and as international pressure mounts to
complete its mandate. Nevertheless, all fugitives must
know that they do not escape justice by merely
outlasting the Tribunal. We will make provisions for
their capture and prosecution whether today, tomorrow
or years from now.

We again thank the President, the Prosecutor and
the Registrar for their service to the Tribunal, to justice
and accountability and to the Rwandan people. We also
express our highest praise and gratitude to former
ICTR President Eric Mase for his exemplary
stewardship and dogged commitment to the Tribunal's
success during these past four years. His imprint will
continually be felt as a part of the Tribunal's own
lasting legacy.

The United States remains a strong supporter,
financial and political, of the United Nations
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and appreciates the hard work of
the President, Prosecutor and Registrar. The focus of
the Tribunal and the international community should
now be on the road ahead. We must work together to
ensure that over its final years the Tribunal
successfully fulfils its mandate, namely to bring to
justice the persons who are most responsible for war
crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia.
Specifically, that will involve apprehending the
remaining fugitives, expeditiously completing the work
at hand and planning for eventual closure.

We call on all States to fulfil their legal
obligations to cooperate fully with the ICTY, including
by arresting and transferring the remaining fugitive
indictees. In that regard, the United States welcomes
the recent apprehensions of Zdravko Tolimir and
Vlastimir Djordjevic and the close cooperation
between the Serbian, Montenegrin and Republika
Srpska authorities that facilitated those arrests.

The United States calls on Serbia to take further
steps to fulfil its obligations, in particular through the
apprehension and transfer to the Tribunal of all
fugitives who may be on Serbian territory, including
Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic. Mladic and
Karadzic have been charged with terrible crimes,
including the Srebrenica genocide, and it is
unthinkable that they would escape international
justice.

The United States therefore calls upon the
Tribunal, its partners in the international community
and States in the region to take all necessary steps to
ensure that they are apprehended before the Tribunal
closes. In the event that they are not apprehended
before that time, we call on the international
community to take appropriate measures to ensure that
they face international justice.

The United States appreciates the work of the
President and Prosecutor to increase Tribunal
efficiency and to meet the Tribunal's completion
strategy targets, as endorsed by the Security Council.
In particular, we welcome the unprecedented step of
running seven trials simultaneously. We appreciate the
positive example set by the Trial Chambers in the
Milutinovic et al. and Prlic et al. cases in scheduling
hearings during the upcoming recess period, and
recognize the many less visible efforts that Tribunal
staff make on a daily basis to increase efficiency.
In that light, and in the context of the recent
arrests of Tolimir and Djordjevic, the United States
notes that all trials should conclude by the end of 2008,
or as soon thereafter as is feasible. We also call on the
Tribunal to take all possible steps to complete appeals
by the end of 2010 and ask that it report to the Security
Council on further measures that it feels are necessary
to meet that goal. The success of the completion
strategy does not depend solely on the Tribunal,
however. The international community can help by
supporting the Tribunal's efforts to help build capacity
for domestic trials. We note the significant work being
done in the region in this regard and urge other States
to contribute to domestic war crimes prosecutions,
either through direct financial assistance or in-kind
contributions.

As Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte today delivered
her final report to the Council, the United States would
like to take this opportunity to express its appreciation
for her service at the ICTY. She deserves to be
commended for her role over the past eight years as a
forceful champion of international justice and
accountability.

The United States notes with appreciation the
recent joint paper on legacy and residual functions of
the ad hoc Tribunals, and asks that the Tribunals
continue to plan their legacy functions in close
coordination with the Security Council.

