Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): Just over five months
ago, the adoption of Security Council resolution 1203
(1998) was greeted with relief in the Netherlands, because
it was felt that with all the pressure applied on Belgrade in
that resolution, it should at last be possible to make
President Milosevic see reason and accept a peaceful
solution to the problem of Kosovo.

The resolution clearly stated that the Security Council
was acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. In the resolution, the Security Council expressed
its deep alarm at the impending humanitarian catastrophe in
Kosovo, emphasizing the need to keep this from happening.
It endorsed and supported the agreements signed in
Belgrade between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) respectively,
and demanded the full and prompt implementation of these
agreements by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

Being aware of its strong commitment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, we were grateful to Russia for having
contributed to this pressure being brought to bear on the
Yugoslav leadership.

Since then, however, at every critical juncture Russia
has somehow succeeded in making the pressure less
credible, so that in the end NATO had no choice but to
make good on its threat, which was initially meant to bring
about a peaceful solution to the Kosovo crisis. It is
legitimate to make a threat hoping that it need never be
carried out, but ultimately one must also be prepared to
bring a threat into effect. The alternative, which we could
not seriously contemplate, would have been to sit back
and simply let the humanitarian catastrophe occur.

The NATO action, in which we are participating,
follows directly from resolution 1203 (1998), in
conjunction with the flagrant non-compliance on the part
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Given its complex
background, we cannot allow it to be described as
unilateral use of force. If the Security Council should now
demand an immediate cessation of the NATO action, it
would once again - and once again at the initiative of
Russia - give the wrong signal to President Milosevic,
leading to a further prolongation of the bloodshed in
Kosovo.

It is for this reason that the Netherlands will vote
against the draft resolution before us.

