Mr. Mminele (South Africa): I would like to
begin by joining previous speakers, Madam President,
in congratulating you and your delegation on your
assumption of your important role, and in wishing you
success in steering the work of the Security Council
during your presidency. South Africa commends you for
giving special attention to this important topic during
your presidency, and we welcome today's debate, which

will, we hope, help to strengthen cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations.

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
recognizes that cooperation with regional and
subregional bodies can improve collective security.
For its part, the African Union (AU) has established,
as part of the African Peace and Security Architecture,
the African Union Peace and Security Council, which
is, among other things, a standing decision-making
organ for the prevention, management and resolution
of conflicts on the African continent. Despite the
challenges faced by the African Union and its
subregional organizations, such as a lack of predictable
sources of funding, they remain a reservoir of critical
knowledge about the nature of conflicts on the
continent. They have a distinct comparative advantage
in addressing conflicts in often complex environments
and are usually able to deploy troops to areas of conflict
without delay. Regional and subregional organizations
also have the distinct advantage of being able to
respond rapidly to conflicts that arise, as evidenced by
the various African-led international support missions,
such as those in Mali and the Central African Republic.
Such rapid response missions have acted as bridges
to the more sustainable United Nations peacekeeping
missions.

In 2012 South Africa piloted the adoption of
resolution 2033 (2012), which built on resolution 1809
(2008), adopted during the April 2008 South African
presidency of the Security Council. The two resolutions
encourage the strengthening of regular interaction,
consultation and coordination between the two bodies
on matters of mutual interest. Moreover, their strategic
thrust is aimed at promoting political and legislative
coherence between the Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council in dealing with African
peace and security challenges.

Since that time we have seen the benefits of the
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union and its subregional organizations. At the
operational level, the United Nations Secretariat has
been active in supporting the AU's Peace and Security
Architecture through the implementation of a 10-year
capacity-building programme. Both organizations also
benefit fromthe deploymentofjointtechnicalassessment
missions. Further examples of such cooperation are the
hybrid model of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the assistance provided to

the African Union Mission in Somalia and, recently, the
robust mandate developed for the Intervention Brigade
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Such
collaborative efforts, benefitting from the experience
of the more robust mandates espoused by regional and
subregional bodies, illustrate the importance of closer
collaboration between the United Nations and Chapter
VIII bodies.

We must also be aware that the principles of national
ownership and the sovereignty of States, which should
be respected ifwe are to create lasting peace, are central
to the sustainability of peace initiatives. Steps, however
minimal, taken by those directly affected by a conflict,
including regional and subregional organizations,
should be taken into consideration and, where possible,
built upon. South Africa believes that, given the
scarcity of financial and human capital, a clear division
of labour and productive burden-sharing between the
United Nations and regional organizations is critical to
sustainable conflict resolution and prevention efforts.
We also believe that regional organizations could
benefit from flexible and predictable financial support
from the United Nations and other international
institutions and stakeholders.

In conclusion, in South Africa we believe that
cooperation between the United Nations and the region
and its subregions can further enhance capacity so as to
ensure complementarity and minimize the duplication
of efforts. Ultimately, however, we must draw on the
strengths of each organization and be prepared to adopt
more flexible and sometimes more robust approaches
to addressing conflicts in a more effective manner. The
United Nations needs to adjust to an environment that
requires a more nuanced approach rather than rigid
procedures that have proved ineffective.

