Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): Let me start by thanking
you, Mr. President, and welcoming the initiative of
Chad, as President of the Council, for convening this
open debate. I would also like to thank you, Sir, for
your concept note (S/2014/869, annex) and to welcome
the thorough briefings given by Ambassador Tete
Antonio of the African Union and Under-Secretary-
General Jeffrey Feltman.
This debate is taking place one day after the first
summit of the countries participating in the Nouakchott
Process on the enhancement of security cooperation and
the operationalization of the African Peace and Security
Architecture in the region, co-organized with the
African Union. At yesterday's summit, representatives
stressed their concern about the worsening of the
scourge of terrorism and violent extremism in the
region, as well as the close links that terrorist armed
groups maintain with transnational organized crime,
in particular human trafficking, money laundering,
illicit arms trafficking and drugs. The cross-border
movement of terrorists and organized crime groups
has a direct impact on international peace and security,
and the potential to undermine the sovereignty and
territorial integrity and jeopardize domestic and
regional stability and economic development and fuels
conflicts. Terrorism and international organized crime
now feed each other in a despicable race where stability
and peace are the left overs.

The connection between terrorism and cross-
border crime is particularly true in the Sahel region
with the threat expanding now into all of West Africa.
For example, the Movement for Unity and Jihad in
West Africa, an offshoot of Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, is one of the best examples of this trend. The
link between terrorism and transnational organized
crime has become evident as terrorists groups have
increasingly exploited the pre-existing, informal or
formal trade routes, as well as the illicit markets to
generate resources from drugs and armed trafficking.
Many countries and regions in Africa run the risk of
becoming more destabilized and a ground for terrorist
recruitment, training and funding. Furthermore,
terrorist groups may gain control of strategic natural
resources, such as oil, uranium and diamonds in Africa.

The overlapping between terrorism and cross-
border crime seriously complicates the Council's
conflict prevention and resolution efforts and hamper
the United Nations and African Union peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions. It increases the risk of
relapse, makes the protection of civilians difficult and
represents a real threat to the safety and security of
mission personnel. Obviously, all of that constitutes a
broad matter for discussions and has been extensively
dealt with by the United Nations, but today we are
focusing on the intersection between terrorism and
cross-border crime and how to make the best use of the
capacity of the United Nations, at the disposal of the
Security Council, in order to counter that threat.

As a critical pillar of national security, border
protection is a matter of national sovereign authority
and the responsibility of the State. Through the better
protection of their borders, States would prevent
the cross-border spillover of illicit trafficking and
movement from inside and outside of their territory, and
thereby contribute to international peace and security.
Mutual cooperation between States in this field can
be achieved only through a coherent and coordinated
approach that respects the basic principles of sovereign
equality, territorial integrity and non-interference in
the internal affairs of States.
Algeria is fully committed to regional cooperation
in fighting the destabilization caused by terrorist and
organized crime groups in the Sahel region. In agreement
with the Sahel countries, Algeria has consistently
advocated an approach that is geared towards targeted
and efficient action, based on ownership ofthe countries
of the region, aimed at combatting terrorism and cross-
border criminality, while assuming responsibility for
security and stability inside their territory in keeping
with their international obligations. Algeria's extensive
military deployment on its borders is part of the efforts
undertaken by my Government to ensure not only our
national security but also that of all our neighbours.

Within the countries of the Sahel, Algeria has
engaged in a concerted approach through many
cooperation mechanisms, such as the so-called
countries of the field or the working group on the
Sahel, co-Chaired by Algeria and Canada under the
Global Counterterrorism Forum, and also with the Joint
Operational General Staff Committee - known by its
French acronym, CEMOC - the Fusion and Liaison
Unit and many other forums. We believe that such
forums make a great contribution to facilitating and
deepening the security cooperation among the countries
concerned through coordination and the strengthening
of border-control measures as well as through training,
equipment and intelligence-sharing.

Algeria's efforts to combat terrorism and improve
regional and international awareness and cooperation
in that regard predates the manifestation of major acts
of international terrorism. My country has sought from
the beginning to strengthen efforts against terrorism at
the African level and, as a result, many instruments and
initiatives have emerged and today are playing a standard
role in enhancing the effectiveness of the African
response in this field. In that respect, I would recall
the establishment of the African Police Cooperation
Organization (AFRIPOL), adopted last June and aimed
at enhancing inter-State police cooperation so as to
address the various challenges related to transnational
crime. AF RIPOL should be fully operational next year.

Among the other initiatives to be pursued in
support of its member States, the African Union
called in a communique issued on 2 September for the
holding of a high-level meeting of member States on
the issue of the financing of terrorism, with a view to
identifying practical measures to address this problem
more effectively. My country has offered to host such a
high-level meeting.

It is also worth noting the important work done
by the African Centre for the Study and Research on
Terrorism, based in Algiers, which has made a crucial
contribution, inter alia, to preparing an African draft
model law to combat terrorism. The Centre is an
important partner of the United Nations entities in
charge of the fight against terrorism, including the
strengthening of African countries' national capacities
and in coordinating and implementing subregional and
regional projects.

Today the vast majority of United Nations peace
operations are deployed in situations of domestic
political crisis, complicated by difficult humanitarian
and socioeconomic circumstances and exacerbated by
the presence of terrorist organizations that are prepared
to take advantage of any institutional vacuum or default.
Under this undesirable scenario, peaceful States could
become failed States.

The Secretary-General has noted in his report on
the progress made in the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, there has
been little counter-terrorism expertise available to
United Nations peacekeeping operations and special
political missions that operate in areas where terrorism
is often a core challenge, such as in the Sahel, and
asked Member States, when reviewing the Strategy,
to consider how they might provide expertise as part
of their contribution to United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions.

Accordingly, we believe that an overall assessment
ofthe United Nations must be addressed by the General
Assembly and the relevant United Nations bodies that
deal with the corresponding cross-cutting issues in a
holistic manner. In that regard, my country is ready
to cooperate and address this issue in its broader
framework within the General Assembly setting
and alongside the High-level Panel on Peacekeeping
Operations.

