Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to convey my gratitude to the Prosecutor for her
briefing. There are great many lessons to be learned
from the report.

As Ms. Bensouda has noted by referring to resolution
2091 (2013), adopted on 14 February, and to the recent
data published by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, there is no disagreement within
the international community regarding the current
state of affairs. The fate of civilians in Darfur remains
unacceptable. The Government and the militia forces
that it has integrated within the security forces continue
to target civilians. Neither the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) nor
the humanitarian personnel present there enjoys the
necessary freedom of access to exercise their protection
mandate.

The Prosecutor has identified a number of areas
of concern, which we share. Despite the Government's
attempts to dissimulate, the reports confirm aerial
bombardments by the Sudanese Air Force, which is
mostly affecting civilians. Sudanese security forces
are involved in attacks on civilians, which are hastily
represented as intertribal clashes. Sexual violence in
displaced persons camps is widespread. Human rights
defenders, international experts and humanitarian
workers are threatened. The work of humanitarian
workers and UNAMID is obstructed, keeping them
from preventing incidents and providing relief to
civilians.

Nearly nine years after the referral to the Court by
the Council, four individuals accused of war crimes
and crimes against humanity, including one accused of
genocide, continue to evade the Court, in full sight of
all, despite the arrest warrants issued against them by
the International Criminal Court. President Al-Bashir,
former militia leader Ali Kushayb, Defence Minister
Abdelrahim Mohamed Hussein and current governor
of South Kordofan Ahmed Haroun are free. Those
four people, who are wanted for the massacre and
displacement of thousands of civilians or accused of
having committed genocide in ways they hoped would
be invisible, including through rape, persecution and
the intentional blocking of access to aid, are still in key
positions and able to order further abuses. As highlighted
in the Council, impunity has encouraged them to use the
same methods in South Kordofan as in Darfur. It is the
same crime, same perpetrators, same modus operandi
and, especially, same victims - civilians.

There is also no disagreement on how to break the
cycle of violence. All facets of the Peace Agreement
must be implemented in good faith and extended to
the rebel groups that continue to refuse to enter into
negotiations; civilians must be protected by allowing
UNAMID to implement its mandate; humanitarian
access must be ensured; and those responsible for
crimes must be prosecuted. The Council has said as
much, and the African Union does not say otherwise.

The Office of the Prosecutor and the Judges of the
Court have done their share of work through preliminary
analysis of crimes, investigations, the issuance of five
arrest warrants against four individuals and legal
proceedings against rebels who have decided to give
themselves up voluntarily. The first trial against the
rebel leaders is set for May 2014 for the attacks against
peacekeeping soldiers in Haskanita.

The Sudan, in turn, is not fulfilling its responsibilities.
Despite repeated announcements and the increase
in the number of special national courts meant to
prosecute serious crimes committed in Darfur, no legal
proceedings have been undertaken. Unlike Libya, which
is legally committed to the ICC, the Sudan has taken no
steps to try the persons who have been charged. The
Prosecutor's Office has reviewed the work of all the
special courts established since 2005. They have done
nothing. Criminals have full immunity. That is also
the finding of the African Union High-level Panel on
Darfur.

Finally, I note that the implementation of the peace
process has serious gaps. Reconstruction is stalled,
the return of displaced persons and refugees has been
delayed, and the resurgence of fighting has increased
populations' insecurity. Given this situation, what can
we do?

First, we must encourage cooperation by all. All
those who support the Court must be thanked. We know,
however, that two countries have refused to cooperate
over the past six months. We must respond to the letters
we have received from the Court through the Secretary-
General on issues of non-cooperation.

Secondly, we must isolate and punish the
criminals. We welcome in this respect the guidelines
issued by the Secretary-General on limiting contact
with persons wanted by the Court to what is essential
for the Organization. We must apply these guidelines
consistently. In particular, it would not seem to be
good policy to allow contact with the accused when the
chance that that might improve the situation is minimal.
Another option, which has repeatedly discussed but not
yet undertaken, is to register individuals subject to an
arrest warrant on the list established by the Sanctions
Committee. I recall in this respect that paragraph
3 of resolution 1591 (2005) provides explicitly that
people who violate international humanitarian law
or international human rights law may be subject to
sanctions.

Thirdly and finally, the Council must once again
be united in exerting real pressure on the parties to
end the violations committed against civilians. We
regret, in this respect, that some refuse to recognize
the deteriorating security and humanitarian situation,
which is nevertheless ongoing and indisputable.

