The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of India, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Malhotra
(India) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the series of bomb attacks that occurred in New
Delhi, India, on 29 October 2005, causing
numerous deaths and injuries, and expresses its
deepest condolences to the victims of these
heinous acts of terrorism and their families, and
to the people and the Government of India.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of bringing the perpetrators,
organizers, financiers and sponsors of these
reprehensible acts of violence to justice, and
urges all States, in accordance with their
obligations under international law and
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), to
cooperate actively with the Indian authorities in
this regard.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security, and that any acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever,
whenever and by whomsoever committed.

"The Security Council further reaffirms the
need to combat by all means, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, threats to
international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts.

"The Security Council reiterates its
determination to combat all forms of terrorism, in
accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2005/53.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

Before adjourning, I wish to take this opportunity
to thank the ministers and representatives who have
participated in today's meetings.

The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

