Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank
New Zealand for convening this important open debate,
as well as Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing. Brazil also wishes to acknowledge the
statements made by the Permanent Representative
of Israel and the Permanent Observer of the State of
Palestine.

Today's exercise is happening against the backdrop
ofincreasing tensions and threats to international peace
and security in different parts of the region. Violent
extremism conducive to international terrorism is on
the rise, spreading fear, violating human rights and
international humanitarian law, and adding greater
complexity to the task of bringing peace and stability
to the region.

We remain deeply troubled by the fact that the peace
process between Israel and Palestine is paralysed. The
international community must not be idle, as each day
we watch the violence increase and the viability of the
two-State solution dwindle as a result of the continuous
expansion of Israeli settlements.

One year after the latest conflict, the situation in
Gaza remains deeply distressing. It is appalling to learn
that in the past 15 years the number of people in Gaza
requiring humanitarian assistance has undergone a ten-
fold increase, from 80,000 in 2000 to 890,000 in 2015.

Under such circumstances, accepting the status
quo is simply not an option. We reiterate our call for the
Security Council to fully carry out its responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations and actively
support and steer the peace process. It is our collective
responsibility to bring about a renewed negotiating
process that will promptly lead to a two-State solution.
We welcome multilateral initiatives, such as the one led
by France in the Security Council on the relaunching of
peace talks.

Turning to Syria, after more than three years since
the adoption of the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), we are deeply disturbed that the prospects for
success in resolving the conflict remain elusive. The
indiscriminate attacks against the civilian population,
including the use of chemical substances and barrel
bombs as weapons, are simply unacceptable. All parties
to the conflict must comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, including by providing safe, full and
unimpeded access to humanitarian agencies, taking
into account the relevant Security Council resolutions.

There is no military solution to the Syrian crisis.
It is high time for the parties to engage genuinely in
political negotiations aimed at ending the conflict.
We reaffirm our support for the efforts of Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura and look forward to hearing
his recommendations on the implementation of the
Geneva communique based on the consultations he
held with several parties during the past weeks. We
also appreciate the efforts by the Russian Federation to
promote dialogue between the parties.

Once again, we commend the outstanding
generosity of many countries in the region, including
Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan and Egypt, which have been
receiving the bulk of the Syrian refugees. Brazil has
also contributed to the humanitarian efforts by issuing
more than 7,000 entry visas for Syrian residents affected
by the crisis and by providing food and medicine to
help alleviate the dire situation faced by refugees and
displaced people in the region.

We support the efforts by the Lebanese Government
to overcome the difficulties caused by the spillover of
the war in Syria. In that regard, Brazil urges all the
relevant political actors to make every effort to end
the presidential vacuum in Lebanon. We are convinced
that such a development would further strengthen
the country in the face of the current political and
security challenges. We also firmly support the policy
of dissociation from regional crises agreed to in the
Baabda Declaration of June 2012.

Despite those serious challenges in the Middle
East, there is reason for hope. We would like to
conclude this statement by once again expressing
Brazil's great satisfaction with the recent conclusion of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian
nuclear programme and its unanimous endorsement
by the Security Council, which we certainly welcome.
We congratulate all parties to the agreement for the
political will, persistence and determination shown
throughout the complex and highly sensitive negotiating
process. Those qualities will also be crucial for the
implementation of the agreement.

Brazil has always supported diplomatic efforts
aimed at ensuring the peaceful nature of the Iranian
nuclear programme and the normalization of Iran's
relations with the international community, including
through the 2010 Tehran Declaration. The Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action demonstrates the
effectiveness of diplomacy in bridging differences and
creating truly sustainable peace.

We are confident that the success achieved in
Vienna will significantly contribute to the launching of
a new and productive phase in the relations between
Iran and the other parties to the agreement. The
agreement has the potential to help reduce international
and regional tensions for the benefit of the entire
international community. Brazil expresses its readiness
to continue to collaborate through diplomatic means for
the furtherance of stability, peace and prosperity of the
Middle East.

