Mr. Heusgen (Germany): One month ago, we
reminded delegations of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and said that there were blatant violations
of the Universal Declaration (see S/PV.8452). Yet here
we sit, one month later, and the situation continues.
The Maduro regime has become even more cynical,
and I refer to the example that the representative of the
United States used in his statement, in which he said
that Maduro is dancing while children and people were
dying and suffering because they do not have anything
to eat or any medical supplies.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for putting

this on the Council's agenda today. I disagree with my
South African friend i I think that this issue belongs
on the Council's agenda. It is a threat to international
peace and security for two reasons. First, as I mentioned
last time, there are 3.4 million refugees across the
border, now living in the border areas of Brazil,
Colombia and Ecuador, affecting stability, wealth and
conditions in those countries. The representatives of
those countries will speak later to confirm that having
all of those people fleeing Venezuela to their territories
is a threat to them. Secondly - and I thought we would
have agreed on this - human rights are not solely an
internal affair, but rather, and I quote from the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, "a common standard of
achievements for all peoples and all nations". I would
have thought that, given South Africa's background, it
would have supported the view that it is very important
to respect human rights and that if human rights are
blatantly violated, then we must look to address that.

The Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, gave
a terrible description of the current situation in the
country. I predict - as my Polish colleague has also
predicted - that the representative of the Maduro
regime will deny what is happening and say that they are
not oppressing, that there are no arbitrary detentions,
that there are no irregular armed groups and that there
is freedom of speech. But they must look into our eyes
and say that they know that there are children dying
as a result of not having any nourishment; that there
is maternal mortality, as the Under-Secretary-General
stated; and that there are many people dying from
preventable causes.

The most important thing now is to ensure the
delivery of humanitarian assistance into the country. I
do agree with my South African colleague and others
that we must prevent any politicization of the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. That will not lead to anything
positive and undermines the safety and security of
humanitarian workers. This is a historic moment for
Venezuela and we must not leave its people to feel
alone. Humanitarian aid must get there, in accordance
with the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence.

Let me briefly turn to the political situation. I
simply want to echo what my French and Belgian
colleagues said earlier. The European Union, through
its International Contact Group, stands ready to provide
support. There can only be a political solution and we
reject the use of force. We also support the declaration
made by the Lima Group, which I wish to quote, "for
a process of peaceful transition through political and
diplomatic means without the use of force".

We therefore renew our call for the restoration of
a democratic process and constitutional order through
free, transparent and credible presidential elections,
and we support Juan Guaido in conducting that
process towards a lasting peace, based on democratic
values and respect for the rights and freedoms of the
Venezuelan people.

