Mr. Danforth (United States of America): The
Security Council consistently has affirmed that it
supports the full sovereignty and independence of
Lebanon, free of all foreign forces. We believe
Lebanon should be allowed to determine its own future
and assume control of its own territory. Yet the
Lebanese people are still unable to exercise their rights
as a free people to make those choices and to take
those steps as a nation.

With France, we introduced the draft resolution
on Lebanon and Syria; and with the sponsorship of
Germany and the United Kingdom, we asked for a vote
tonight, because the situation in Lebanon is moving
very quickly. The Government of Syria has imposed its
political will on Lebanon and has compelled the
Cabinet and the Lebanese National Assembly to amend
its Constitution and abort the electoral process by
extending the term of the current President by three
years. The final vote in the Assembly is scheduled for
Friday, so it is imperative for the Security Council to
address this issue now.

The Lebanese parliament and the Lebanese
cabinet should express the will of the Lebanese people
through a free and fair presidential electoral process.
What the Lebanese people and we have witnessed over
the past week in terms of Syrian actions is a crude
mockery of this principle. It is clear that Lebanese
parliamentarians have been pressured, and even
threatened, by Syria and its agents to make them
comply. We strongly support the extension of the
control of the Government of Lebanon over all
Lebanese territory, including southern Lebanon, as
called for by the Security Council over the past four
years. The continued presence of armed Hizbullah
militia elements, as well as the presence of the Syrian
military and Iranian forces in Lebanon, hinders that
goal.

We believe that this situation - 14 years after the
end of Lebanon's civil war and four years after the
Security Council accepted unanimously the Secretary-
General's report that Israel had complied fully with
Security Council resolution 425 (1978) - is simply
unacceptable. It is wrong for Syria to continue to
maintain its forces in Lebanon, in flat contravention of
the spirit and clear intent of the Taif Accord. And it
would be very wrong of Syria to continue to interfere
in the presidential electoral process in Lebanon. We
have called on the Security Council to carry out its
responsibility of supporting the full independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon, free
after so many years from all foreign forces, and to
support the Lebanese people in their ability to make
their own national decisions, free at long last from
outside coercion and dictate.

