Mr. Jiirgenson: It is a great pleasure for me
to address the Security Council in my capacity as
Vice-President of the Economic and Social Council
at this open debate devoted to the working methods
of the Security Council. I wish to thank the Spanish
presidency of the Council for convening this debate and
for inviting us. Ambassador Oh Joon, the President of
the Economic and Social Council, is unable to attend
because of prior commitments abroad and sends his
regrets.

This meeting is a welcome step in improving
cooperation among United Nations Charter bodies.
The relations between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council are enshrined in the
Charter of the Organization. Article 65 states that the
Economic and Social Council may furnish information
to the Security Council and shall assist it upon its
request. The legal basis for cooperation could not be
clearer. Yet the use of this provision has been very
limited. Its most constructive incarnation is probably
the establishment by the Economic and Social Council
of its Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti, following an
invitation made by the Security Council in its resolution
1212 (1998) to contribute to the elaboration of a long-
term programme of support for Haiti. The Ad Hoc
Advisory Group continues to exist and contributes to
the promotion of coherent and sustained development
support to Haiti.

Following the promising example of the Haiti
Group, and responding to a request from the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council established
Ad hoc Advisory Groups on Guinea-Bissau and
Burundi, which were active from 2003 to 2006. These
Groups, which promoted a comprehensive approach
to peace and development in post-conflict settings,
prefigured the country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for which they constituted
an avant garde.

Interestingly, the creation of these Groups led to
enhanced interaction between the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council, particularly the
latter's Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa. In recent years, the Economic
and Social Council has followed the development of the
situation in South Sudan since that country joined the
community of nations and has maintained interaction
with the Peacebuilding Commission under its agenda
item "African countries emerging from conflict".
However, interaction with the Security Council has
diminished considerably.

The time has come to revitalize the relationship
among the Charter bodies of this Organization.
The changing nature of conflict - from inter-State
wars to complex civil conflicts that are intractable
and reoccurring - highlights the fundamental link
between sustainable development and lasting peace. As
the report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446) rightfully stressed, the
promotion of inclusive economic and social development
and the broadening of community engagement are
key to prevent relapse into conflict, and innovative
approaches are needed to integrate conflict prevention,
governance, development and human rights.

The changing context of global cooperation for

development through the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) further enhances this opportune moment for a
revitalization of the relationship. The Agenda seeks
to strengthen universal peace in larger freedom and
recognizes the major challenge to the achievement of
durable peace and sustainable development in countries
in conflict and post-conflict situations.

The Agenda also promotes a culture of peace and
non-violence. In particular, Sustainable Development
Goal 16, on promoting peaceful and inclusive societies,
lays the ground for common work. Sustainable
Development Goal 16 highlights the need to address
violence, abuse and exploitation, as well as to strengthen
national institutions against crime and corruption,
making them more transparent, accountable and
effective. The connection between peace, stability and
development could not have been more clearly stated.

The definition of follow-up and review mechanisms
for the 2030 Agenda offers an opportunity to engage in a
joint reflection on how the Charter bodies ofthe United
Nations, as well as the Peacebuilding Commission,
work together to translate the Agenda into tangible and
coherent policy measures by the United Nations system
and the international community at large.

The Economic and Social Council can interact
with the Security Council on a regular basis on issues
of common concern. There are many of these issues:
the promotion of institution-building and improved
governance, the need for social inclusion as a key
component for sustained peace, the role of women and
youth in that context, the consequences of economic
and financial crises for global stability and the impact
of environmental degradation on weakened societies.

On each dimension of sustainable development,
namely, economic, social and environmental, and on
their contribution to the overall objective of peace,
the United Nations development system, under the
oversight of United Nations Economic and Social
Council, has a lot to contribute. The Economic and
Social Council can act as a counterpart of the Security
Council so as to embrace a truly holistic approach to
peace and security, an approach that world leaders have
recognized as the only one that can lead to sustainable
results. The Economic and Social Council stands
ready to work together with the Security Council on
the modalities for such interaction, be it through more
systematic interaction on issues of common interest or
through the establishment of an ad hoc working group.

The debate today should pave the way for renewed
coherence among United Nations bodies and for
mobilization around the objectives of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, to which the Security
Council also has a lot to contribute. I trust that our
willingness to work together and make the best use of
our respective bodies will be stronger than the political
and institutional cleavages between us. Together, the
entire United Nations system, including its principal
bodies, the Economic and Social Council and the
Security Council, can provide strong, integrated
policy support and guidance, within their respective
mandates and competencies, to the cause of peace and
development.

