The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Brunei Darussalam, Djibouti, Egypt, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Malaysia, Morocco,
Pakistan, Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey
and the United Arab Emirates, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Yaacobi (Israel)
took a place at the Council table; Mr. Lamamra
(Algeria), Mr. Abdul Momin (Brunei Darussalam), Mr.
Olhaye (Djibouti), Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Kharrazi
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Owada (Japan), Mr.
Abu Odeh (Jordan), Mr. Razali (Malaysia), Mr.
Snoussi (Morocco), Mr. Marker (Pakistan), Mr.
Eltinay (Sudan), Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia), Mr. Batu (Turkey) and Mr.
Samhan (United Arab Emirates) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 28 February 1995 from
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/ 1995/ 166 and which
reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in accordance
with its previous practice, the Security Council invite
Dr. Nasser Al-Kidwa, Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, to participate in the
current debate of the Security Council with regard to
 

the illegal Israeli settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate in the
current debate in accordance with the rules of procedure
and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a place at the Council table.


The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 28 February 1995 from
the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which reads
as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, I have the honour to request that
I be invited to participate in the meeting of the
Security Council to consider the question of the
establishment of Israeli settlements in the territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and the
dangerous consequences of these activities on the
Palestinian people and the Middle East peace
process, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council."

On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in
this matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 28 February 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Ambassador Engin A. Ansay, Permanent Observer
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference to the

 
United Nations, during the Council's discussion of the
item entitled 'The situation in the occupied Arab

territories .

That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/1995/ 165.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to His
Excellency Mr. Ansay.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in response to the
request dated 22 February 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Djibouti to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, document
S/ 1995/151.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/1995/ll,
letter dated 6 January 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Algeria to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General; S/ 1995/ 14 and S/ 1995/95, letters
dated 9 and 31 January 1995 respectively from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; and S/l995/50, letter
dated 17 January 1995 from the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People addressed to the Secretary-General.

The first speaker is the Permanent Observer of
Palestine, on whom I now call.


