Mr. Djakpo (Benin) (spoke in French): The
Minister for Foreign Affairs and African Integration of
Benin very much appreciates the invitation addressed
to him to participate in this meeting. As it was
impossible for him to come to New York personally, he
has asked me to represent him today in this public
debate in the Security Council and to make the
following statement on his behalf.

My country, Benin, is very grateful to the
President for having organized this public meeting on a
subject whose importance is undeniable in the context
of the debate under way regarding the reform of the
United Nations. As in other areas, it is not a question
of reinventing the United Nations but of creating the
conditions for the judicious application of the Charter
in the spirit of the fundamental principles enshrined
therein.

The Charter of the United Nations has established
a system of collective security based on two pillars,
namely, the primary responsibility vested in the
Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security and cooperation with regional
organizations working in that field on the basis of
subsidiarity and the obligation to be accountable. The
relevant provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter are
unequivocal on that point and there is no need to cite
them here.

The international environment has not always
been favourable to the effective implementation of
those Charter provisions. However, since the fall of the
Berlin Wall and the end of ideological confrontation
between East and West, we have seen the emergence of
a new community of values and an increase in
cooperation between the great Powers in the area of
promoting international peace and security. That has
enabled the Security Council to play a greater role, as
conferred upon it by the Charter. At the same time, we
have seen a renewed interest on the part of States
towards regional integration aiming at the promotion of
peace and stability.

Among other things, that has been manifested in
Africa the praiseworthy initiatives of regional
economic commissions - such as the Economic
Community of West African States - to find solutions
to domestic armed conflicts. Both the African Union
and its Peace and Security Council were established for
that very reason.

Those positive developments have created the
conditions for more active cooperation with the
Security Council. They have also served to promote the
revitalization of the collective security system
instituted by the Charter, which is in line with the
humanistic ideal that presided over the establishment
of the United Nations itself, namely, to save future
generations from the scourge of war and to promote the
dignity and worth of human beings.

In that connection, we would like to pay tribute to
the Secretary-General, who very early on understood
the importance of both those virtuous endeavours and
favoured consultations between the United Nations and
representatives of regional organizations. Important
results were achieved at the sixth high-level meeting
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
which was held in New York on 25 and 26 July 2005
and organized around the telling theme of "Partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
for a safer world".

In that regard, Benin in particular welcomes the
decision to establish a standing committee charged
with mobilizing political will, promoting the adoption
of a long-term perspective and monitoring the
decisions taken. This is an act of great importance that
augurs well for the deepening of concrete institutional
relations.

Similarly, we welcome the participation in
today's debate of eminent representatives of major
regional organizations. This is a key opportunity to
define the parameters of partnership in the area of
promoting international peace and security. That
partnership requires the establishment of consultative
mechanisms for more effective interaction between the
Security Council, regional organizations and Member
States, with a View to facilitating sound management of
situations that could pose a threat to international
peace and security. The Security Council could thereby
meet its primary purpose, to prevent the breakdown of
peace and, where necessary, act collectively with
Member States.

However, regional organizations cannot fulfil
their commitments in that partnership unless their
early-warning and response capacities are strengthened
to deal with situations posing a threat to international
peace and security. The constraints that have surfaced
as part of the efforts of the United Nations and the
African Union to bring stability to the African
continent demonstrate concretely the scope of the
challenges that must be overcome to strengthen the
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the area of conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as in the area of peacebuilding
throughout the world. The international community as
a whole stands to gain much, and must therefore act
with clear-sightedness and determination.

It is in that spirit that my country fully supports
the draft resolution we are to adopt at the end of our
debate.

Benin would like to pay tribute to Romania not
only for having undertaking this initiative, but
especially for having strengthened relations between
the United Nations and regional organizations and
having made that a priority of its mandate in the
Security Council. History will record and take the true
measure of the substantial contribution that Romania
has made to structure relations between the United
Nations and regional organizations to further integrate
the collective security system established by the
Charter of the United Nations.

