Mr. Danon (Israel): Wednesday's declaration
marks a milestone for Israel, for peace and for the
world. The United States had the courage and true
understanding of justice to officially state what has
always been known - that Jerusalem has always been
and always will be the capital of Israel, and that the
Embassy ofthe United States belongs in Israel's capital.
For that, I thank President Trump, Vice President Pence,
Ambassador Haley and the American people.

The Jewish people are an ancient nation. Three
thousand years ago, King David declared the city of
Jerusalem the capital of the Jewish people. Jerusalem
appears in the Bible 660 times. It is the centrepiece
of our vibrant Jewish history. Three times a day, Jews
turn towards Jerusalem to pray. At every birth and
every wedding, we remember Jerusalem. I have here a
replica of an ancient coin, found on the Temple Mount
in Jerusalem. It dates from the year 67 A.D., during
the time of the second Jewish Temple. The words
"Jerusalem the Holy" are inscribed on it. Only three
years later, in the year 70 A.D., our holy temple was
destroyed and the Jewish people were sent into exile for
2,000 years.

Nearly 70 years ago this week, shortly after Israel
declared independence, Prime Minister David Ben-
Gurion made a timeless affirmation. He said: "Jerusalem
is an inseparable part of Israel and her eternal capital.
No United Nations vote can alter that historic fact." It
was an important message, one that the world too often
seems to forget.

Last year, in this same Chamber, almost all of
us were here when the Security Council adopted its
shameful resolution 2334 (2016). The Council had the
audacity and the chutzpah to say that Israel's presence
at the Western Wall in Jerusalem has, and I quote,
"no legal validity and constitutes a flagrant violation
under international law". Then, in May, UNESCO,
the organization responsible for preserving cultural
heritage, adopted a resolution declaring that Israel has no
legal or historical rights anywhere in Jerusalem. It was
one historic wrong after another. That is why President
Trump's decision was so important. The United States
had the courage and sound moral judgment to right
those historic wrongs in recognizing Jerusalem as the
capital of the State of Israel.

Middle Eastern capitals are not known for tolerance
or freedom of religion. But not in Israel. Jerusalem,
under a sovereign Israel, is freer and more open to people
of all religions than at any time in history. In Jerusalem,
all people practice their religions freely. These values
are enshrined in our Declaration of Independence, the
founding document of our State. In it, we pledged to
"safeguard the holy places of all religions". We have
always known that Jerusalem is holy for others, too.
From the moment of our founding, we vowed to create
a State that would honour that holiness; a democracy
that would respect and value the traditions of all people.
That has never changed, nor will it ever change - not
this past week, not tomorrow, not ever.

The announcement on Wednesday revealed a sad
truth about some people around the world, the people
who threaten to ignite a wave of violence against Israel
and Jews everywhere and who may claim they want
peace but whose actions speak louder than their words.
That is why every member of the Security Council
must send a clear message today that there is never any
excuse for violence. Violence must never be used as
a threat. We have heard such threats before. In 1948,
when the State of Israel was established, President
Harry Truman of the United States was warned not to
recognize us. People said that such recognition would
spark terrible violence, but President Truman stood
strong, just as President Trump did this week. They
made the right decision.

The Palestinians now have a decision to make.
They can choose violence, as they have always done.
As we speak, we are seeing reports of rockets flying
from Gaza into Israel. Or they can choose to join us
at the negotiating table. They can meet us to talk - in
Ramallah, Jerusalem or anywhere around the world. I
sincerely hope they make the right decision. The United
States announcement should serve as a reality check for
the Palestinians and for the nations of the world. They
can see this moment for what it is, an opportunity to
initiate hope. They can realize what has always been
true i that recognizing Jerusalem as Israel's capital is
a critical and necessary step for peace. They can learn
that there will never be peace without Jerusalem as the
capital of the State of Israel. That is why today I call on
all countries, all peace-seeking nations of the world,
to join our American friends, recognize Jerusalem's
connection to Israel and move their embassies to our
capital. I urge them to understand that this declaration
is a positive step and to see in it the potential that it can
bring to our region.

Twice a year, Jews all over the world conclude two
of our major holidays, Yom Kippur and Passover, with
a prayer. That prayer calls for "next year in Jerusalem".
Seventy years ago, the Jewish people came home to
Jerusalem. We are grateful to the United States for its
courageous decision and we call on all the nations of
the world to join us this year in Jerusalem, the capital
of the State of Israel.

