I thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting to discuss the latest developments in Venezuela, especially the terrorist and mercenary attacks that took place on 3 May, as well as the looming threat of an armed attack, in an imminent breach of the peace in my country and of the entire region, should the aggression continue. When signing the Charter of the United Nations, all States Members committed "to take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and for the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of international disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of the peace". Today that provision is being violated, with impunity and in full contempt of the Charter. In a letter to the Security Council dated 13 May, we demonstrated to the world the acts of armed aggression against my country, which, as per public and irrefutable evidence shared at that time, proved that the Governments of the United States of America and the Republic of Colombia facilitated its planning, training and financing and are, to this day, protecting groups of mercenaries and terrorists who executed an armed attack with the objective of perpetrating indiscriminate killings of innocent civilians, targeting the killing of selected high-level officials of my Government and even the assassination of President Nicolas Maduro. This is a manifest violation of the Charter of the United Nations, international law and multiple resolutions of the Security Council, which are legally binding on all Member States. The Governments of Colombia and the United States of America violated their relevant obligations under international law, particularly as enshrined in at least the following four resolutions. The Security Council, in paragraph 2 of resolution 239 (1967), condemns any State that permits or tolerates "the recruitment of mercenaries, and the provision of facilities to them, with the objective of overthrowing the Governments of States Members of the United Nations". The Security Council, in paragraph 4 of resolution 1269 (1999), called upon States to "prevent and suppress in their territories through all lawful means the preparation and financing of any acts of terrorism". The Security Council, in resolution 1373 (2001), decided that all States shall both refrain from providing any form of support to entities or persons involved in terrorist acts, including by suppressing their recruitment and the supply of weapons to terrorists, and deny safe heaven to those who finance, plan, support or commit terrorist acts. The Security Council, in paragraph 2 of resolution 1456 (2003), called upon States to "assist each other, to the maximum extent possible, in the prevention, investigation, prosecution and punishment of acts of terrorism, wherever they occur", while stressing, in paragraph 3, that States "must bring to justice those who finance, plan, support or commit terrorist acts or provide safe heavens, in accordance with international law, in particular on the basis of the principle to extradite or prosecute". As of today, the Governments of the United States of America and Colombia continue to refuse any sort of contact with relevant Venezuelan authorities in order to establish the facts and avoid impunity by ensuring that those responsible are brought to justice. As a result, those Governments are violating their obligations under existing bilateral treaties on mutual legal assistance in criminal matters. Even more, as of today, the United States Government continues to provide safe heaven to the leaders of the armed incursion against Venezuela. Today I must report that the operations to capture the individuals involved in this armed aggression are still ongoing, as we are aware of the existence of other groups of mercenaries and terrorists who were trying to carry out their criminal plans in other regions of our country. As a matter of fact, an attack against our national water system took place on 14 May, which, apart from constituting itself a clear violation of resolution 2341 (2017), on the protection of critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks, confirms the veracity of the public statements by the criminals, who still remain at large, regarding the preparation of further acts of aggression and the training of yet more groups of mercenaries and terrorists. At the same time, further evidence continues to come to light clearly pointing to both Washington and Bogota as the main plotters behind the aggression. Furthermore, there are at least three additional developments that I must also denounce today, as they are part of the continued systematic campaign of aggression against my country. First, on 13 May, the United States Government included Venezuela in an unlawful unilateral list, falsely condemning my country as being among those that do not cooperate fully with counter-terrorism efforts. There could be nothing more cynical than such an accusation, coming just days after the perpetration of an armed attack with mercenaries and terrorists, with the full support of United States Government officials and the direct participation of United States citizens and companies. In addition, the following day, on 14 May, a senior Trump Administration official told Reuters News Agency that consideration was being given to designating several Venezuelan security agencies as "terrorist organizations". This is a manifest threat to the peace and security of my country, as the United States Government is aiming at fabricating a narrative in which, according to its supremacist notion claiming its national laws to be universal, it may take "decisive defensive action" and proceed with the assassination of top officials from Venezuela's security agencies, and, by using its propaganda machine, then twist the crime and present it as a counter- terrorism operation. It is a sad fact of our times that the United States Government expects to openly get away with murder by normalizing the unlawful killing of top national officials around the world through the sheer use of brute force. Secondly, as we have denounced in previous letters to the Security Council, the United States Government has openly admitted to exerting pressure on companies to refrain from supplying gasoline to Venezuela, resulting in the current shortages throughout the country. In that context, allow me to ask the following question: what would happen if, in the midst of the coronavirus disease pandemic, New York City were deliberately left without gasoline? That would undoubtedly constitute a crime against humanity, which is precisely what the Government of President Donald Trump is currently perpetrating against 30 million Venezuelans. Today coercion is coupled with a fresh peril: the threat of the use of military force against five Iranian tankers carrying fuel that are en route to Venezuela, in violation, among other things, of the freedoms of trade and navigation. If that threat materializes, it would constitute actual armed aggression against a civilian Iranian vessel and against the Venezuelan people as a whole. In that context, I wish to stress that a naval blockade is an act of war under international law, particularly if not authorized by the Security Council on the basis of Article 41 of the Charter or applied pursuant to the right of self-defence. Therefore, the current threats being made by the United States Administration are nothing more than a military act of aggression against civilian vessels carrying vital goods for our people and coming from a country that has engaged in legal trade with my own. In the midst of a pandemic, forbidding those vessels from reaching our ports would thus constitute an act of extermination amounting to a crime against humanity. Perversely, the United States Government insists on portraying itself as our saviour, claiming to be the major donor of humanitarian assistance to Venezuela, and now even dares to accuse our Government of obstructing the provision of United States assistance, when the truth is that everyone willing to support our country has been able to do so through the relevant United Nations agencies. Thirdly, on 13 May international media revealed the existence of a "Venezuela reconstruction unit" within the United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Office, through which discussions were held between United Kingdom officials, Venezuelan opposition figures and those who plotted the recent armed incursion on the promotion of and the need to provide guarantees of preferred status to British businesses in my country once the act of aggression had successfully been carried out. This new evidence that has now come to light, together with the pillaging of more than $1.7 billion in Venezuelan gold by the Bank of England, demonstrates once again how the British Government is an opportunistic accomplice in the colonial looting of Venezuelan wealth. In addition, British warships remain off our territorial waters, with a hostile and confrontational attitude, together with Dutch, French and United States warships, conveniently disguised as anti-drug-trafficking operations but in fact aimed at illegally establishing a naval blockade against our nation. The combination of military provocations with information operations is a replay of the old trick of plausible deniability used in covert assaults. In that context, it is noteworthy that just hours ago international media revealed that a powerful Colombian drug-trafficking organization known as "Los Pachenca", which controls that country's La Guajira region and which supported the mercenaries and terrorists that participated in the armed attack of 3 May against my country, is in possession of precise operational information on the surveillance routes and the locations of Colombian and United States warships in the Caribbean. That official, top-secret information is being used by the cartel to avoid operations allegedly being carried out for counter-narcotic purposes. This proves that the real purpose of warships in my region is not to fight drug trafficking but to attack Venezuela. This is yet more evidence of the coordination that exists between the intelligence agencies of those countries and narco-paramilitary groups. It is a classic example of the "all options are on the table" strategy in the clandestine war against Venezuela, under the pretext of an alleged war on drugs. Behind it all is the very same mind that applied that very same combination in Nicaragua during the 1980s, that is, the use of drug lords, covert operations and mercenaries in a dirty war. Cruelly, one of the individuals who was responsible for this more than 35 years ago is now repeating his crimes today in Venezuela - literally the very same individual. I am referring to Elliott Abrams, one of the darkest characters in our region's history. On 14 December 1974, the General Assembly unanimously adopted resolution 3314 (X XIX), which in its article 1 defines aggression as "the use of armed force by a State against the sovereignty, territorial integrity or political independence of another State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the Charter of the United Nations" and includes as such acts both "the blockade of the ports or coasts of a State by the armed forces of another State" and "the sending by or on behalf of a State of armed bands, groups, irregulars or mercenaries, which carry out acts of armed force against another State", as set out in its article 3, paragraphs (c) and (g), respectively. That text fits perfectly the description of the most recent events in Venezuela. Consequently, while urging the Security Council to fulfil the duties and responsibilities entrusted to it by the Charter of the United Nations in relation to the maintenance of international peace and security, we request that it once and for all not only determine the threat that the warmongering policies of the Governments of Colombia and the United States of America represent to the peace of both Venezuela and the region, but also to both recognize the acts of aggression that have been committed against my country and demand that the perpetrators immediately bring to an end their criminal practices, including the use or threat of use of force and the commission of further armed attacks, inter alia, through the use of mercenaries and terrorists. The United States Government and its allies are creating a lawless space in international relations where they can ignore their obligations under international law and impose tyrannical, whimsical and colonial practices on the rest of the world. Thus, in their minds, the supremacy of their national interest justifies the most abhorrent crimes, as is the case with protecting the "good terrorists and mercenaries" who attacked Venezuela if they serve the expansion of United States power. The Security Council must enforce the notion of legality in international relations under the principle, as set out in article 5, paragraph 1, of General Assembly resolution 3314 (X XIX), that "no consideration of whatever nature, whether political, economic, military or otherwise, may serve as a justification for aggression". That is the only way to further peace and security among nations. Today, in the midst of a deadly pandemic that is affecting all of humankind and which requires the full attention of our national Government to protect the lives of our people, we are facing an imminent armed attack that, because of its genocidal effects, amounts to a crime against humanity. Given the seriousness of the situation and its potential escalation, inaction from the Security Council at the current juncture will only embolden those Governments to continue with their warmongering and criminal plans, as has been the case thus far, considering the fact that the Colombian and United States Governments have doubled down on their aggression against Venezuela, in breach of international law and the Charter of the United Nations, thereby demonstrating their unrepentant and recidivist nature. Allow me to conclude by stressing that our country does not represent a threat to anyone and expects everyone to learn this lesson: Venezuela is not for sale; it will never be anyone's colony; and our people, with serenity and determination, will fulfil their duty to be free.
