Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation joins
previous speakers in welcoming the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, and in thanking him for his usual lucid
briefing and his frank yet optimistic assessment of the
situation in East Timor and on the mission of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET).

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, in his presentation, addressed the central
objectives that must be achieved by UNTAET in the
process leading up to independence, in relation in
particular to the security situation, refugees, the
humanitarian situation, the judicial situation,
reconstruction, the establishment of an East Timorese
administration and a political transition.

As my delegation has emphasized in previous
briefings, the participation of the East Timorese in
creating and building institutions of governance and
public administration is of fundamental importance if
they are to have a sense of ownership of the process
leading up to independence.

We are therefore heartened by UNTAET's
decision to respond to the East Timorese by sharing
governmental responsibility and having East Timorese
political figures given political responsibility for their
decisions.

We also agree with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General that the process of co-
government is in keeping with resolution 1272 (1999),
which mandates UNTAET to support capacity-building
for self-government. The expansion of the National
Consultative Council from 15 to 33 members, with
wide representation from throughout the territory and
from a wide range of civil society, is an important
development. Arrangements for the East Timorese to
participate in planning, prioritizing and approval of
development proposals and projects is an important
part of this capacity-building.

There have been other positive developments
which my delegation applauds. These include the
conference on reconstruction held at the end of May
and the focus on health, education, infrastructure,
community empowerment, agriculture and education,
as these will provide the foundation for future
sustainable development in East Timor.

The grant of $12.7 million from the World Bank
to rehabilitate hospitals and clinics should lay the
foundation for an efficient health system. The recent
donor meeting in Lisbon is also another welcome
development, and my delegation notes the positive
response of the donor community. We hope that these
commitments will be followed by the early
disbursement of funds for reconstruction and
rehabilitation.

One area of concern to my delegation continues
to be the unemployment situation. Although we
recognize that efforts have been made to create short-
term employment, we believe that long-term solutions
must be found by involving job creation through the
development of private enterprises, and we would wish
to ascertain from the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General the actions taken by UNTAET in
this regard.

My delegation's optimism is tempered by the
recent reports relating to the status of refugees and to
the actions of the militias. We are deeply disturbed by
the news that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has had to
suspend operations to repatriate East Timorese from
three camps in West Timor because of security
concerns, and we believe that security guarantees must
be provided to allow the UNHCR staff to continue their
work unhindered. Equally, my delegation regards as
unacceptable the reported attacks by suspected militias
on United Nations peacekeepers. The sporadic
incidents of violence, particularly along the border
between East Timor and West Timor, continue to be of
concern. We have noted the cooperation that has been
developed between UNTAET and the Government of
Indonesia, and we hope that these issues relating to the
activities of the militias and to the status of refugees
will be addressed with a sense of urgency.

The status of minorities is also of concern to my
delegation, and in this regard the establishment of a
national reconciliation council could act as an
important catalyst.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to commend
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the men and women of UNTAET for their
dedicated and dynamic service, which has seen the
transformation of East Timor over the past 10 months.
We also commend the people of East Timor and their
leaders and wish to assure them of our continued
support as they move towards independence. The East
Timorese have high expectations of the international
community and of the United Nations. We must not let
them down.

