Ms. Bird (Australia): Thank you, Madam President,
for convening this important debate. I also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui for their efforts to give
prominence to the rights and protection of girls and
boys affected by armed conflict.

The profound interest we all share in protecting
the world's most vulnerable citizens, our children, is
evidenced by the fact that the Convention on the Rights of
the Child is the most ratified international human rights
treaty in history. Yet still, in conflicts today, children
are consistently victimized and denied their most basic
protections. For example, in South Sudan, the future
of a generation of children is being jeopardized by
worsening fighting and severe food insecurity caused
by gross political self-interest. Through resolution 2206
(2015), the Security Council established a mechanism
to impose discipline on the peace talks through the use
of targeted sanctions.

But with no sign that either party is genuinely
committed to peace, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) should
immediately list individuals and entities whose actions
target civilians in South Sudan, particularly children.
South Sudan is reliant on its children growing up safely
and with hope for the future.

We must do more to compel non-State actors
to live up to their obligations to protect children in
conflict situations. In their persistent targeting of
children, barbarous groups such as Daesh and Boko
Haram have demonstrated that their actions are bereft
of humanity. Both groups have engaged in systematic
child abduction - a heinous crime used to humiliate,
suppress and terrorize civilians. Abduction during
armed conflict is a serious breach of the rights of
children, and the consequences are dire. They can
amount to additional crimes: we know that thousands
of children have been snatched from their families and
forced to be soldiers, sold as sexual slaves, exploited as
human shields or as unwitting suicide bombers.

It is for those reasons that the Council has listed
child abduction among the six grave violations against
children during armed conflict. As we mark the tenth
anniversary of resolution 1612 (2005), we welcome
the Council's decision today to include abductions as
a trigger for the inclusion of parties into the annexes
of the Secretary-General's annual report (S/2015/409).

Australia commends the work of the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. We encourage the Group to engage directly
with peacekeeping mission leadership - as it did for the
first time last year with the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan - and to better understand contemporary
challenges on the ground.

In United Nations peacekeeping missions, there
must be situation-specific training for all peacekeeping
personnel, including military and police, to address the
full range of grave violations against children, including
abductions. The international community must do
more to prevent grave violations against children
and to end impunity. Condemnation is not enough.
Australiajoins others in endorsing Malaysia's Children
in Armed Conflict Accountability Framework as a
practical resource that can guide States in introducing
accountability measures at the local, national, regional
and international levels.

As the preamble to the United Nations Declaration
of the Rights of the Child states, "Mankind owes to
the children the best it has to give". That is as true in
times of conflict as it is in times ofpeace. We welcome
the Security Council's continued interest in this most
important issue.

