Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased, Sir, to express to you my deep satisfaction at
seeing you preside, for the second time, over the work
of the Security Council during Bangladesh's presidency
of the Council. I am certain that the work done by the
Council under your presidency will be successful.

A number of delegations that spoke before me
have called for the General Assembly to continue to
play the role entrusted to it by the Charter in the
domain of conflict prevention. We find this approach
relevant and believe it merits our support. In addition,
we were pleased to hear that the President of the
General Assembly will be organizing a similar debate
next month on this very important issue. But, since I
am speaking to the Security Council, I would like to
submit a number of remarks regarding items in the
Secretary-General's report that have attracted our
attention and that I believe are important to refer to.

First of all, there are paragraphs 36, 37 and 39
and recommendation 3 regarding the Secretary-General
presenting informal periodic reports to the Security
Council and the formation of a subsidiary body of the
Council perhaps for every situation, region or area that
requires it. These are matters that are best, or should be
best, approached with extreme caution and care. The
dividing lines between what constitutes a threat to
international peace and security and what falls within
the scope or responsibility of a specific government are
extremely fuzzy and obscure in many cases. On the
other hand, determining the point at which the Security
Council may or should intervene in a specific conflict
that threatens international peace and security is a very
complicated issue on which there may be many views
and opinions. The Council should make a decision only
if there is complete unanimity. I am not speaking here
about clear cases, such as those of foreign occupation,
or clear violations, such as ethnic cleansing.
Intervention by the Council in such cases is part and
parcel of the responsibility entrusted to it under the
Charter of the United Nations.
Secondly, the fact that the Secretary-General
would enhance his traditional role in the prevention of
conflicts is a matter that we welcome within the
framework of checks and balances established by the
Charter regarding his role and the responsibilities of
the principal bodies and organs of the United Nations.
We also welcome the report's statement that the work
of the Secretary-General in the area of conflict
prevention should be carried out in full cooperation
with the concerned countries and parties. But we have
a question about recommendation 9, regarding the
enhancing of the traditional role of the Secretary-
General in conflict prevention, in particular about
improving the Secretariat's capacity and resource base
for preventive action. We would like clarification from
the Secretariat. What do they mean by this
recommendation? Before concluding on this point, I
would like to state that the confidence we have in the
Secretary-General to choose the so-called network of
eminent personalities and figures to help in the
prevention of conflicts should not stop the Member
States from having a role in determining the criteria by
which these figures and personalities are to be selected.

Thirdly, we were extremely disappointed reading
paragraphs 86 to 93, regarding disarmament. We have
not found a single reference to any other kind of
weapon that threatens international peace and security
besides small weapons. While we fully understand the
threat posed by these weapons to the security of
communities, particularly in cases of intra-state civil
strife and conflict, nevertheless the report should not
have ignored the importance that many countries attach
to achieving nuclear disarmament and to addressing the
problems posed by other unconventional weapons, the
existence of which threatens whole communities and
societies. We call on the Secretary-General to correct
this lapse as soon as possible.

We have a number of other comments on points
in the report of the Secretary-General. We will deal
with them in our statement to the General Assembly
during the discussion of this issue.

Allow me before concluding, however, to refer to
a lapse that surprised us. Paragraph 77 of the report
gives a list of examples of areas in which there are
missions supported by the Department of Political
Affairs. Among these examples there is a reference to
"the Occupied Territories". Our understanding of this
reference is that it applies to the occupied Palestinian
territories. If our understanding of this is correct, and
this is most likely, we wonder how this lapse in
referring to Palestine occurred in this context. Is this a
deliberate error, despite the many different reviews to
which such a report is subjected? We are posing this
question to the Secretary-General in all seriousness so
that he can rectify such error or lapse, and so that he
can find out how such an important report could be
issued with such an incomplete and truncated
expression.

What we find positive about the Secretary-
General's report is the proposed coordination between
the principal bodies in the field of conflict prevention.
We call on the Security Council to increase its
coordination with the General Assembly, which has the
more general and comprehensive role in the field of
conflict prevention, and with the Economic and Social
Council when required. The result should be one policy
and one vision for the Organization in this very
important field.

