I wish to begin by thanking your delegation for convening this meeting during a very difficult period. Our appreciation also goes to Mr. Mladenov for delivering the Secretary- General's quarterly report on resolution 2334 (2016), and his update of the Council on the latest developments on the ground. With that background, I would like to make the following pertinent points: First, the creeping annexation of Israel in the Occupied Palestinian Territories must be stopped. Indonesia deplores this reprehensible practice, particularly in recent weeks following the outbreak of COVID-19 in the Occupied Palestinian Territory. Based on data of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, since 5 March 2020 when the first seven cases of the disease were discovered in Bethlehem, the Government of Israel has demolished 30 structures in the West Bank belonging to the Palestinians. This is against the background of Israel also announcing plans last month to construct over 17,500 settlement units in the Occupied Palestinian Territories, including in and around East Jerusalem; and on February 27, approving plans for an additional 1,739 units. These brazen efforts clearly violate international law and Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). Moreover, they take advantage of, and jeopardize, the international concern over, and efforts to tackle, the spread of COVID-19. We therefore urge the Security Council not to entertain this slight by Israel, or let these unjustifiable measures go unchecked. Second, urgency to assist Palestinians to address the outbreak of COVID-19 in the Occupied Palestinian Territories. While we continue to maintain pressure on Israel in this Council concerning the illegality of its actions in the Occupied Territory, it is also imperative that we find ways to help the most vulnerable Palestinian population in the area to respond to COVID-19. In that regard, Indonesia urges the Council to call on Israel to halt all illegal settlement activities, including the destruction of Palestinian properties, that are causing displacements and enhancing the humanitarian crisis of the civilians. We must also urge the Occupying Power to assume its legal obligations to help address the COVID-19 situation in the West Bank and Gaza, among others by ensuring unhindered access to essential health supplies as well as lifting the movement restrictions on patients and health workers We must also appeal to the international community to extend urgent humanitarian support and resources to the Palestinian population, including through the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We also would like to welcome the appointment of Philippe Lazzarini as the Commissioner-General of UNRWA. Third, the need to prepare Gaza to cope with the pandemic. I am particularly worried about the potential impact of COVID-19 on Gaza, as its health-care system was collapsing even before the outbreak. It is common knowledge that its stocks of essential drugs are extremely low, its natural sources of drinkable water largely contaminated, and that its electrical system supplies limited power. As a result, if the situation in Gaza is not addressed, we could witness a large - scale COVID-19 outbreak capable of leading to a devastating humanitarian catastrophe. Before I close, I wish to express my delegation's denunciation of Israel's recent airstrikes in the Gaza Strip. We reject this and all forms of violence, particularly those that are disproportionate and aimed at extending the pain and suffering of helpless Palestinians. Finally, I would like to once again reaffirm Indonesia's long-standing position that the two-state vision, based on various United Nations resolutions, is the only viable solution to the prolonged Palestine-Israeli conflict. While we continue our concerted efforts to fight the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, Indonesia reiterates its call for the early resumption of credible multilateral negotiations on the Question of Palestine guided by the internationally agreed parameters. In closing, I would also like to request the Secretariat to distribute the statement by Mr. Mladenov today to all Council Members as official document of the Council.
