The President: At the outset of the meeting, I
should like, on behalf of the members of the Security
Council, to express our profound sadness and deep
outrage at the horrendous terrorist attacks that took
place in Paris on the evening of 13 November. These
attacks led to the loss of so many precious lives, and
a huge number of casualties. To the families of the
Victims, both French and from 19 other countries, at
this point, and to the people and the Government of
France, the Security Council expresses its heartfelt
sympathy and condolences. These and other recent
attacks, including the terrorist attacks in Beirut on
12 November, have affected countries and people
from all over the world. The members of the Security
Council offer their sympathy and condolences to all of
the countries affected.

I now invite Council members to rise to observe
a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of the
victims.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute ofsilence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between

1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of
today's meeting. In accordance with the understanding
reached among the members of the Council, I shall take
it that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2015/21.

The meeting rose at 3.10pm.

