Mr. King (United Kingdom): We are grateful for
the reports before the Council and for today's briefing.
We share the revulsion of others at the abuses we have
heard described and at the lack of respect for human
life that they represent. We have heard about rape and
mutilation being used as weapons of war, and about
pillage being used by armed groups as a means of
sustaining their operations - in other words, as a
means of continuing the conflict. That disregard for the
ordinary people of the Congo seems to be common to
all the parties to the conflict. It needs to stop.

As other speakers have underlined, we need to
see an end to the culture of impunity. But human rights
also carry a positive obligation, especially on those in
authority. We need to see the development in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo of a culture of
dignity and respect for all, and it has to start at the top.
The establishment of law and order, respect for human
rights and justice must be top priorities for the
transitional Government. The power-sharing
arrangements of the new transitional Government need
to work in the interest of all the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We need to avoid a
situation in which those arrangements become a new
forum for conflict among the political elite.

Looking further ahead, the transition will need to
lead to free and fair elections. The transitional
Government needs from the start to create a culture of
political freedom, freedom of expression and freedom
of the media. Above all, all the Congolese parties need
to listen to the people they seek to represent and
respect their rights, needs and wishes.

We would be grateful for any further comments
from Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Ramcharan on how they
see the monitoring of human rights being further
strengthened - for example, involving civil society,
especially at the local level. More generally, how can
we promote civil society involvement in the transition
process? Also, as we have heard, some good efforts
have been made to tackle gender-related issues, but is
there more we can do, including through MONUC, to
ensure that women play a full part in all these areas of
the transition, as well as playing a wider role in
government and development?

