Mr. Madavo: Madam President, Mr. Secretary-
General, we are indeed honoured and very pleased to
be invited to participate in the discussion on this
occasion.

As the Council knows, the World Bank has been
supporting the Government of Guinea-Bissau in its
reconstruction efforts. Our Board approved an
economic rehabilitation and recovery credit in May that
provides financial and technical assistance to
reconstruction, including the demobilization of former
combatants. The International Monetary Fund (IMF)
has also provided support through its emergency post-
conflict facility.

World Bank staff are in frequent contact with the
national authorities and with our multilateral and
bilateral partners. We believe that, while the overall
situation remains fragile because of tense relations
within the existing coalition and the visible influence
of the military in a generally unstable neighbourhood,
the overall situation has improved in recent months on
both the political and economic fronts.

Despite the recent instability in Guinea-Bissau,
we are reassured by the elected Government's
commitment to dialogue as an approach to resolve
problems. We have also been impressed by the progress
made in the preparation of new projects proposed for
World Bank support and by the Government's overall
reconstruction efforts.

While progress has been made in the above-
mentioned areas, much remains to be done to restore
normalcy. The energy situation is desperate; the
financial sector is very weak; landmines pose a danger
and, in addition, basic social services such as education
and health have yet to be fully restored. The World
Bank stands ready to assist the Government in those
key sectors, but Guinea-Bissau will need to rely on the
continued and expanded assistance of the international
community if it is to overcome some of these
challenges.

The World Bank has been working closely with
the IMF, the African Development Bank, the European
Union, the West African Development Bank and other
multilateral partners in Guinea-Bissau, including the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the World Health
Organization (WHO) and the World Food Programme
(WFP).

We appreciate, in particular, the generous
assistance of the Government of the Netherlands,
with which we have been collaborating on
the demobilization, reinsertion and reintegration
programme. The Netherlands has been instrumental in
financing the preparation of the programme, which is
critical to complement the technical assistance being
provided by the International Organization for
Migration (IOM). While programme preparation has
been moving somewhat more slowly than initially
expected, after the deployment of technical assistance
by the IOM, the situation has improved considerably.

A census of combatants has been under way, and
we expect that in January a pilot programme will be
launched, with a demobilization programme moving to
full implementation immediately afterwards.

To mobilize financing for the programme, a
multi-donor trust fund was recently set up in the World
Bank at the request of the Government. Though the
Netherlands has made an important initial contribution
of six million guilders, this falls short of what is
needed and assistance will be required from other
partners.

The Council is aware that Guinea-Bissau is a
highly indebted country which is being considered for
debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
(HIPC) Debt Initiative The staff of the World Bank and
the IMF are currently preparing a HIPC decision-point
document which will be presented to our Board on
14 December. Accompanying the analysis of our staff
will be the Government's interim poverty reduction
strategy paper, which it has recently completed after
broad consultations with domestic stakeholders and
external partners.

The interim poverty reduction strategy paper
constitutes a serious initial effort to put together a
package to promote sustained growth and poverty
reduction. It highlights selected areas such as
governance, demobilization, education, health and, no
less important, the fight against HIV/AIDS.

The Government has already mobilized
significant support from other donors but will require
additional financial help to achieve its objectives. The
proposed HIPC debt relief would give Guinea-Bissau a
reduction of 85 per cent in net present value terms on
its multilateral and bilateral official debt. This would
be the deepest debt relief granted to date. The debt
relief would help Guinea-Bissau to keep up progress
towards national reconciliation and to lay the
foundations of sustained growth and poverty reduction.
It would also contribute to paving the way for easing
the tensions in the subregion, which has seen its share
of violence, instability and growing poverty.

At a recent discussion of a HIPC preliminary
document, the directors of the World Bank
acknowledged Guinea-Bissau's track record in
implementing macroeconomic reforms since 1998, and
commended the country for its progress in
reconciliation and reconstruction after the violent
conflict that erupted in June 1998. They noted that,
despite improvements achieved so far, Guinea-Bissau
faces considerable challenges under the reform agenda.
These include maintaining sound macroeconomic
policies, improving governance, carrying out
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants,
developing the private sector and reallocating public
expenditures towards activities that promote growth,
reduce poverty and enhance access to social services.

The executive directors of the World Bank further
reconfirmed their preliminary determination that
Guinea-Bissau is eligible for assistance under the HIPC
Initiative, as I have already mentioned, on the basis of
its high debt burden and the track record of
performance under programmes supported by both the
World Bank and the IMF.

To summarize, progress is being made to bring
peace and stability, so necessary for Guinea-Bissau's
development and the reduction of poverty among its
people. We believe that the international community
should take a risk for peace and accompany this
process. The World Bank and the IMF are prepared to
do their part in coalition with other partners and in
support of the Government's own efforts.

