Ms. Nakamitsu: I thank the members of the
Security Council for this opportunity to brief the
Council again on the implementation of resolution 2118
(2013), on the elimination of the chemical weapons
programme of the Syrian Arab Republic.

The Office for Disarmament Affairs has been
in regular contact with the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on this
matter. I spoke to the OPCW Director-General this past
Thursday, 1 November, and look forward to seeing him
in two weeks, when I travel to The Hague to deliver
a message on behalf of the Secretary-General at the
opening of the Review Conference of the Chemical
Weapons Convention.

There have been some new developments related to
this file in the past month; in other areas there has been
little change. Efforts to clarify the outstanding issues
regarding the initial declaration of the Syrian Arab
Republic remain as I previously informed. Following
the analysis by the OPCW of the information provided
to it by Syria on 10 July, the Director-General wrote
a letter to the Syrian Deputy Foreign Minister, dated
28 September, which reiterated the need to resolve
the outstanding issues and invited Syria to continue
working to clarify the remaining gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies. That message was underlined at
working-level meetings that took place between the
OPCW and the Syrian National Authority.

In that context, I welcome the Director-General's
news that the inspections at the Barzah and Jamrayah
facilities are now under way. The conduct of the
inspections is in accordance with the decision of the
OPCW Executive Council taken at its eighty-third
session, which required the OPCW to carry out two
yearly inspections of those sites.

With regard to the OPCW Fact-finding Mission
(FFM) in the Syrian Arab Republic and its work in
relation to the alleged use of chemical weapons in
Douma, the Director-General informed me that the
FFM. is close to drawing its conclusions and will be
issuing the report in due course. Like the Council, I look
forward to receiving the final report on that incident.

The FFM. is also investigating five additional
reported incidents brought to the attention of the
Director-General by the National Authority of the
Syrian Arab Republic: two incidents in Kharbit
Masasnah on 7 July 2017 and 4 August 2017; one
incident in Al-Salamiyah on 9 August 2017; one
incident in Yarmouk, Damascus, on 22 October 2017;
and one in Souran on 8 November 2017. So far there
is no indication of when a report on those incidents is
likely to be issued.

At its fourth special session, in June, the Conference
of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention
decided, among other things, that the OPCW Secretariat

"shall put in place arrangements to identify the
perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons in
the Syrian Arab Republic in those instances in
which the OPCW Fact-finding Mission in Syria
determines or has determined that use or likely use
occurred, and cases for which the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism has not
issued a report".

The OPCW Director-General has now provided two
progress reports in that regard to the OPCW's Executive
Council and to the Secretary-General. He continues to
make progress in implementing his mandate.
Although five years have now passed since the
adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), there is still work
to be done before it can be considered to have been
fully implemented. Moreover, as long as the use of
chemical weapons is ongoing or the threat of their use
lingers, we must retain our focus on the issue and not
allow ourselves to become inured to it. We will need
unity in the Security Council if we are to collectively
re-establish the norm against chemical weapons. The
vitality and credibility of the broader disarmament and
non-proliferation architecture depend on it. The use of
these weapons must always be seen as a violation of a
deeply held taboo. It is therefore imperative to identify
those responsible and hold them accountable.

In a related matter, and before concluding, I want
to note that allegations of a possible planned use of
chemical weapons in Idlib continue to surface. The
Secretary-General has made clear his concern about
the continued use of chemical weapons, as well as the
risks of a humanitarian catastrophe in the event of a
full-scale military operation in Idlib province. He has
called on all parties to exercise restraint. I want to once
again underscore the vital importance of upholding
humanitarian principles and the Chemical Weapons
Convention in Syria.

