The Middle East, cradle of millenary civilizations and the melting pot of three great religions, has for some decades been the scene of conflicts with unspeakable consequences. From Palestine to Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan, Yemen and the Islamic Republic of Iran, there are countries and peoples exposed to violence, desolation and despair, even though everything predestines them to peace, harmony and prosperity. My delegation duly followed the statements made today by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov and Mr. Ahmed Abdul Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, all describing the prevailing situation in the Middle East. I thank them most sincerely. One briefing after another, the Council has pronounced itself on various aspects of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Since 1993, despite the Oslo Accords, Israel, the occupying Power, has accelerated rather than halted its policy of building settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories, expropriating land and ignoring the legitimate Palestinian demand for a State - a demand that is also supported by the international community. Many peace processes and plans have been adopted by the international community in order to find a lasting solution to this protracted conflict. Regrettably, the peace processes have been merely processes, but without peace. Yet benchmarks have been set, including by the Council, to pave the way for dialogue and peace. The occupation by force and seizure of Palestinian land, which are contrary to international law, should end, in accordance with the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016). The Gaza Strip, the only territory spared, is under a blockade that has made it an uninhabitable place, in the words of the United Nations itself. Israel's assertion of sovereignty over the whole of Jerusalem is also a violation of international law. It is also a war crime for Israel, the occupying Power, to settle its own civilian population in an occupied zone. It cannot be said often enough: the settlement policy violates both the principle and the spirit of the peace accords. Another principle that should underpin the momentum for peace was set out in resolution 1515 (2003), in which the Security Council, together with the international community, enshrined the two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and security, in strict compliance with the 1967 borders, as the basis for the settlement of this conflict. Twenty-seven years after the signing of the first peace agreement, the Palestinians, sadly, are no closer today to self-determination and the establishment of an independent State than they were yesterday. For instance, a Palestinian youth of 27 years today would have lived only under occupation, with its associated violence and deprivation of all kinds. She would have experienced only detention and the disproportionate use of force, which has also been meted out against women and children. And yet it is my country's conviction that both Israelis and Palestinians are peoples capable of overcoming this suffering, which afflicts them and distresses us. They have proved it by pooling their efforts in the face of a common enemy, the coronavirus disease, both in Gaza and in the West Bank. Israel, whose genius is known to all, must build peace by renouncing the annexation of parts of the occupied West Bank. Such action, if carried out, would constitute a serious violation of international law and a grave threat to international peace and security. In this regard, my country supports the Secretary-General's call to all stakeholders - Israelis, Palestinians, States of the region and the international community at large - to take immediate steps to allow the parties to step back and begin the process of re-engaging in a dialogue that will put an end to unilateral action, chart a positive course and avoid falling into chaos. I would like to conclude by saying that the time has come for us to put an end to this optical illusion, which has paved the way for the triumph of peace of the strongest, a peace of the victors. It is therefore high time to prevent the Council's paralysis on the Israeli-Palestinian question from causing the death by asphyxiation of the two-State solution, which we must save at all costs. I sincerely hope that, through their statements, Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Palestine, and Mr. Dany Danon, Permanent Representative of Israel, will guide us on the road to reconciliation and peace between their peoples.
