The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Greece.

I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Egeland, for
today's very interesting briefing on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, northern Uganda
and other areas.

The political situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, although still fragile, gives us
reason to be optimistic about an overall improvement
of the situation as soon as a democratically elected
Government is in place. In the meantime, violence still
poses an ongoing threat to untold numbers of
Congolese, including the sexual abuse of women,
particularly in the strife-torn eastern provinces, while
in Katanga the problem of 150,000 internally displaced
persons persists.

We should commend the efforts of the United
Nations humanitarian agencies working in the field -
engaging in a humanitarian marathon, I would say -
and, as Mr. Egeland said, saving lives on a daily basis,
despite the dire conditions in which they work.

There is also hope for a political settlement in
northern Uganda following the Juba agreement with
the Lord's Resistance Army. The 20-year conflict has
caused immense suffering, with thousands of victims
and 2 million people displaced. Everybody has
understood that no military solution could be applied.
Only the success of the peace process can create the
sense of security necessary for the safe return of the
internally displaced persons and the rebuilding of the
Acholi and Ugandan societies. We should do our
utmost to support it. Regional actors and the
international community should spare no effort to
ensure that resources are adequately allocated to
northern Uganda, including for humanitarian assistance
and the sustainable reintegration of the conflict-
affected population.

As far as the Sudan and, more particularly, Darfur
are concerned, in 2003 we had the largest operation in
the world, which was extremely effective. Now,
unfortunately, it is at the brink of total collapse,
touching what some have called the Rwandan
threshold. Indicatively, during the past few weeks, the
number of gross violations of human rights, including
rape, has risen dramatically. The number of internally
displaced persons has risen by 50,000, while
humanitarian access has been severely restricted due to
the fact that humanitarian workers are being targeted.
In July alone, nine humanitarian workers were killed.

In that context, we believe strongly that the only
way to improve the situation is if we all work
collectively to implement resolution 1706 (2006) and
to uphold the Darfur Peace Agreement. As we have
said before, there cannot be any military solution to the
Darfur crisis.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. Egeland to
respond to the comments and questions raised.

