Mr. Sidibe (spoke in French): It is an honour and
privilege to be here today. I would like to thank the
Security Council for inviting me. I would especially
like to thank the President of the Republic of Gabon
and to commend him for his leadership in dramatically
scaling up the response to AIDS in his own country. On
behalf of the 30 million people who have died of
AIDS, I also wish to thank him for being here today.
His presence among us illustrates his personal
commitment to this cause and his ongoing efforts on
behalf of peace, security and stability throughout the
world.

I would also like to thank my friend Alain Le
Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for once again drawing the attention of the
Security Council to the critical relationship between
AIDS and international peace and security.

The global response to AIDS is at a crossroads.
The Security Council adopted resolution 1308 (2000)
more than 10 years ago, and the General Assembly
adopted the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS
in 2001. We have made significant progress since then,
providing HIV prevention, treatment, care and support
services to peacekeepers and other uniformed
personnel. But I remain deeply concerned by the ways
AIDS still intersects with conflict. AIDS affects not
only peacekeepers and others in uniform; it also has an
impact on the populations with whom they interact.
That is why resolution 1983 (2011), which has just
been adopted, is so important to us.

Resolution 1308 (2000) was a watershed moment
in the response to AIDS. We are indebted to the late
Richard Holbrooke for backing that resolution so
passionately. What he said then still holds true today,
namely, that it was not the end of the process, but just a
cornerstone for the future. Member States were right to
recognize AIDS as a potential threat to peace and
security. I want to thank the Secretary-General for
repeatedly calling attention to AIDS in his reports to
the Security Council.

Progress against HIV infection in people in
uniform has been positive, but it remains uneven and
insufficient. The risk that HIV poses to peace and
security is far more nuanced than we thought in 2000.
The nature of conflict and the epidemic itself have
evolved. We are convinced that the fresh political
commitments stemming from resolution 1983 (2011)
will enable the United Nations to effectively contribute
to the efforts of Member States to address the impact of
AIDS on peace and security. In so doing, Member
States will themselves be encouraged to strengthen
their response to AIDS in national strategic plans and
to put in place appropriate strategies, means and
resources.

Tragically, we have seen an increase in the use of
sexual violence as a weapon of war. This new
resolution is moving in the right direction in calling for
HIV prevention efforts among uniformed services to be
aligned with efforts to prevent sexual violence in
conflict.

The disproportionate burden of HIV on women is
a serious obstacle to their full participation in efforts to
prevent and resolve conflicts and in peacebuilding. It is
my hope that the new resolution will motivate all
parties concerned to better empower women and
strengthen the capacities of national health systems and
civil society networks in order to provide sustainable
assistance to women infected or affected by HIV in
conflict and post-conflict settings.

The response to AIDS has also changed
dramatically since the adoption of resolution 1308
(2000). Today we have the capacity to provide
treatment on a broad scale and to target prevention to
populations at highest risk of HIV infection. We have
seen that post-conflict and transition periods increase
the risk of HIV transmission and of sexual violence.
We know how to address both of those challenges. We
have made progress and must now scale up those
efforts. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
in close collaboration with UNAIDS, wishes to work
with Member States on disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and on security sector reform. That
will allow countries to benefit from peacekeepers who
are stronger, healthy and fit for even the most difficult
peacekeeping missions.
(spoke in English)

Since the adoption of resolution 1308 (2000), we
have come to understand that peacekeepers and the
millions of people in uniform can play a leading role in
HIV issues, as they secure peace around the world.
Their extensive contacts with populations in conflict,
post-conflict and other settings position them as agents
of positive change, particularly with respect to
preventing violence against women and girls in
conflict.

I hope this new resolution will reinvigorate
global and regional partnerships that are working to
prevent conflict, ensure security and build peace. These
partnerships can ensure that the United Nations
contributes to building government and civil society
capacities of Member States. There are symbiotic
actions in the General Assembly to ensure that this
happens. We are acutely aware that global, national and
personal insecurity will undermine our efforts to
achieve universal access to HIV/AIDS prevention,
treatment, care and support. This new resolution is key
to realizing exactly what the Secretary-General just
mentioned: zero new HIV infections, zero
discrimination and zero AIDS-related deaths.

