Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I thank the Secretary-
General for his latest report on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

New Zealand has been pleased to see progress in
Afghanistan, both on the political front and in terms of
counter-insurgency operations over the past year, as the
Ambassador of Afghanistan reported this morning, but
the overall situation does remain of concern. The
security situation, especially in the South and the East,
seriously hampers development and limits the reach of
the Afghan Government. Opium production is
undermining Afghanistan's future. There is a need for
much greater effort to develop alternative sustainable
livelihoods.

We see security, governance, development and
reconciliation of the various factions in Afghanistan as
the four key areas of focus for the Afghan Government,
acting with the support of the international community.
To a significant extent, those four areas of focus are
interdependent. The relative weight given to each is
important. We believe that, in the context of a
comprehensive approach, there is a need to rebalance,
giving added weight to political reconciliation,
governance and development.

Since 2001, New Zealand has contributed
military personnel to Afghanistan and provides a
Provincial Reconstruction Team in Bamyan province.
New Zealand personnel also support the International
Security Assistance Force headquarters and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, as well as
police training and mentoring in Bamyan. Alongside
those contributions to security, New Zealand
contributes to other priority areas of the Afghanistan
Compact, such as rural livelihood programmes,
education and health services, and capacity
development of provincial governmental and non-
governmental and civil society organizations. We
support the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission through a core contribution. All
programming seeks to empower women, as we see
women's participation as a key to achieving peace and
security.

New Zealand endorses the importance attached
by the Secretary-General in his report to assistance
with the building of local governance structures, which
is a priority for the Government of Afghanistan. We
also welcome the readiness he has signalled for the
United Nations to play a more central role in the
coordination of international aid and to help promote
political reconciliation in Afghanistan. The role of the
new Special Representative, Mr. Kai Eide, will take on
added importance as we enter that new phase in the
struggle to secure Afghanistan's future, and we wish
him well on his assignment.

In closing, while we welcome the progress in
Afghanistan in recent years, we also appreciate that the
international community needs to remain committed to
sustained efforts for Afghanistan to have a positive
future.

