Mr. Clay (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
The United Kingdom is deeply concerned about
the recent violence in Gaza and Israel, including the
civilian casualties. We must do everything we can to
avoid another devastating war, which would compound
the already awful humanitarian and security conditions
that ordinary Gazans face and further threaten the
security of Israeli border communities. We urge all
parties to show restraint, and we welcome the return
to calm of the past few days. We strongly support the
mediation efforts of the international community led
by Egypt and the United Nations, and urge for talks to
continue aimed at achieving enduring peace in Gaza
under the control of the Palestinian Authority.

We strongly condemn the firing of projectiles from
Gaza towards Israel. Our Ambassador to Israel visited
communities affected by the rocket fire on Tuesday.
Hamas and other factions must end such attacks
immediately. The recent deaths on both sides of the
conflict are alarming. In order to protect civilians, it
is crucial to ensure that a ceasefire is agreed on and
maintained as part of a political process that sees
the Palestinian Authority return to Gaza and the
restrictions on the Gazan people and economy lifted.
As Mr. Mladenov made clear today, no effort must
be spared to reverse the spiral of violence. The cycle
of conflict in Gaza has gone on for too long and the
civilian populations in Gaza and Israel have suffered
the consequences. We call on Hamas, the Palestinian
Authority and Israel to refrain from any action that
could lead to further deterioration.

We remain deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Gaza and have been holding
frequent discussions with the Government of Israel
about the importance of easing its restrictions on Gaza.
The United Kingdom welcomes the recent efforts to
improve the humanitarian situation, especially the
increase in the supply of electricity from between
four to six hours to 12 hours a day, and the Palestinian
Authority's continued payment of salaries and other
costs. As others have done, we also welcome the recent
contributions that have been made to close the funding
gap for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and we reiterate
the United Kingdom's support for the Agency.

If the situation in Gaza is to improve, it requires
political resolve. The October 2017 reconciliation
agreement was a good start, but now all the Palestinian
factions must work together to implement an agreement.
We strongly support the efforts of Egypt, the Special
Coordinator and the wider international community
to achieve that. The United Kingdom will continue to
urge the parties to prioritize progress towards reaching
a durable solution for Gaza and to take the necessary
practical steps to ensure Gaza's reconstruction and
economic recovery. That is the only way to improve the
living standards of ordinary Palestinians in Gaza and
guarantee Israel's long-term security.

In conclusion, the people of Israel and Gaza have
the right to live without constant fear for their security,
and both peoples have the right to live safely and in
peace. Urgent steps must be taken now to address the
underlying causes of the conflicts. It is in everyone's
interest for peace and stability to prevail in Israel and
the occupied Palestinian territories. Now more than
ever we need a political process that delivers a two-
State solution.

