Ms. Juul (Norway): I will today focus my statement
on the Middle East peace process, as I am conscious of
the time restriction that the President just mentioned.
A slightly longer version of our statement that touches
on the situation in Syria, Yemen and Libya can be
read online.

There is a strong international consensus on how
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict should be resolved.
Only a negotiated two-State solution can create durable
peace. A political solution cannot be substituted by
institution-building and economic development alone,
even if those are essential building blocks for a future
Palestinian State.

We are deeply concerned about the current fiscal
crisis of the Palestinian Authority (PA), especially
regarding the clearance revenues of the PA budget,
which amounts to two thirds of its entire budget. In
March, based on a recent law adopted by the Knesset,
the Israeli Government decided to withhold 6 per
cent of the revenues it collects on behalf of the PA for
Palestinian prisoner payments, which was followed
by a Palestinian decision not to accept any clearance
revenues unless the entire transfers are reinstated.
The PA is currently implementing serious austerity
measures that are not sustainable. The donors cannot
fill the financing gap, and the existence of the PA could
be at stake if the fiscal crisis is not resolved. Norway
urges both parties to do their utmost to be pragmatic
and find a practical solution.

The situation in Gaza remains of great concern.
The people of Gaza will not have a normal life and the
economy cannot be sustained without lifting the current
closure regime. The PA, Israel and the donors must
mobilize support for the humanitarian package and
key infrastructure projects for Gaza. A condition for
further development is that the PA must return to Gaza.

Norway will chair the next meeting of the
international donor group to Palestine, the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians, which will be hosted by the
European Union in Brussels tomorrow, 30 April. In
addition to addressing the current fiscal crisis of the
PA, we will take the opportunity to urge the parties to
close some of the outstanding fiscal files. Progress on
those files is essential to stabilizing and improving the
situation towards a negotiated two-State solution. We
call on the parties to demonstrate genuine commitment
to the two-State solution and to take credible steps
to reverse the current negative trends on the ground,
including settlement activities and acts of violence.

Norway has a long-standing commitment to peace
and security in the Middle East, and we will remain an
active and consistent partner to achieve that goal.

