Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to take this opportunity to express
my country's warm welcome to Mr. Stephen O'Brien,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs. I
wish him complete success as he carries out the noble
tasks he has set out to fulfil at this very difficult time.

This is a time of extremism and violence resulting
in unprecedented levels of crime and very challenging
humanitarian conditions in many countries. It is a
time in which terrorism is being fuelled by the policy
failures of several Governments. The victims are all our
peoples. This terrorism is destroying our civilization
and cultural heritage, just as it has done in many cities
across Iraq. Recently, in Tadmor, Syria, terrorists
destroyed the historic Temple of Bel-Shamin and killed
one of Syria's most preeminent antiquities experts,
Mr. Khaled Al-Asaad.

We consider Mr. O'Brien's visit in Syria, with
his meetings and interviews with Syrian authorities,
including in his visit to Homs, to be a greatly welcome
preamble to putting things on the right path and
strengthening our transparency in cooperating with
the United Nations in the humanitarian context. We
are comfortable with Mr. O'Brien's ideas on improving
cooperation between the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and Syria. We expect
those exchanges and discussions to remain ongoing for
the benefit of Syria and its people.

In that regard, I would note that the Syrian
Government will continue to cooperate with the United
Nations to facilitate access to humanitarian assistance
for all of its citizens victims of the crisis, wherever
they are, in line with United Nations principles
relating to humanitarian assistance in emergency
situations, pursuant to resolution 46/182 of the General
Assembly and taking into account Syria's sovereignty
and territorial unity and integrity as well as the plans
agreed with the Syrian Government.

This cooperation by the Syrian Government is
only part of the overall humanitarian situation in
Syria, which is dire as a result of foreign military
interference in the country. That interference is the
reason for the increase, fuelling and continuation of
the phenomenon of terrorism in Syria and the region. It
is also why progress has slowed on the political track.
Therefore, foreign interference is the main reason for
the emergence and prolongation of the humanitarian
crisis being experienced in some parts of Syria. It is
why we have been unable to make genuine, tangible and
lasting improvements to the humanitarian situation. We
will be unable to do so without putting an end to this
blatant foreign interference in our economic, social and
military affairs, or without ending the manifestations
of support for terrorism, which is hindering progress
on the political track and imposing obligatory measures
on the Syrian people. In no region can human suffering
be brought to an end solely by humanitarian assistance.
Nevertheless, we are aware of the need for such
assistance, which plays a major role in alleviating the
suffering of our people. Developments have shown just
how sound our reasoning is.

Despite all the humanitarian efforts undertaken,
Syrians have not emerged from the crisis and from
suffering. Refugees and persons displaced by terrorism
have been unable to return to their homes and their
daily lives. Peace and security have not been provided
for the people and their children, except in the regions
liberated by the Government and the Syrian army where
peace and security were re-established after routing
terrorists and where local and national reconciliation
has taken place. That shows once again that Syrians
are capable of talking to each other and solving their
problems by themselves if foreign intervention ceases
and if the Governments that protect terrorists commit
themselves to end their bloody policies.

One, including members of the Security Council,
cannot continue to hide behind what some are calling
the moderate military opposition, which merely
provides an excuse to use terrorists and extremists
as ways and means to carry out their political agenda
in Syria and other States. Those terrorist activities
have been exposed to everyone: witness the so-called
Jaish Al-Islam, which is linked to Saudia Arabia and
is continuing to indiscriminately bomb the capital
Damascus, which we are glad Mr. O'Brien mentioned;
or the Jaish Al-Fatha, which is linked to Turkey and
Qatar and is contituing to bomb Aleppo and Idlib; while
the Jaish Al-Yarmouk, linked to Jordan and Israel, is
destroying southern Syria. The question here is: Is the
indiscriminate bombing of civilians in Damascus and
Aleppo a practice of the moderate opposition? Between
23 and 24 August, such "moderate" opposition launched
92 mortars and missiles against Damascus, killing and
injuring many civilians.

It is ironic that some members of the Security
Council preach the protection of the Syrian people
while they remain silent about those crimes - offering
no condemnation and holding no emergency meeting to
reject those acts. An exception, for which I am grateful,
was the Council statement concerning what happened in
the city of Palmyra/Tadmor, as was the case when water
was cut off from Damascus and Aleppo for weeks by a

"moderate" military opposition that considers its tactics
of killing, torture and slavery as acts of moderation and
as a peaceful path to achieve democracy and freedom.

Why give legal standing and legitimacy to the
moderate military opposition in Syria alone, and not
in any other State? Why are we alone targeted with this
invention of so-called moderate military opposition,
while at the same time we are witnessing a campaign in
the Western media to promote armed groups that have
pledged allegience to Al-Qaida, such as the terrorist
group Harakat Ahrar Al-Sham, which The New York
Times has often commended, as in yesterday's issue,
which I have with me here, as an "Ideal Syrian ally for
[the] US"?

The bombing, which is targeting civilians in
many cities in Syria, prompts me to refer to Syria's
constitutional obligations and responsibilities to protect
its citizens from terrorism and extremism. Many have
accused the Syrian Government of targeting civilians
in Duma and other cities. Like any other responsible
Government in the world, including the members of
the Security Council, we cannot sit by when terrorists
target our civilians, as happens in Aleppo, Damascus
and other Syrian cities. We have to respond to the source
of the firing and shelling by the terrorists. As such, the
Syrian army is acting in accordance with international
law to combat terrorism and protect its civilians. This
is not about attacking civilians, as some delegations
falsely claim. Those who are killing civilians are those
who are using them as human shields in Duma and
other cities in Syria. As the Council is aware, that is
similar to what Boko Haram is doing in Nigeria and
neighbouring States.

Once again, the Secretary-General's report
(S/2015/651) includes several gaps and erroneous
information. As we have sent identical letters to the
President of the Security Council and the Secretary-
General on this issue, I will limit myself today to
simply noting that there were 48 requests presented
by the United Nations for access by humanitarian
assistance convoys from 1 January to 30 June. Approval
was granted in connection with 43 of those requests,
not the mere 20 referred to in the report. Meanwhile,
the United Nations has yet to avail itself of 10 of the
approvals granted in April and June.

I would also like to point out that the Syrian
Government has agreed to allow the entry of certain
assistance to the cities of Harasta and Duma, Damascus
governorate, as well as into Al-Fu'ah and Kafriya, Idlib
governorate, and into all other areas where the situation
is such that the security ofhumanitarian workers can be
guaranteed. We are now considering several requests
while taking into account various elements, including
the security situation, in order to ensure access for
humanitarian assistance to those who deserve it, and
so that the assistance is not confiscated by terrorists.
I would also like to say that, following Mr. O'Brien's
visit to Syria, we approved all the requests for visas
that were presented to the Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
including extending the visas of OCHA officials, which
Mr. O'Brien did mention.

Lastly, there is an unacceptable legal violation
in the Secretary-General's report with regard to the
implementation of resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165
(2014). Erroneous information, which may even be
called scandalous, was deployed in the report to refer to
terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham/Daesh and Jabhat Al-Nusra as non-State armed
groups. As everyone here knows, those, as well as other
Al-Qaida-associated groups, have been classified by
the Council as terrorist groups. We therefore cannot
accept calling the terrorists in Syria non-State armed
groups a an incorrect description that violates Security
Council resolutions aimed at combating terrorism.

Finally, on behalf of the Syrian Arab Republic, I
would like once again to warmly welcome Mr. O'Brien's
resolve, as well as to express our willingness to work
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs to successfully bring to fruition the noble goal
of providing humanitarian assistance to those who
deserve it.

