Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the delegation of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to take the floor
on behalf of the 120 States members of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries at today's debate.

The situation on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, is
critical and clearly unsustainable. In that regard, the
States members of the Movement reiterate that the
current Israeli occupation and the entire Palestinian-
Israeli conflict remain a serious threat to international
peace and security and require urgent attention and
resolution, in accordance with international law,
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Charter of the
United Nations, of course, as well as the tools provided
by multilateral diplomacy. The Security Council has a
clear responsibility. It must uphold its obligations under
the Charter and enforce its own resolutions, which
are not only the basis for a peaceful, just and lasting
solution to the conflict, but are legally binding on all
States Members of the Organization.

We also remain committed to contributing to the
achievement of a peaceful, just and lasting solution
to the conflict, as reiterated on 26 September, when
the Movement's Ministerial Committee on Palestine
adopted a public statement on the issue that was
unanimously supported by the membership. We also
take this opportunity to call for the requisite efforts to
be taken and stepped up at the regional and international
levels in support of such objectives, the ultimate aim of
which is to end the injustice; more than 51 years of the
Israeli foreign occupation of Palestine, including East
Jerusalem; more than 70 years of the Nakba, which
we must remember in all its human dimensions - the
disaster and tragedy that befell the Palestinian people
in 1948, during which they lost their homeland and the
majority of Palestinians were forcibly uprooted from
their homes and displaced, becoming refugees. Their
suffering continues to this day.

The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries still
considers resolution 2334 (2016) to be the most
viable path to peace. It establishes the fundamental
requirements and parameters for a just solution, through
which the two-State solution would be achieved on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders, in line with the relevant
United Nations resolutions; the Madrid principles,
including the land for peace principle; the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map, with a view to
ensuring that the Palestinian people are able to enjoy
their inalienable rights. The Security Council must insist
that resolution 2334 (2016) be respected, in particular by
the occupying Power. Similarly, the States members of
the Movement reiterate their call for full respect for and
the implementation of all other relevant resolutions in
that regard, as they will create the necessary conditions
to end the occupation, justly resolve the conflict in
all its aspects, and make Palestinian-Israeli peace and
security possible.

We take this opportunity to note the current deep-
seated funding crisis of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) and to stress the urgency of providing
UNRWA with sustained, predictable and uninterrupted
support, in particular following the punitive and
unjustified decision of the Government of the United
States ofAmerica to end its contributions to the Agency.
That not only affects the most vulnerable segment of the
Palestinian population and undermines the provision of
humanitarian assistance and vital development, but also
threatens the stability of the entire region. Similarly, we
echo UNRWA's statements in expressing concern about
the recent and irresponsible announcements made by
Israeli authorities about the closure of the Agency's
offices in the occupied Palestinian territory.
The situatopm in Gaza remains of great concern
to the Movement, in particular the grave humanitarian
situation that regrettably, continues to deteriorate on
a daily basis. In that regard, we reiterate our call for
the complete lifting of the Israeli blockade on the Gaza
Strip, which continues to impose untold economic,
social and humanitarian suffering on more than
2 million Palestinian children, women and men. It must
be emphasized once again that the crisis in Gaza should
be addressed in a comprehensive manner, in accordance
with international law, including humanitarian law
and human rights law, as well as the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

Bearing in mind that Israel has clearly renounced
its obligations as an occupying Power to protect the
Palestinian civilian population, in compliance with
the provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention,
the Movement calls on the international community
to ensure the protection of Palestinian civilians on
the Gaza Strip and throughout the entire occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, so as to
address the deplorable lack of security for the occupied
population and prevent the loss of more innocent lives.

In that regard, the States members of the
Non-Aligned Movement reiterate their deep concern
at the lack of accountability for all of the violations
committed by Israel, which fosters impunity and
destabilizes the situation on the ground, while reducing
the prospects for peace. That is why we reiterate our call
for international action, in particular that of the Security
Council, in order to ensure that those responsible are
brought to justice for their actions and that the violations
committed by the occupying Power cease. Israel must
fulfil its obligations and responsibilities within the
framework of international law.

We stress that failure to provide protection to the
Palestinian people will only lead to further escalation
of the violence, which will result, tragically, in
additional bloodshed, as demonstrated by the numerous
deaths and injuries of Palestinian civilians, including
children, in recent weeks. We also reiterate our concern
that the Security Council has long been unable to fulfil
its mandate on this very important issue because of the
use of the veto by one of its permanent members.

With regard to the situation in the occupied Syrian
Golan, we reaffirm that all measures and actions that
Israel, the occupying Power, has taken or may take,
such as the illegal decision of 14 December 1981, which
sought to change the legal status, physical character
and demographic composition of the occupied Syrian
Golan and its institutional structure, as well as
Israeli measures to implement its jurisdiction and
administration in that area, are null and void, without
validity or legal effect. In that regard and in line with
our principled positions, we demand once again that
Israel comply with resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
completely from the occupied Syrian Golan to the lines
of 4 June 1967, pursuant to resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).

In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement
reaffirms its permanent solidarity with the Palestinian
people to promote a just, lasting, comprehensive and
peaceful solution on the basis of General Assembly
resolution 194 (III). We also reaffirm our support for
the heroic Palestinian people in their quest for justice
and for the achievement of their inalienable rights and
legitimate national aspirations, including the right to
self-determination, freedom and independence in their
sovereign and independent State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, on the basis of the pre-
1967 borders.

