Mrs. Rodriguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate Cote d'Ivoire on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council and thank its
delegation for convening today's open debate.

Cuba fully supports the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Our country is firmly committed to conflict
prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes, in
line with the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. We firmly believe that conflict
prevention is the primary responsibility of Member
States. We welcome the strengthening of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
with a view to supporting peacekeeping operations
on a continent that provides nearly 50 per cent of
peacekeeping personnel and the majority of United
Nations police officers to peacekeeping missions.

We take note of the Secretary-General's initiatives

to improve the work of the Organization. We support

the call for solutions to ensure that United Nations

peacebuilding efforts and Security Council-mandated

African Union operations can count on predictable and

sustainable funding from the Organization. At the same

time, we believe that the United Nations, regional and

subregional organizations and other external actors

involved should support and complement the efforts

made by national Governments in the area of conflict

prevention and conflict resolution, when requested. Such

support must be impartial and unconditional and should

not interfere in their domestic affairs. It should also

fully respect the sovereignty, political independence,

authority, leadership and consent of the host State, in

accordance with its needs and priorities. The main duty

of such actors is to help the host country to settle its

conflict and provide the capacity to do so. It is essential
to address and eliminate the root causes of conflict,
in particular issues pertaining to social and economic
development, while supporting the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

Cuba believes that success in the area of conflict
prevention and conflict resolution also depends on
peacekeeping operations being endowed with clearly
defined, realistic and viable mandates, the resources
and capabilities required for discharging them and
concrete exit strategies. We reiterate that the basic

principles of peacekeeping operations - the consent
of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force,
except in cases of legitimate defence - must be

respected and implemented with full respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, in particular respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence of States
and non-interference in their domestic affairs.

We are not convinced that operations involving
the use of force, above and beyond the basic principles
involved, can help improve the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations and the security of their
personnel and civilians. On the contrary, the flexible
application or reinterpretation of those principles can
increase the risk of threats and attacks against United
Nations staff, which, regrettably, have occurred
in recent years. Cuba reiterates that protection-of-
civilians activities should also support the efforts of
national authorities and can in no way be used as a
pretext for disregarding the principles of the Charter.
We underscore that peacekeeping operations are neither
geared towards nor equipped to combat terrorism or
protect human rights.

With respect to the performance demands on
peacekeeping operations, we believe that operations
should be deployed with the resources and conditions
required to discharge their mandates. Improving and
increasing the number of consultations between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop- and/
or police-contributing countries would also allow for
a better understanding of the situation and help in the
design of mandates. Peacekeeping operations must
have the logistical support and resources required.
Personnel training should be improved and the capacity
of contributing countries enhanced.

Lastly, we believe that conflict prevention and
resolution also require the United Nations to ensure an
environment of international peace and security that
allows for the implementation of sustainable economic
and social development strategies. The coordination and
consistency of efforts between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter, will be essential.

