Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): At the outset, let me take this
opportunity to recognize the presence of the families of
those who perished in the tragic destruction of Pan Am
flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, on 21 December 1988.
Their presence here today is a telling reminder of the work
we still have to do to truly lay the souls of their loved ones
to rest in peace. I sadly recall the statement of condolence
my Government issued on behalf of all Kenyans during that
time of pain, and today I can still, with a heavy heart again,
convey to them these genuine expressions of sorrow.

This debate today affords us an excellent opportunity
to look again at what needs to be done to ease the pain that
the families of the bereaved must be feeling. We think that
much has been said in the past and much will continue to
be said. But we need to look into the future and act - act
with a resolve tempered by the reality that our decisions
will affect the lives of the bereaved families and the
innocent people of Libya suffering under the unyielding
heel of sanctions. We are honoured in this connection to
recognize the presence in our midst of Mr. Omar
Muntasser, the Foreign Minister of Libya.

We have listened carefully to the views and
positions presented to us by previous speakers. The
impressive eloquence outlining known positions,
juxtaposed against the silent presence of the bereaved
families and the unheard cries of sick children in Libya,
convinces my delegation even more that the time for
rhetoric is over and that the time for a genuine and soul-
searching give-and-take has come.

Fourteen days ago, when the Security Council
reviewed the sanctions imposed on Libya by Security
Council resolution 748 (1992), the Kenyan delegation
tried to balance the two competing but equally important
realities in this case. On the one hand, an act of terror
was committed causing immense anguish and suffering to
many people, but especially to the families of the victims
of that tragic incident. On the other hand, we have in
place a sanctions regime designed to bring the culprits to
book but which has failed to do so. The time may have
come to take stock of how much has been achieved in
real terms since the sanctions were imposed.

Kenya firmly believes that the families of the
victims must be allowed to put this tragedy behind them,
with the perpetrators of this terrorist act being brought to
book, and must receive complete restitution too. We also
firmly believe that the innocent people of Libya, who had
nothing to do with this heinous crime and who have
nothing to do with the current impasse, should be relieved
of the suffering the sanctions have caused them.

In this regard, we commend the skilful work being
done by the Chairman of the Libya sanctions Committee,
Ambassador Danilo Turk of Slovenia. By drawing on
elements of the now well-known Petrovsky report, which
is a result of the Secretary-General's fact-finding mission
to assess the humanitarian impact of sanctions on the
people of Libya, Mr. Turk has begun to make progress.
We think that the Petrovsky report, taken together with
existing studies by United Nations agencies and other
international organizations, is a useful framework for
addressing the impact of sanctions. We urge the Chairman
to continue working expeditiously to achieve more
progress.

How can we move this process forward? We need to
do so quickly so that we do not delay justice, bearing in
mind that justice delayed is justice denied. There is no
one single simple answer. We are faced with a very
complex legal and political issue. We believe that we can
work together to find a way to address this very tragic
issue.

 

All has not been in vain; there have been some
positive results. The Government of Libya has responded
positively to some of the demands made of it by the
international community. Security Council documents refer
to two such cases, cooperation on the Irish Republican
Army matter and cooperation on the UTA 772 incident. On
the outstanding issues, recently there have been attempts by
several organizations which have offered various options
towards resolving this problem. The League of Arab States
came up with options which were supported by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), the Organization of
the Islamic Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Harare Declaration of June 1997, issued following
the thirty-third ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity recommended three options. The first option is to try
the two suspects in a third, neutral country to be determined
the Security Council; the second is to have the suspects
tried by Scottish judges at The Hague in accordance with
Scottish law; and the third is to establish a special criminal
tribunal at the International Court of Justice to try the two
suspects.

On 27 February 1998 the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity at its sixty-seventh meeting
urged the States concerned

"to take specific action to ensure a rapid and definitive
settlement of the dispute"

and appealed to the Security Council to lift as a matter of
urgency the sanctions imposed. Kenya reiterates this urgent
appeal to resolve this impasse.

Coincidentally, the International Court of Justice ruling
on one aspect of this matter was read on the same day, 27
February 1998. This may be a good omen portending an
amicable and lasting solution to this matter.

The Judgment held that there was a dispute relating to
the Montreal Convention which could be decided by the
Court. The Court said that both the jurisdiction of the Court
and the admissibility of any claim must be determined at
the moment Libya's claims were first filed. We realize that
if any changes are to be introduced to the conditions
originally set by the Security Council, they must be
acceptable to all the parties to the dispute. However, this
may not be the case: there are two interpretations.

The first view is that the Judgment was on preliminary
jurisdictional issues, with the Court not having pronounced
itself on the merits of Libya's claims in any way. The
Court held that it had jurisdiction to determine, under the
Montreal Convention, whether the two Governments'
demands for surrender of the accused were or were not in
breach of Libya's rights under that Convention.

The second and opposing view is that there is a
dispute between the parties in this case on the
interpretation and application of the Montreal Convention,
and that the Court has jurisdiction over the dispute on the
basis of article 14, paragraph 1, of the Convention.

As a member of the OAU and having fully
participated in the deliberations that formulated the OAU
position, we strongly feel that that position provides clear
options for resolving the stalemate that we are faced with
today. We urge the States directly involved in this dispute
to give serious and urgent consideration to the proposals
put forward by the OAU and other regional bodies. In
this regard, we wish to re-emphasize the need for the
parties directly concerned to take specific action to ensure
a rapid and definitive settlement of the dispute. Frankly,
we are encouraged by the tone of the views expressed
here today and hope that a positive dialogue is not too far
away.

I conclude, as I began, by embracing the sorrow of
the bereaved families and empathizing with the suffering
of the innocent people of Libya, who committed no crime
but are hurting nonetheless.

