Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. As a seasoned diplomat from a friendly
country, you and I speak in many of the same forums
and share many qualities and aspirations to peace,
stability and development. Your convening of today's
debate on mediation and the settlement of disputes
attests to your profound interest in the problems and
concerns of the developing countries, in particular
those in Africa. You are thereby building on the
pioneering initiative of Burkina Faso in organizing, in
September 2008, the first high-level exchange of views
on this extremely important subject under its own
presidency of the Security Council.

I hope that today's deliberations will identify an
objective, mandatory approach stressing the absolute
priority of eliminating the underlying causes and
origins of conflict through effective mediation and the
overall political settlement of disputes, strongly and
seriously supported by the Security Council and the
international community, and in particular by relevant
international and regional partners. The Security
Council will thereby be in a position to best discharge
its responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security by ensuring stability and long-term
security, pursuant to its mandate and the provisions of
paragraph 3 of Article 2, and Articles 3, 33 and 36 of
the United Nations Charter.

We support the statement delivered by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The founding fathers of the United Nations were
well aware more than six decades ago that peace must
be established before it can be maintained. They were
convinced that international peace and security can be
best safeguarded through the peaceful and political
settlement of disputes. The Charter reaffirms the
United Nations key role in mediation efforts and in
peacebuilding. The role of the Security Council should
not be limited to dispatching peacekeeping missions,
which now number 18 staffed by more than 100,000
personnel. That is a heavy burden on resources,
especially in consideration of the current global
economic and financial crisis.
The Security Council must therefore work
tirelessly to promote the peaceful settlement of
disputes. Regardless of the independence, impartiality,
objectivity and expertise of mediators, all influential
parties, in particular the Security Council and the
regional and subregional organizations directly
involved with the parties to a conflict, must contribute
to the solution. It goes without saying that the
Council's adoption of neutral and impartial positions
vis-a-vis the parties to a conflict remains the keystone
to resolving conflicts.

Given their direct links to the geopolitical,
cultural and social aspects of conflicts, regional and
subregional organizations are best placed to undertake
mediation efforts, particularly since modern conflicts
among and within States are becoming increasingly
complex. The intervention of regional and subregional
organizations therefore provides added value,
particularly when they attach great importance to the
political settlement of conflicts. The Constitutive Act
of the African Union stresses the importance of the
pacific settlement of disputes and of preventing them
before they erupt. Given the United Nations cumulative
experience in this area, we reaffirm its role in
supporting regional mediation efforts, in particular by
lending technical and logistical support and required
expertise.

The political settlement of conflicts requires the
promotion and activation of the role of the United
Nations and of its competent bodies, including the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the relevant funds and agencies, in order to build
the national capacities of States and help them reach
the Millennium Development Goals by supporting
national projects for development, reconstruction and
economic recovery, transfer of technology, and the
fight against climate change and environmental
degradation, because development remains a decisive
factor for building lasting peace.

Indeed, addressing the root causes of conflicts is
the best way to ensure lasting peace and the avoidance
of a return to war. Moreover, the promotion of the
United Nations conflict prevention capacity will
undoubtedly make it possible to make considerable
savings in the exorbitant cost of peacekeeping
operations.

In conclusion, we would like to recall something
that we have consistently reiterated in the Council on
many occasions before: the Darfur conflict in our
country could not have endured so long had the
Security Council at the very outset brought its full
weight to bear to support the political settlement
efforts, particularly because there was a strong national
will to turn the page in this conflict. That will was
shown recently in the national comprehensive
integrated plan adopted through decisions and
recommendations of the Sudan People's Forum. That
initiative laid the foundation for international and
regional efforts to bring about an immediate,
comprehensive and just peace in Darfur. We stress in
particular the promising efforts of the African-Arab
initiative led by the State of Qatar in coordination and
cooperation with the Joint African Union-United
Nations Chief Mediator, Djibril Bassole.

Furthermore, armed movements that have
continued to boycott the peace process would not have
been able to continue to reject the peace option if the
Security Council had carried out its role by sending the
right messages to the leaders of those movements.
Those movements would not have stayed away from
the peace process were it not for the attitude of certain
influential Powers which had sent them the wrong
message by closing their eyes to their excesses and
even welcoming their leaders.

Everyone knows that the hasty, ill-considered
decision by the International Criminal Court had
negative results. The first one was the announcement
by certain armed movements that they were going to
boycott the political process. One might have hoped
that the Security Council would have protected the
political process against such risks and dangers. Thus,
we wish to reaffirm that the credibility of the Security
Council and the fact that it has chosen peace and
stability in the Sudan should impel the Council to
definitively reject all of these risky and ill-considered
ventures and to rectify the situation by exerting
pressure on the rebel movements so that a peaceful
political solution can be found, one that can give the
people of the Sudan stability and prosperity.

