Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by expressing the United Kingdom's continued
support for both the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). Their work is
essential to combat impunity and deliver justice to
Victims in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

I would like to thank President Meron and
President Khan and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow
for their very comprehensive briefings and reports.
Furthermore, while congratulating and welcoming
Judge Meron on his return to the office of President of
the ICTY, I would also like to express our thanks to
Judge Robinson for his years of service as President.
We wish him well for the future.

We would like to praise the Serbian Government,
police force and judiciary for the apprehension and
transfer of Goran HadZie and Ratko Mladie. As the
report states (see S/201l/716), those arrests represent
important milestones for the Tribunal and for
international justice. It is important that the work of the
ICTY be organized efficiently over the coming months,
to take account of the extra work that those cases will
generate. The arrest and transfer of both Mladie and
Hadzie are evidence of Serbia's continued commitment
to cooperating with the Tribunal and are indeed
milestones for international justice. However, it is
important that Serbia's support continue. Questions
remain on how it was possible for two high-profile
fugitives to evade capture. We encourage the Serbian
authorities to continue their good work and ensure that
all people found to be responsible for supporting a
former fugitive be held accountable for their actions.
In general we are pleased with the levels of
cooperation that have been provided by Croatia. As
with Serbia, Croatia's ongoing cooperation with the
Tribunal remains essential. We also share the concerns
that the report raises on the greetings sent by Prime
Minister Kosor to Generals Gotovina and Markae, both
of whom have been convicted of war crimes and
crimes against humanity. We reiterate the importance
of Croatia demonstrating full cooperation with the
Tribunal. In that regard, we note that the European
Union Commission's monitoring will focus in
particular on commitments undertaken by Croatia in
the area of the judiciary and fundamental rights. That
remains an essential part of the European Union
accession process.

We note the difficulties that have been
highlighted as a result of the Tribunal's staffing levels
and we are mindful of the extra burden that this has
placed on the current staff members. We remain
grateful for their ongoing efforts and understanding.
The level of staffing in both Tribunals will continue to
be an issue as they each complete their work. Until a
solution is found for that problem, we encourage the
Tribunal to prioritize its staffing resources as
effectively as possible.

We support the efforts of President Meron to
reassign ad litem judges to address the large number of
contempt cases and we welcome the assurance that
such reassignments will not result in the extension of
the terms of office of those judges. Furthermore, to try
to tackle the difficulties related to staff retention, we
believe that it would be appropriate to revisit the
interpretation of the regulations applying to the six-
month prohibition on hiring people who have served as
interns. In supporting that action we note that there
would be no financial implications for the United
Nations.

Moving on to the ICTR, we remain concerned by
the number of indictees that remain at large. The
Tribunal's mandate cannot be completed until all of
those individuals are apprehended. We encourage all
United Nations Members, especially Kenya and
Zimbabwe, to provide the Tribunal with their full
cooperation, in order to ensure that all individuals are
brought to justice. Regretfully, we note that once again
the ICTR report (see S/201l/731) states that there will
be a short delay in the Ngiraba1ware trial. The United
Kingdom remains concerned about the impact that
further delays will have on the Tribunal's ability to
meet the deadlines that have been agreed in the
completion strategy. To address that issue, we
encourage both Tribunals to explore ways to share best
practices, in an effort to avoid further slippages. It is
also important for the continued success of the
completion strategy that lower level cases be
transferred smoothly to national jurisdictions under
Rule 11 bis.

