Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): The
Council has just adopted resolution 2304 (2016), which
renews and modifies the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).

The situation in South Sudan is one of the most
serious that we are aware of at the present time. Violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
are being committed on an almost unparalleled scale.
Breaches of basic protection of civilians at imminent
risk of a resumption of hostilities leave no choice
but to react immediately. The resolution just adopted
takes up the recommendations of the countries of
the region, represented by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and endorsed by
the African Union. That is a critical point for France
and an example of cooperation between the competent
regional organization, the African Union and the
Security Council. The ongoing commitment and unity
of the region will be decisive in settling the crisis.

However, the resolution that has just been adopted,
while necessary, is only an immediate response to
controlling the situation. In that respect, France has two
comments to make.

First, the regional protection force and its 4,000
troops, who have justjoined the 12,000 troops already
deployed, can only help to create the conditions for a
cessation of hostilities and a resumption of the political
dialogue. We pay tribute to the troop-contributing
countries and their Blue Helmets. They will need the
support of each and every one of us. However, this force
is not a lasting response to the crisis and that is why
France expects the authorities of South Sudan to fully
cooperate with UNMISS and all the parties in finding a
peaceful path to the crisis.

My second comment is that the resolution, as
decisive as it may be, should have gone all the way by
imposing an immediate arms embargo. That was what
France wanted, given the gravity of the abuses. Had the
embargo been imposed earlier, South Sudan would not
have undergone this deterioration. The embargo could
have been imposed immediately, as was pointed out,
with a view to a cessation of hostilities and also to
better preserve the security of the peacekeepers whom
we are deploying. France will continue to call for the
swift imposition of the embargo.

The Council's unity and the inclusiveness of our
discussion are crucial to the success of our action,
given the seriousness of the crisis. The resolution is
now ours. Although France regrets the absence of the
embargo, France will provide all its support to the full
implementation of this text, which is now ours.

