Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Let me at the outset congratulate you,
Mr. President, on presiding over the Council for this
month. I also welcome the presence of Mr. Wang Yi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of China, at this meeting
and thank him for convening this debate.

Let me reaffirm the following points. The first is
the importance of strict compliance with the principles
of the Charter. At the top of this list is respect for the
sovereignty of States, their territorial integrity, legality,
sovereignty, the peaceful settlement of international
disputes and non-interference in the internal affairs
of other States. That is the sole approach that anchors
the rule of law on the international scene. Respect
for international peace and security guarantees
development and strengthens cordial relations among
Member States.

Secondly, the experience of the past seven decades
underlines the need to respect and comply with the
Charter and to reform certain working methods of the
Security Council. There is also a need to strengthen
other working methods so that the United Nations
can be in a position to play the role entrusted to it by
Member States and to preserve its effectiveness.

Throughout its history, the United Nations
has had to deal with actions of certain influential
States seeking to impose their hegemony over the
Organization and make use of it for their own interests
and policies without paying the slightest attention to
the contradictions of their policies with the principles
and purposes of the Charter or the interests of other
Member States. When the founders of the Organization
drafted the Charter, they opened it with "We the peoples
of the United Nations", but we see current practice
as an attempt to change this wording to "We, certain
influential States of the United Nations". We have seen
this very clearly since the very inception of the United
Nations, which has been paralysed and remains so
because of the policies of certain of these influential
States, and is unable to take the necessary measures
under the Charter to implement many of its resolutions
of international legitimacy, particularly those calling
for an end to the Israel occupation of the Syrian Golan
and other occupied Arab territories, and for Israel to
end its aggressive policies and racist crimes against
Arab citizens living under occupation in the States of
the region.

That is also very clear when the Charter is flouted
by double-standard policies. New terminology,
new principles and new concepts have emerged to
circumbent the Charter and international law, such as
the protection of civilians. This concept that does not
enjoy full international support and has been used to
justify colonialist, bloody, military interventions in
certain areas, for example in Iraq and Libya, which are
now dealing with chaos and terrorism. It is also used
to impose illegal unilateral measures against certain
States, including Syria.

Thirdly, the United States, which won the Second
World War and defeated fascism and racism, must now
work seriously and sincerely on the civilian and military
fronts to address the terrorist tidal wave represented by
international terrorist groups linked Al-Qaida, such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the
Al-Nusra Front and their offspring in Syria and Iraq,
which are supported from outside. We see this in Boko
Haram, the Movement of East Turkestan, the Caucasus
Emirate, Ansar al- Sharia, Al-Shabaab, and others. Syria
reaffirms in this respect that all efforts aimed at putting
an end to terrorism will be successful only if we stick
to the principles of the Charter and international law
and cooperate with the Governments and institutions
of the States involved, since certain States make use of
terrorism as a tool for international policies, and only
if we stop ignoring the fact that others actually practise
terrorism.

The situation in Syria and other States of the region
demonstrates the deplorable state the United Nations is
in. Since the initial days of the crisis - and we are now
in its fifth year - certain States have used this forum to
intervene flagrantly in the internal affairs of Syria and
worked relentlessly to provoke, spread lies, demonize the
Syrian Government, exacerbate the crisis and support
terrorism in all its forms, as well as to block efforts to
achieve a settlement, destabilize Syria and undermine
its policies and its strategic, national sovereign choices
in order to promote regime change through force and
terrorism. Certain States have also sought to impose
unilateral measures against the Syrian people and to
lay the groundwork and find excuses for military
intervention on the basis of falsehoods, as we saw in the
Libyan experience. The brotherly Libyan people and
the whole world continue to see the disastrous effects
of such an approach, without hearing the least apology
from those who responsible for these deadly destructive
and serious actions. We see no enlightenment or change
in their disastrous policies, which have heaped shame
upon them and bled our peoples.

The situation does not stop there. Certain influential
States members of the Council have worked to guide
their puppet regimes in the region and encouraged them
to gather terrorists, criminals, foreign mercenaries and
bloodthirsty Takfiris from throughout the world, to
finance and arm them, and send them to Syria and Iraq
to establish their pseudo-State and make Syria a new
base for their terrorism against the rest of the world.
The Turkish regime has gone further still. Just yesterday
morning, it carried out an aggression on Syrian territory
when hundreds of soldiers and armoured divisions from
Turkey made an incursion into Syrian territory. That
aggression demonstrates Turkish intentions to expand
into the region and the depth of the relationship between
the Turkish regime and the terrorist group ISIL.

Where are the promises made by those States,
when they joined the United Nations, to live together in
peace and in relations of good-neighbourliness? Where
is their respect for the principles of international law
concerning friendly relations and cooperation among
States, set out in General Assembly resolution 2625
(XXV) of 1970? How can the representatives of these
influential countries who have spoken today explain
these violations? Why is the Security Council unable to
condemn these practices?

I have with me today a 500-page document that
includes the names of thousands of foreign terrorists
who were killed in October 2013 alone. Hundreds
of those were nationals of Council members. We are
talking about realities and we feel deep pain. Thousands
are being killed in Syria, Iraq and other States in the
context of the inertia of the so-called international
community and its inability to bring to account the
masterminds of international terrorism. If the United
Nations is not compelled to respect the principles of
the Charter and international law, it will have lost its
moral quality and will have become a weapon for the
strongest against the weakest.

In response to the statement made by the
representative ofthe United States, who is a specialist in
international law, need I remind her that the Pentagon's
training of mercenaries in Saudi Arabia, Qatar and
Turkey to deal with Syria is a flagrant violation of
the principles of the Charter and prohibited under
resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014), 2195 (2014), and
2199 (2015)?

