Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank High Commissioner Grandi for
his briefing today.

The Dominican Republic welcomes the convening
of today's meeting and joins the collective aspiration
to address and attend to the needs of the millions of
people who are forced to leave their homes as a result of
armed conflict, violence, human rights Violations and
persecution. We are particularly interested in the search
for mechanisms to tackle the serious problems and
challenges arising from these human displacements, as
well as in the communities that host the displaced. We
believe that, in this search, it is necessary to support
and involve displaced persons in order to respond to
their specific needs.

Today, there is a plethora of images of displaced
persons, of human suffering, of broken dreams, of
mothers praying to return home, of fathers longing
to work again and of children dreaming of having
a childhood. Such is the case of Joury, a 12-year-old
Syrian refugee who lives in a refugee camp in Jordan
and draws pictures of gardens because that is what she
remembers from her homeland, believing she will never
be able to return there.

Similarly, in Afghanistan, it is estimated that more
than 1,000 people, mostly women and children, are
displaced every day. That was the case of Shakila, who
is a refugee in Greece, having left Afghanistan with
her husband and three children looking for a better life,
which she is still not sure she will find.

In Southern Sudan, the situation is critical. Food
insecurity has motivated 4 million people to leave
their homes in search of safe haven. Their situation is
aggravated by the effects of climate change, such as
drought and floods, which have led to massive shortages
of safe drinking water. Such is the case of Angelina,
who has left her village several times. Angelina swam
through deep waters with her son floating on a plastic
raft to shelter, where she depends on humanitarian
assistance to survive. She would be happy if she could
provide for her children, even if that means planting
and producing her own food.
In Myanmar, the situation is no less pressing. The
massive wave of Rohingyas that crossed the border into
Cox's Bazar in Bangladesh brings together more than
1 million people who depend on humanitarian aid to
cover their basic needs. We cite the case of Daw Phyu,
mother of four children, widow, who left Myanmar in
June 2012, leaving behind her daughter who lives with
a disability. She met her a month afterwards and, using
sign language, told her that she was sad. After six years,
Phyu Ma was still living in a one-bedroom hut, waiting
for a safe opportunity to return home.

In Somalia, the case is no different. After two
decades of conflict and countless natural disasters,
more than 3 million Somalis are refugees or internally
displaced and nearly 2.5 million do not have their basic
food needs met. That is the reality of Hadija, a 22-year-
old girl, who had to leave her village, along with her
two children, after she lost her livestock to drought, and
is waiting in a refugee camp to return to her normal
life. But she is 1 out of 155,000 from the same area who
now depend on the charity of friends and relatives and
who lack hope for a better future.

In view of that deterioration, it is crucial that
we seek solutions to the crisis. We understand
that it is important to strengthen and promote a
complementary approach between humanitarian action
and development initiatives in order to address the root
causes of conflict, to ensure sustainable solutions for
refugees once they return to their places of origin and
to create the conditions to increase the resilience of
affected communities.

We cannot fail to mention the situation affecting
the millions of Venezuelans who have had to leave their
country in search of food, medicine and better living
conditions. For them, abandoning their home has not
been an option. It has been a necessity.

In conclusion, we recognize that we are facing the
greatest refugee crisis in history and that it represents
an enormous challenge for the United Nations and its
partners, as well as for the host communities. We also
believe that the human dignity of refugees must be kept
at the centre of all our actions. We reiterate that, in any
context, the relocation or return of refugees should be in
safe and dignified conditions and voluntary on the basis
of information about the conditions that await them.

