Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank High Representative Inzko for his briefing.

In recent times, the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has remained stable. There has been
positive progress in economic development and building
the rule of law. China welcomes that development.

China respects the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
believe that the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina have
the right to determine their own development path and
diplomatic policy. The international community should
respect the choices made by the people and Government
of Bosnia and Herzegovina regarding the future of the
country.

We welcome the smooth conduct of the general
elections on 12 October, which we believe will
create enabling conditions for ethnic unity, harmony,
cooperation and joint efforts to achieve development.
China hopes that all ethnic communities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will consolidate the positive achievements
in State-buidling and continue to implement in a
comprehensive manner the Dayton Peace Agreement
so as to achieve greater progress in various areas.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country
in the Balkan region. Maintaining peace and security
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the common interests
of the countries of the region and the international
community. Currently, efforts to achieve sustainable
economic and social development and lasting peace
in the country are facing complex difficulties and
challenges and continue to require the assistance
of the international community. The international
community, when addressing the question of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, should adopt a balanced and cautious
approach and give due attention to the opinions and
concerns of all parties.

China supports High Representative Inzko in
conducting his work in accordance with his mandate
and in a stable and constructive manner, so as to play
a positive role in advancing the political process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

