Mr. Baali (Algeria) (interpretation from French): It is
a genuine pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding over the work
of the Security Council at a time when it is dealing with the
sources of conflicts and the means to deal with them on my
continent, since your country has endeavoured to
understand it and has made patient efforts for its
development.

I am therefore confident that, under your wise
guidance, our deliberations today - and doubtless tonight
as well - will serve to enrich, consolidate and refine the
international community's understanding of African realities
and of the considerable issues at stake, and that these
deliberations will thus enable Africa to better shoulder its
destiny and take its place in the world with dignity,
independence and respect for its distinctiveness.

I would also like to express my great admiration and
gratitude for the work carried out by your predecessor, the
Ambassador of sisterly Gambia, who, with talent and
modesty, guided the work of the Council during a
particularly busy month.

By meeting at the level of foreign ministers precisely
seven months ago to consider the timeliness of concerted
international action to promote international peace and
security in Africa, the Security Council clearly showed,
for the first time, a proper understanding of the growing
importance of our continent and of the significance of its
contribution to the maintenance of international peace and
security. At the same time it demonstrated its interest in
Africa and its readiness to support the struggle for peace
and development of the continent, which has been able to
throw off colonialism without being able fully to rid itself
of the difficult heritage bequeathed to it, which in many
cases is the cause of the conflicts that tear it apart and of
the rampant poverty.

In submitting to our Organization a report that is as
complete as it is rigorous and supported by a clear
analysis that is not complacent but fully oriented towards
action, the Secretary-General - to whom I should like to
pay a well-deserved tribute for the quality of the work he
has done and the courageous vision that underpins it -
has met the enormous expectations placed on him by the
international community and, above all, by the African
continent, of which he is a worthy son.

This report must, as the Secretary-General intended,
provoke a debate that is as broad as possible and that
focuses on the causes of conflicts and the means of
dealing with them, given that the numerous scourges from
which Africa is suffering today are also affecting other
continents. Africa is by no means the only region in the
world confronted by serious difficulties, nor is it a
continent characterized exclusively by chaos and poverty.

In fact, Africa today is a continent with many
enormous challenges, but one which also has unlimited
potential for development, democratization and the
settlement of conflicts.

Numerous conflicts which are today battering the
African continent undeniably stem from that dark period
in its history when, dismembered by colonial appetites, it
found itself torn apart and carved up, its landmarks
broken and the delicate balances on which it had always
depended irretrievably destroyed.

It is true that we are not here today to put
colonialization on trial; we would obviously need
considerably more than a few meetings of the Security

 

Council to do that. Nor are we here to attribute all the
problems of Africa to colonialization. However, it is
important to recall here, for the sake of history and out of
concern for objectivity, the huge responsibility borne by the
former colonial Powers for the tragedies that are currently
battering Africa. We must emphasize - and we should not
forget this - that our peoples, in the wake of the
independence that they acquired, often at the cost of great
pain and blood, inherited territories where, since there was
nothing, everything had to be built; where, by way of
economic activity, there was only mining or the harvesting
of produce; and where, therefore, there was a need to create
the necessary infrastructures and open construction sites
everywhere. Our peoples inherited territories where, despite
pompous speeches on the civilizing mission of colonization,
illiteracy exceeded 90 per cent and epidemics were
rampant, and it was necessary to build schools and clinics.
Because there was no State structure aside from that which
allowed the colonial administration to maintain order and to
pillage the resources of the country, it was necessary to
create the State.

Furthermore, the former colonial Powers throughout
the entire colonial period had, without regard for conscience
or scruple, applied the old adage "divide and conquer",
fomenting and fuelling rivalries between tribes and clans,
in so doing thwarting any consolidation process for social
cohesion and national sentiment. In the aftermath of
independence - and up to the present - numerous
African countries found themselves faced with the
phenomenon of tribalism, which economic difficulties and
political games have, it is true, sometimes exacerbated.

From the north to the south and from the east to the
west, Africa therefore had to start from scratch. Throughout
Africa there was a need to meet, rapidly, with limited
means and in an international environment characterized by
structural inequalities and ideological rivalries, the
enormous needs of the people, establish economic policies,
consolidate the social fabric and create a sense of belonging
to a single nation while continually coping with numerous
forms of interference and with the appetites of the Powers
past and present.

Left to itself Africa, it should be recognized, resolutely
shouldered its responsibilities, aware that above all it had
to rely on its own means, regardless of how meagre they
may have been, when faced with the enormous expectations
of its peoples and the magnitude of the task to be
accomplished.

Within the framework of the organization that was
created in the wake of independence, and whose credo of
unity presupposed the liberation of the continent, Africa
mobilized itself in order to dedicate itself absolutely to, in
the words of the Charter of the Organization of African
Unity, "the total emancipation of the African territories
which are still dependent" and to "eradicate all forms of
colonialism from Africa".

Aware of the risks to future relations among the
African States posed by borders that had sometimes been
established contrary to common sense, our leaders
decided then that, as from 1963, they would ratify the
borders inherited from the colonial period, thereby
demonstrating wisdom and responsibility and avoiding the
danger of suddenly plunging the continent into bloody
conflicts with immeasurable consequences.

Furthermore, our countries committed themselves to
dialogue, to cooperation and to harmonizing their
positions and policies. Today, concerted action among
African countries is a true reality, evident in the regular
and frequent contacts at bilateral, regional and continental
levels between heads of State and other African leaders,
which attests to the will of Africans to seek by
themselves, working together within the continent, ways
and means of living together in greater harmony, stability
and shared prosperity.

The establishment by the OAU of it Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, whose
role is now undisputed, illustrates this African awareness
that there exists in Africa the political will, the means and
the necessary human resources for the settlement of
African problems, even if the continent will, for a long
time to come, need financial and logistical support from
the international community if it is to successfully
complete its peace initiatives.

Finally convinced that without true economic, social
and cultural development, and that without the progressive
integration of the African economies Africa would not be
saved, the African countries decided at Abuja to create an
African economic community at both the regional and
subregional levels, with countries grouped together within
political and economic units so as to better pool their
efforts and utilize their complementarities.

Parallel with this multilateral effort, the
overwhelming majority of the countries of Africa
committed themselves at the national level to a dual
undertaking: the bold task of the democratization of

 

societies and institutions, whose results can be seen today;
and the no less ambitious undertaking to recover and
restructure the economy, with the support of the Bretton
Woods institutions, which are so far fulfilling all of their
promises. This is attested to by the boost given to economic
growth in numerous African countries, even if the social
cost is often very high.

It is true that numerous complex problems remain, and
there are substantial liabilities at the political and economic
levels. The young shoots of democracy are still fragile and
the economic gains precarious. But it is undeniable that
today in Africa a democratic, free enterprise culture is
developing and that this movement is growing daily and
little by little becoming irreversible.

Africa, however, needs support in the huge effort that
it has undertaken, and if it is to be supported effectively our
distinctive features must be better understood and our
priorities better grasped. It must be clear, therefore, that the
cause of democratization and development in Africa will
not be furthered by exerting pressure on African countries,
attempting to impose on them social or developmental
patterns which have been conceived elsewhere and which
are irrelevant to the realities of Africa or by sometimes
brandishing the scarecrow of sanctions.

Today, the men and women of Africa are determined
to see the fulfilment of their will to establish democracy
and respect for their rights throughout the continent; but
they also know that these goals must be promoted at their
own pace and in terms of their own specific national and
local characteristics. At the same time, they are aware that
if their economic and social rights - that is, their right to
education, work, housing and health care - are not ensured
at the same time, the concept of human rights will be no
more than a hollow shell and a pious wish.

Consideration of the Secretary-General's report leads
us to a number of preliminary ideas that I should like to
share with the Council today. Other observations, and no
doubt other proposals, will in due time be formulated in
other bodies of our Organization.

We consider, first of all, that while the Security
Council has the merit of having launched the debate on
Africa, it is not, obviously, by its very mandate - which,
as we know, is limited to the maintenance of international
peace and security - the appropriate or sole framework for
multifaceted, effective and concerted action on Africa.

The General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the Bretton Woods institutions, which also
have before them the report of the Secretary-General, as
well as the Organization of African Unity (OAU), are in
fact all called upon together to make their contribution to
our reflective endeavour on the means to be implemented
to assist Africa in meeting the challenges that confront it.

Indeed, without a genuine mobilization of the
international financial institutions and the United Nations
agencies, constructed around a real programme of support
for Africa that would deal with the questions of
investment and aid for development, as well as the
problems of debt, commerce and trade and the negative
effects of structural adjustment policies, any policy on
Africa would be mere posturing. In his report, the
Secretary-General has clearly and convincingly indicated
the path to be followed, which we find both reasonable
and realistic.
Regarding the handling of conflicts in Africa, it is
absolutely essential that the United Nations cooperate in
a close and ongoing manner with the OAU, which, better
than any other organization, knows and understands
African realities and sensibilities, and, in particular, with
the Central Organ of the Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution. This should not,
however, mean that the international community - that
is to say, the United Nations - should consider itself free
from its obligations under the Charter.

In this context, and while recognizing the merit of
the initiative undertaken by certain countries to strengthen
African peacekeeping capabilities, it is imperative that the
principles of multilateralism, universalism and
transparency preside over the conception and
implementation of this initiative. Here, the United Nations
and the OAU, through its Mechanism, must be fully
involved.

Hence, in this, as in any operation of preventive
diplomacy or peacekeeping, the consent of the State
involved, and thus its cooperation, are absolutely
indispensable. This principle also applies to all situations
in which the delivery of humanitarian assistance may
seem necessary.

Regarding this last point in particular - in the light
of the dangerous problems to which humanitarian aid is
sometimes susceptible, which the Secretary-General has
clearly highlighted, and because of the ways politicians or
the media exploit such forms of aid - it seems to us of

 

the greatest importance that all precautions be taken so that
when such aid has been decided upon and accepted, it does
indeed reach its beneficiaries, above all the most vulnerable
ones, and that it does not exceed the strictly humanitarian
framework in which it belongs. It must also be perfectly
clear that humanitarian assistance must not be substituted
for the prevention and settlement of conflicts, nor must it
be used for propaganda purposes, nor serve as an
alternative to development aid, whose positive effects on
populations are far more lasting.

My other comment addresses the question of the
proliferation of weapons. In proportion to its geographic
area, Algeria is the country that devotes the smallest part of
its gross domestic product to national defence; therefore, it
obviously cannot fail to demonstrate its interest in the
Secretary-General's recommendation to decrease
expenditures for weapons and munitions to 1.5 per cent of
the gross domestic product, even if that recommendation
needs further clarification and refinement.
In the same context, Algeria can only welcome the
proposal regarding the compilation, research and publication
of information on the weapons trade, which fuels large-
scale international crime and terrorism. To be effective,
however, this proposal, which may be taken up by the new
Department for Disarmament Affairs, must be part of a
framework of effective and objective cooperation by the
international community aimed at dismantling and
neutralizing the networks of logistical support and supply
of armaments that fuel the terrorist groups in their work of
destabilization, destruction and death.

My last observation has to do with the policy of
sanctions to which the Security Council has, with increasing
frequency and uneven success, resorted over recent years.

In fact, while the embargo on the shipment of
weapons to warring countries - as long as it is respected
by all, which is rarely the case - can be an effective
means of containing or preventing an armed conflict,
economic sanctions often serve only to penalize civilian
populations and can even lead to results that are
diametrically opposed to those initially sought.

The serious abuses and excesses experienced in
connection with sanctions regimes make it absolutely
necessary for this kind of measure to be re-examined by the
competent bodies of the United Nations, including the
Security Council. Such reconsideration - obviously, going
beyond the framework of Africa - must, beyond the
recommendations of the Secretary-General, take up all
aspects of the conditions for imposing and lifting
sanctions, as well as the effects of sanctions on the
civilian populations of the countries involved and of
neighbouring countries, and must specifically define their
objectives. Finally, the decision to impose sanctions must
continue to lie solely with the Security Council.

The machinery to ensure that the recommendations
of the Secretary-General are followed up could take the
form of an ad hoc committee or working group that the
Secretary-General would establish in cooperation with the
OAU and that would be open to representatives of these
two organizations and to those of the Bretton Woods
institutions, the Economic Commission for Africa and the
African Development Bank. The mandate of such a group
would be to see to the implementation of agreed
recommendations and to report to the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, which, because of
their extensive competencies, seem to us to be in the best
position to act on the report of the follow-up mechanism.
Obviously, the Security Council should also be kept
informed.
As the intense deliberations of the Council have
shown, the Secretary-General's report on Africa contains
a valuable set of ideas and recommendations that will, we
are convinced, contribute to a better understanding,
knowledge and evaluation of the magnitude and
complexity of the problems experienced today not only by
Africa but also by the international community as a
whole.

Many of these problems are also faced by other
regions of the world and cry out to all of us for solidarity;
many of them are complex and require our serious and
thorough consideration both in this Council and in other
organs and institutions, first and foremost among which
is the OAU, which is bound to the United Nations by a
long tradition of concerted action and cooperation,
strikingly illustrated last year by a joint commitment for
peace in the Great Lakes region.

What Africa expects from our Organization today is
that for once it will go beyond making declarations of
intent and expressions of solidarity and truly commit
itself, side by side with Africa, through a programme of
action that fully addresses our concerns and our particular
features and that can meet our expectations and the
historic challenges that face our continent every day.

 

