Mr. Mwamba Kapanga (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me first of all to
fulfil the pleasant duty of extending to you, Sir, on
behalf of my delegation and in my personal capacity,
my warm and sincere congratulations on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council.

I also wish to thank your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Canada, and to convey
our gratitude and congratulations to him on his success
as President of the Council last month.

My delegation also wishes sincerely to
congratulate Ambassador Holbrooke and the members
of the Security Council mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the report contained in
document S/2000/416. We are convinced that the report
will make a great contribution to charting the road to
peace and sustainable development for millions of
Congolese men and women, who, like all the
inhabitants of the other continents, seek only to live
decently in peace.

The members of the Council mission were able to
witness firsthand the deep desire for peace of the
Congolese people. The experience of Kananga speaks
eloquently to this desire. Throughout the national
territory of our country - from Mbandaka to
Kisangani, from Goma to Bukavu, from Kindu to
Mbuji-Mayi and from Lubumbashi to Bandundu, not to
mention Kinshasa - children, fathers and mothers are
calling for an end to the unspeakable suffering that has
become their daily plight since the fateful day of 2
August 1998, when the horde of occupying forces from
Burundi, Uganda and Rwanda swept unopposed
through the Democratic Republic of the Congo like the
angel of death, sowing misery and annihilation in their
wake.

My country has spent two years in a pitiless war,
the senseless nature of which has frequently been
denounced by the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and its Secretary-General, Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim. Through me, the Congolese people call on the
international community to use all means available to
put a final end to this war, of which it is ultimately the
sole victim.

My Government hopes that the United Nations
will absorb a full understanding of the resolve and of
the great need for peace and domestic and external
peace of the Congolese nation as a whole. My
Government calls on the international community to
become further involved in a sincere and positive effort
to bring the aggressors to sincere negotiations for peace
and regional stability, in respect for the relevant
provisions of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.

My delegation would like very sincerely to thank
President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, current Chairman of
the Organization of African Unity, for the organization
of the Algiers summit of 30 April 2000 and for his
continuing and tireless efforts to facilitate the rapid
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. The Algiers
summit, in fact, made it possible to reaffirm the
commitments undertaken during the meeting of the
Political Committee held in Kampala, Uganda, from 6
to 8 April 2000, regarding a plan for disengagement
and redeployment of forces in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in accordance with the Lusaka
Agreement, as well as the decision to order a full
cessation of hostilities to go into effect on 14 April.

We must indeed recognize that until now the
ceasefire has been respected for the most part. It is
certainly regrettable that the armies of Uganda and
Rwanda have once again engaged in fierce fighting in
the city of Kisangani. The civilian population of
Kisangani, which, for an entire year has been the
sacrificial victim of these acts of war, is the least of the
concerns of these two countries for which Congolese
lives are only a tool to achieve their mercantile goals.
It is certainly equally deplorable that Uganda and the
Movement for the Liberation of the Congo are stepping
up their skirmishes in the Equateur Province. The most
recent instance was the fighting that took place for
control of the city of Bomongo on the border with the
neighbouring Republic of the Congo.

But it is also certain that all of these activities are
not of a scope that can endanger the peace process
initiated in Lusaka. The war in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a transnational war involving
primarily States and Governments that are sensitive to
friendly and other forms of pressure to restore peace in
the region. This aspect distinguishes this situation from
the situation in Sierra Leone.

My delegation thus shares the belief of the
members of the Council's mission that the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has its own
special characteristics, that the peacekeeping operation
must be judged on its own merits and that the situation
in Sierra Leone should in no way obscure the
responsibility of the leaders of the region and the
international community in respect of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, nor their capacity to make a
real difference in my country.

The United Nations should therefore take
advantage of this respite to proceed to the rapid
deployment of phase II of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). Mr. Laurent-Desire Kabila,
President of the Republic, assured the members of the
Council's mission that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo would not create
any obstacle to such deployment. The head of State
also reiterated the readiness of the Government to
cooperate fully with MONUC.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to express its heartfelt thanks to all of those countries
that have made a substantive contribution to MONUC
and would like to say to them that their sons and
daughters, who are committed to the cause of peace for
my country, are welcome in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The Congolese Government and people
are ready to receive them in the best tradition of
African hospitality.

Aside from stopping the fighting, the United
Nations should also work at restoring the most
fundamental rights of the Congolese population, as it is
authorized to do by resolution 1291 (2000) of 24
February of this year, primarily in paragraphs 12
through 15.

The non-governmental organization Human
Rights Watch, based in New York, has just published a
damning report on the brutal acts committed on
occupied Congolese territory by the aggressors, in
violation of the principles of human rights and of
international humanitarian law. My Government
urgently demands that the United Nations insist that the
Governments of Rwanda, Burundi and Uganda, the
Goma and Bunia factions of the Congolese Rally for
Democracy and the Movement for the Liberation of the
Congo immediately halt all attacks aimed at civilian
populations. The United Nations must carry out
investigations to establish the facts and begin legal
proceedings against the perpetrators of these crimes.

As a result of armed aggression, my country has
become the land of choice for illicit activities of all
types. The United Nations has already shown itself to
be seriously concerned by the illegal exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo by the forces of aggression. This practice fuels
their war effort, thus perpetuating the destitution of the
Congolese people. This is why my Government
supports the proposal made to the Security Council by
the Secretary-General to establish a group of experts,
in accordance with paragraph 17 of resolution 1291
(2000), and asks that the Security Council follow up
the Secretary-General's proposal.

My Government calls upon the Security Council
to make this expert group effectively operational as
quickly as possible in order to put an end to such
activities, which are obviously accompanied by the
destruction, the dismantling and the illegal transfer to
the aggressor countries of economic, environmental
and industrial infrastructure from the occupied
provinces.

The inter-Congolese dialogue is one of the
provisions of the Lusaka Agreement. The President of
the Republic has rightly emphasized that the major
objective of that dialogue continues to be the
participation of the Congolese people at those
meetings, thus allowing it to express itself freely on its
future and also to choose or to determine the bodies
that will govern the future of the Republic.

From their talks, both with the Government and
with representatives of civil society, religious groups
and political parties, the members of the Council's
mission doubtless will have understood that an
unequivocal consensus is emerging in favour of
holding these meetings as soon as possible.

Since the outset of the aggression of which it has
been a victim, my country has continued to reaffirm
that the restoration of peace will allow for the
establishment of a favourable climate for the
implementation of the programme of national
reconstruction and development that the people of the
Congo so keenly desire. The aggression has put in
jeopardy for a long time to come the development and
well-being of the present and future generations of all
countries of the Great Lakes region. All of our
countries are now faced with the task of consolidating
peace domestically and of economic reconstruction.
Renewing good-neighbourly relations is a prerequisite
of vital and primary importance. If all the countries of
the region, assisted by the United Nations and the
international community, grasp the complexities that
have been at the foundation of the aggression and
demonstrate their readiness to make sincere efforts, the
problems that we are facing should ultimately be
settled.

We must have the courage to identify
dispassionately the specific problems facing our
countries and to take, within the framework of a global
approach, reliable measures aimed at national
reconciliation, power-sharing, the establishment of
republican armies, the establishment or revitalization
of the process of democratization, and development.

It is in this spirit that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo supports the holding of an international
conference on peace, stability, security and
development in the Great Lakes region. Each country
must bear full responsibility for its people, deal with its
own contradictions and refrain from placing on others
the burden of its own inability to manage its
contradictions. The international community has a
moral obligation to assist us in developing our
capabilities to resolve our problems.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that from
the United Nations and the Security Council, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is expecting, first,
the deployment, as soon as possible, of phase II of
MONUC, in order to establish conditions conducive to
the withdrawal of the occupying forces; secondly, the
establishment of an expert group to study the question
of the illegal exploitation of the natural and other
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
thirdly, the early holding of the inter-Congolese
dialogue; and fourthly, the effective implementation of
the Lusaka Agreement.

My Government wishes to assure the Council of
its full and total cooperation, so that the process begun
in Lusaka can be successfully concluded.

The meeting was suspended at 1.15pm.
