Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): We, too, thank you, Sir,
for convening this meeting and welcome the
comprehensive report of the Security Council mission on
the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) in Kosovo,
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. May I also acknowledge
and congratulate Ambassador Anwarul Chowdhury and all
my colleagues who were able to find time to undertake
the Mission to Kosovo on our behalf.

First, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation that the Security Council enthusiastically
accepted the invitation of the Special Representative,
Mr. Kouchner, to visit Kosovo, not only to ascertain the
facts on the ground but also to bring the Security Council
members closer to the people we serve - in this case,
the people of Kosovo.

Secondly, we observe with satisfaction that the
Council found this opportunity to share the findings of
our mission to Kosovo with the larger membership of the
United Nations family. This formula, if replicated, will
definitely augur well for us in the days ahead. It is
unfortunate that we could not extend meaningful
participation to all the Member States that wanted to
make a presentation.

My delegation believes that for the full and effective
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), the international community ought to support the
efforts by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) in a sustainable manner and at the same time
continue to encourage the ethnic communities in Kosovo
to actively participate in the process.

On a daily basis, UNMIK and KFOR have been
facing the Herculean task of providing adequate physical
security, freedom of movement, particularly for the ethnic
minorities, and access to education and health care, as
well as of guaranteeing the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, as indicated in paragraph 24
of the report. In the light of the task at hand and in View
of the forthcoming municipal elections, this is a critical
juncture for contributions to UNMIK.

We welcome the participation of Serbs as observers
in the following bodies: the Joint Interim Administrative
Structures, the Kosovo Transitional Council and the
Interim Administrative Council. My delegation hopes that
soon the Serbs will upgrade their participation in these
institutions. In this context, we encourage the Bosniac and
Roma representatives to join the Transitional Council.

 

Paragraph 23 of the report also indicates that, in
Kosovo, "All ethnic communities expressed a desire to live
in peace together". If that is the case, the international
community should be able to assist them in moving towards
peaceful coexistence in spite of the recent violence.
Furthermore, it is exhilarating for us to learn that positive
relations between communities still exist at the local level,
as demonstrated through the renewal of contacts between
leaders of the Albanian and Serb communities in Mitrovica.
Therefore, we hope and pray that these contacts will
continue and at the end of the day provide an opportunity
for confidence-building and reconciliation. It is these efforts
that the international community must support and nurture.

Namibia concurs with members of the Security
Council mission that the process of reconciliation,
rebuilding and resettlement is a protracted one, but it is a
process worth engaging in, and we are confident that the
foundation derived from the work by the international
community will continue to provide the people of Kosovo
with the necessary ingredients to reorganize their lives.

In conclusion, let me express my delegation's
appreciation and thanks to UNMIK, KFOR and other
international humanitarian institutions who are carrying out
their work under challenging circumstances.

