Mr. Sevilla Somoza (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to tell you how pleased my
delegation is that you, Mr. President, have convened
this important meeting. We also wish to welcome the
presence of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Bahamas and Jamaica.

I first wish to endorse what was said by the
representative of Guatemala, speaking on behalf of the
Central American Integration System. However, in
View of the bonds that unite us with the Haitian people,
we would like to make our own comments as well.

The people and Government of Nicaragua - a
country that suffered a years-long civil war that caused
thousands of deaths, casualties and maimed and made
our economy slip back at least 40 years - can do no
less than express our solidarity and concern at the
current crisis in the sister Republic of Haiti. Rebel
forces opposing President Jean Bertrand Aristide have
taken at least two of the main cities and have
destabilized the political order in many other parts of
the country.

The military conflict in Haiti - above and
beyond the physical violence that has in a terrible
manner produced a huge number of dead and
wounded - has worsened the situation for the 8
million inhabitants of the poorest country in the
continent, a situation characterized by famine and lack
of drinking water, medication, fuel, transportation and
electricity. This has the greatest impact on the weakest
parts of society - women, children and the elderly.

The crisis threatens to spread, in some form, to
other countries of the region. They would have to seek
international assistance to deal with the flow of
refugees that the conflict could cause if it persisted or
intensified. The Organization of American States
(OAS) and Caribbean Community (CARICOM) have
taken a number of initiatives with a view to resolving
the problems besetting our brethren, the people of
Haiti. They have condemned the violence and have
voiced the urgency of a peaceful settlement of the
conflict.

The most recent of those initiatives was a
multilateral mission to Haiti with the participation of
the United States, France, Canada, CARICOM. and the
OAS. CARICOM. offered a concrete proposal intended
to restore confidence among the various armed groups
and to begin a process of detente that could facilitate
dialogue with opposition forces and civil society. But
that Plan of Action has not yet come to fruition,
because it has been accepted only by President
Aristide. We hope it can soon be adopted by the
opposition as well.

The Government of Nicaragua deplores the
violence and the loss of life in Haiti, and calls on all
the conflicting parties, including the Government, to
respect human rights, cease violence and hostility and
begin dialogue in accordance with the CARICOM. Plan,
with a view to a peaceful and democratic settlement of
these disputes.

We fully support President Aristide in the quest
for a solution consistent with the Haitian constitutional
order and the principles of the Inter-American
Democratic Charter.

We call on the international community, and on
the United Nations system in particular, to help the
Haitian people to improve the grave humanitarian
situation by providing food, medicine, blankets and
other goods that can improve the present serious
situation of the people of Haiti.

We echo resolution CP/862, adopted today on this
subject by the Permanent Council of the OAS, by
which that body resolved, inter alia, to "call upon the
United Nations Security Council to take the necessary
and appropriate urgent measures, as established in the
Charter of the United Nations, to address the crisis in
Haiti".

