Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this timely meeting. I would also like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their
briefings depicting the grave situation in Idlib.

Unfortunately, ceasefire violations are still on the
rise. The consequences of the attacks by the regime
against civilians are dire. So far, they have caused
hundreds ofcasualties, the displacement ofover 300,000
people and severe damage to health facilities and schools.
We are particularly alarmed by attacks on medical
facilities, the locations of which have been notified
under the United Nations deconfliction mechanism.
That seriously undermines the very purpose of those
notifications, which is to allow for humanitarian access
while increasing the security of humanitarian actors in
the field. The continued targeting of health facilities
will only generate more displacement, instability and
suffering for the 3.5 million Syrians living in the Idlib
area. The deconfliction mechanism should be fully
implemented and the ceasefire must be respected
without delay.

Turkey is fully committed to the Sochi memorandum
and has clearly demonstrated that with concrete action
on the ground, at the risk of putting our soldiers' lives
in grave danger. The regime's attacks undermine our
efforts to implement the memorandum. They must stop.
Over the past weeks, our observation posts in the Idlib
de-escalation area have been repeatedly targeted by the
regime. Most recently, observation post 10 was seriously
hit twice by mortar fire from regime-controlled areas
on 4 May and 13 June. Five Turkish soldiers were
wounded during those attacks. A recent aggression
over the weekend on observation post 9, with mortar
fire and shelling, also caused damage.

Those attacks are unacceptable and in clear
violation of, inter alia, the Sochi memorandum. We
must take precautions to protect the lives of our
military servicemen on the ground. We will not hesitate
to take decisive action to that end. We will keep our
observation posts operational, despite threats. We will
also continue to coordinate our efforts with Russia at all
levels in order to put an end to the regime's violations
and preserve the status of Idlib as a de-escalation area.
As a matter of fact, yesterday, the Defence Ministers
of Turkey and Russia discussed the situation in Idlib
and agreed to uphold their commitments under the
Sochi memorandum.

It is clear that combating terrorism does not absolve
any party from its obligations arising from international
law to prevent attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Fighting terrorism can in no way justify
those indiscriminate attacks. The use of barrel bombs
indicates a complete disregard for human life. As a
country with a long history of fighting terrorism, we
strongly condemn terrorism and extremism in all their
forms and manifestations. Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham is an
acute problem, aggravated by the presence of foreign
terrorist fighters. However, the problem of Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham cannot be overcome by targeting civilians. We
need to address the problem of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
with a more sophisticated and comprehensive long-
term strategy, targeting its ideology and structure.
Progress in the political process will be one of the key
elements to this end, and establishing the constitutional
committee will be the first step in that direction.

We are at a critical stage in the approach to finalizing
the formation of the constitutional committee. The
convening of the committee will be the first essential
step in the international community's efforts to achieve
a democratic Syria. All sides should assume their
responsibilities and support efforts to convene the first
meeting of the committee. We want to see a stable,
peaceful and democratic Syria that can maintain its
political unity and territorial integrity, a Syria that is
governed according to the legitimate aspirations of its
people. We can achieve that only through a political
solution on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015). There
can be no lasting humanitarian solution without a
credible political process. Ifthe Idlib de-escalation area
cannot hold, the prospects for a viable political solution
will diminish considerably. The ongoing attacks by
the regime are clearly aimed at the collapse of the
political process.

We must be clear that the responsibility to prevent a
major catastrophe in Idlib lies not only with the parties
to the Sochi memorandum but with the Council as
well. What we are seeing in Idlib cannot be allowed
to continue. This latest chapter in the Syrian conflict
is an affront to all humankind. Enough blood has been
shed. All efforts should now prioritize the needs of the
millions of Syrians who have suffered tremendously
and are putting their faith in us.

Lastly, with regard to the hallucinatory statement
by the representative of the Syrian regime, I repeat that
I do not consider him to be my legitimate counterpart,
because that would be an affront to the millions of
Syrians who have suffered countless crimes at the
hands of that regime. I will therefore not dignify his
delusional accusations with a response.

