Ms. Durrant (Jamaica): Mr. President, allow me
on behalf of the Jamaican delegation to welcome you,
the Foreign Minister of Colombia, most warmly. My
delegation is certain that under your guidance this
important debate will be extremely useful in seeking to
meet the objectives you have outlined. We are
particularly grateful that the Colombian presidency has
provided an opportunity for non-members of the
Council to participate in this discussion, as we believe
that the Security Council can only benefit from
exploring new approaches to a subject that affects all
aspects of its mandate related to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The increased attention of the international
community to the issue of small arms is both timely
and welcome. The spread and use of those weapons has
contributed significantly to the escalation and
perpetuation of violence in conflict and post-conflict
areas; it has brought more pervasive violation of
human rights and erosion of social justice and has
expanded the threat both to personal security and to the
stability of States. The escalation in the level of
violence that has accompanied the increase in the use
of small arms and light weapons and its linkage to the
illicit drug trade now pose a formidable challenge to
the economic and social development of many
countries.

There is no question that the greatest injury and
loss of human life result from those weapons, most
often within the context of national or regional
conflicts. Particularly disturbing is the fact that the
victims of small-arms violence are increasingly from
the most vulnerable sectors of society, especially
women and children.

Today's open debate, which follows the recent
conclusion of the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects, under the leadership of Ambassador
Camilo Reyes Rodriguez of Colombia, is, in our View,
very appropriate. We also express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General and to the Department for
Disarmament Affairs for their exhaustive efforts to
keep this issue before the international community. In
that context, we thank the Secretary-General for his
presence here today and for his valuable introduction to
our debate.

The Programme of Action adopted by the
Conference can be seen as the first significant initiative
of the international community as a whole to map out a
comprehensive set of measures for national, regional
and international action to prevent, combat and
eradicate the illegal trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects. The Security Council must
build on that momentum.
There can be no doubt that the ready availability
of small arms and light weapons has undermined the
efforts of the Security Council to achieve many of its
objectives. When it last considered this item, on
24 September 1999, the Council acknowledged the
destabilizing accumulation of small arms as a
contributing factor in the intensity and duration of
armed conflict and in the undermining of peace
agreements, complicating peace-building efforts and
increasing the vulnerability of civilians to the
indiscriminate use of these weapons in both conflict
and post-conflict situations. The Council also
expressed particular concern at the humanitarian
impact and socio-economic implications of the
excessive accumulation and transfer of small arms and
light weapons. Since that debate, new situations have
arisen that have served to further substantiate these
concerns.

This reality is compelling reason for the Council
to include integrally, within the framework of its
assessment and decision-making, specific consideration
of the role played by small arms and light weapons. We
therefore hope that this debate will result in practical
proposals and recommendations for the mainstreaming
of small arms in the work of the Council, moving it
from a tangential to a more central position in our
deliberations. To this end, I wish to offer the following
perspectives.

First, the Secretary-General should be encouraged
to include an analysis on the proliferation of small
arms in his reports to the Security Council on specific
conflict situations, identifying sources of supply and
financing for these weapons where possible. We note,
for example, current reports that the civilian population
in Burundi is being armed despite efforts to advance
the Arusha peace process. This is an example of a case
in which special briefings or reports by the Secretary-
General with an analysis on the spread of arms could
be particularly valuable.

Secondly, the Security Council should
significantly improve its attention to the disarmament
component of disarmament, demobilization,
resettlement and reintegration (DDRR) programmes.
Greater attention should be given to devising more
effective programmes to ensure that peacekeeping
operations respond clearly to the question of arms
control. Such consideration should include the securing
of accurate information on the origin, volume and
nature of small arms and light weapons in the
possession of ex-combatants and the civilian
population. More accurate and comprehensive data
collection is important for the success of the
disarmament phase of any DDRR programme.

Such programmes should also include clear
guidelines for the disposal and destruction of weapons,
in order to consolidate peace and to prevent the
migration of these weapons to other regions of conflict.
In this regard, the Council should pay special attention
to the destruction of weapons in the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration, repatriation or
resettlement programme anticipated for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to preclude the access to these
weapons by groups in other countries.

The Secretary-General has drawn attention to the
devastating effects of small arms on children, and it is
important that psycho-social rehabilitation of child ex-
combatants be an important part of the DDRR
programmes.

Thirdly, the sanctions committees of the Security
Council have an important role to play in redefining
the Council's approach to the question of small arms.
There is an urgent need for more innovative strategies
that address the issue of the illicit exploitation of
natural resources being used by combatants for
purchasing weapons. In this regard, we need to build
on the important successes achieved by the
mechanisms in relation to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Angola. It is imperative that greater
attention be given to ways to achieve sharper and more
targeted sanctions so as to limit combatants' access to
resources. It is also important that information on
financial transactions fuelling the illicit flow of arms
be shared and made public. We also need to ensure that
appropriate and regular information is provided on
arms flows and effective enforcement of arms
embargoes.

In due course, the Council should undertake an
analysis of the lessons learned from the mechanisms
established for the sanctions against UNITA, and more
recently on Afghanistan. The importance of regional
agreement and cooperation in this regard must be
underscored. The Council could benefit from the
results of the Interlochen and the Bonn-Berlin
initiatives on targeted sanctions.

Fourthly, there is an urgent need to engage
business and financial institutions, non-governmental
organizations and other actors at the international and
local levels in an effort to curb the ability of local
groups to secure the resources to purchase illegal arms.
In this regard, Jamaica reiterates its position that more
effective domestic and international regulation of the
legal arms trade, so as to stem the leakage of legal
weapons to illegal markets, is central to any strategy to
effectively control the illicit trafficking in and use of
these weapons.

Beyond this, experience has shown that the most
effective initiatives to date in controlling the spread of
illegal weapons have been initiated at the regional
level. Regional bodies are well placed to provide useful
information and perspectives on the regional
dimensions that characterize arms flows. We therefore
strongly recommend more structured consultation
between the Council and regional organizations seized
of this issue. Towards that end, the Council may wish
to consider holding consultations with the heads of
regional organizations when they meet here at United
Nations Headquarters next year, to consider follow-up
for implementation of the Programme of Action on
small arms and light weapons relevant to the work of
the Council and to the mandate of the regional
organizations.

In his statement the Secretary-General
underscored that the issue before us is not just a
question of disarmament, but an integral question of
development, democracy and human rights. The
complex, integrated challenge that it poses demands a
comprehensive, coordinated response. In this regard,
Jamaica considers that closer consultation and
cooperation with the General Assembly and other
organs of the United Nations system for the control of
wrongful use of small arms and light weapons could
only serve to enhance the effectiveness of the work of
the Council.

Within this framework, we believe that there is a
central role for the Secretariat to play in coordinating
all United Nations activities concerning small arms. We
welcome the important role that the Department for
Disarmament Affairs, through its mechanism for
Coordinating Action on Small Arms, continues to play
in ensuring regular consultation and coordination
among all entities within the United Nations system for
which the matter of small arms is an integral concern.

Jamaica considers that these existing mechanisms
could be strengthened to enhance in-house capacity to
undertake more research and analysis on the nature and
scope of the problem, and to provide practical
assistance to affected States. There is still a paucity of
data on the small arms phenomenon. Instead of
establishing another group of experts, institutions like
the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research
could be strengthened with a view to widening the
database of information that the Council could access.
We also note that the United Nations continues to
experience difficulty in recruiting disarmament experts
and trainers for service within peacekeeping operations
in the field. This need could be addressed in part by
encouraging Governments to establish databases of
expertise on disarmament to enhance the United
Nations capacity when the need arises.

These initiatives will, of course, demand
additional resources, both human and financial. My
delegation was therefore disappointed that the recent
Conference did not result in a specific commitment to
the investment of new and additional resources for the
implementation of the Programme of Action. Without
the injection of fresh resources, our efforts will be
significantly compromised. We encourage better
coordination among existing small arms funds, to
ensure maximization of the impact of these resources.
We also consider that it would be useful to explore the
possibility of working more closely with the United
Nations Development Programme to identify areas in
which its trust fund for support of prevention and
reduction in the proliferation of small arms, which
includes a "weapons for development" approach, can
be of assistance in the disarmament component of
peacekeeping operations.

The challenge before us to effectively address the
problem of small arms is awesome. It is our hope that
the Council will embrace the issue integrally within the
scope of its work. This is an issue that must remain on
the agenda of the Council as long as the death toll from
the indiscriminate use of these weapons remains a sad
reality.

