Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): Sierra Leone
congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of October
2007. We assure you, and the Council, of our full and
unwavering support.

We deeply appreciate the opportunity to the
contribute to the discussion of the first report of the
Peacebuilding Commission (S/2007/458) for the
second time in two weeks. The prominence that has
been given to the report by two principal organs of the
United Nations - the Security Council and the
General Assembly - is an indication of the
significance they attach to the Peacebuilding
Commission and its partner, the Peacebuilding Fund.

We were compelled by our own painful
experience with conflict to play an active role in the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission. As
Council members know, we had the fortune of
becoming one of the two countries for the
Commission's first country-specific interventions.
Thus, we have witnessed with unflagging interest the
birth and growth of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The report before us is an account of how that birth and
growth took place, of the challenges the Commission
has had to conquer and of challenges that are yet to be
conquered.

We welcome and appreciate the report. Now we
have a torch, in the form of the report, to show us the
way into the future. In spite of the Commission's
teething problems, most of which were not totally
unexpected, all of us should be proud of the
achievements of the Peacebuilding Commission during
its short period of existence. My delegation would like
to thank all those whose efforts put the Commission on
the path we envisaged at the conceptual stage,
particularly the Commission itself, the first Chairman,
the Peacebuilding Support Office and the Chairs of the
country-specific configurations.

Let me pay a special tribute to the Chair for
Sierra Leone, Ambassador Frank Majoor, for his
devotion to Sierra Leone. Of course, we thank the
Commission for selecting Sierra Leone as one of the
two countries for its initial operation.

In Sierra Leone, as in many other places that have
been afflicted with Violent and devastating conflict, the
road to peace has not been altogether smooth. But with
tolerance, understanding and the overriding need to
reconcile and move forward for the general good, even
the pain, the mud and thorns we have travelled through
for peace have been the greatest of healers. Today, we
can reflect with pride on the two presidential and
parliamentary elections and the one local government
election we have had since the war formally ended in
2002. These represent giant strides in our peace and
democratization processes and a solid foundation for
sustainable peace.
The recent elections, in particular, speak
eloquently of our political maturity and determination
to achieve lasting stability. Again, we thank the United
Nations and all other multilateral and bilateral partners
of Sierra Leone for their support.

We are aware that this support comes with the
responsibility to make sure that the people of Sierra
Leone enjoy, in tangible terms, the benefits of peace,
democracy and human rights, and, in particular, the
realization of the promise of the Peacebuilding
Commission. That is why our new President both in his
maiden speech to parliament and during the recent visit
of Ambassador Majoor, declared his commitment to the
cooperation of his Government with the United Nations
in general and with the Peacebuilding Commission in
particular.

As a demonstration of our readiness to discharge
our responsibility, let me make the following
observations and recommendations. First, work on the
framework document on cooperation between Sierra
Leone and the Peacebuilding Commission was slowed
down by the elections. Now that the elections are over,
we should try as expeditiously as possible to conclude
it so that this issue does not stand in the way of
progress in the implementation of the Sierra Leone
programme.

Secondly, country ownership of the
Peacebuilding Commission both in principle and in
practical terms, should be the foundation for the
operations of the Commission.

Thirdly, resource mobilization is one of the
responsibilities of the Commission. That should now
be brought to the fore of its activities, including,
possibly, through a pledging conference with all our
partners fully involved. Given very weak - and in
some cases non-existent - institutions, owing partly to
a scarcity of appropriately trained and experienced
personnel, the Peacebuilding Commission may want to
consider introducing a scheme for experience transfer
to needy countries that are within its purview. The
programme, as a critically urgent gap-closer in the
recovery process, should be flexible, adaptable and in
harmony with those already in place.
Fourthly, in the light of the fluid nature of
conflict in the West African subregion, a carefully
coordinated regional approach, in particular within the
Mano River Union, will be an investment worth
considering by the Commission.
Lastly, the institution of a strong monitoring and
evaluation mechanism for the programmes in operation
should be considered.

The Commission might also consider the question
of working relationships among the Commission, the
Security Council and the General Assembly, while
recognizing their respective responsibilities and
functions under the Charter.

We acknowledge that the Commission shall
request advice from the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council or the General Assembly.
In our view, there is also need for the Commission to
start thinking of ways in which it can assist the
Security Council by providing relevant advice, for
instance in the establishment of new United Nations
post-conflict integrated offices, or even in developing
peacekeeping mandates.

Since the Commission was established jointly by
the General Assembly and the Security Council,
perhaps at the end of this first year of the
Commission's work the Council itself may wish to
come up with general proposals to address some of the
challenges outlined in the Commission's report.

In conclusion, let me assure the Security Council
that we are prepared and ready to share with the rest of
the world what I prefer to call the Sierra Leone
experience, in the days of the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone and now in the days of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone and the
Peacebuilding Commission. For now, that is perhaps
all that we can give to the world for its support. As
intangible as what we have to offer may seem at the
moment, I am sure that future generations may one day
say, yes, our predecessors invested so much for peace
and stability in Sierra Leone, but the result of the
experiment has made our work easier and saved the
world lives and billions of dollars.

