Mr. Lal (India): We thank the presidency of the
Netherlands for convening today's open debate, the first
this year on the topic of peacekeeping. We are meeting
against the backdrop of the previous year, which saw
the highest number of fatalities due to attacks among
United Nations peacekeepers since 1994.

The questions regarding the limitations of United
Nations peacekeeping operations continue to confront
us, as several complex missions show little signs
of resolution. The issue has been debated here long
enough. Several expert reports on it exist, and the
reasons for the situation are very clear. Besides the
changing nature of armed conflicts themselves, they
include serious, chronic shortcomings resulting from a
lack of clarity in mandates, a mismatch in the resources
available to peacekeepers, inadequate consultations
with troop-contributing countries and a lack of focus
on political solutions to building and sustaining peace.
These are all well known.

However, a coherent approach to jointly addressing
these reasons continues to elude us, while we continue
to look for shortcuts and focus narrowly only on

enhancing efficiency, effecting savings, improving
logistics or expanding the availability of troops and
their rapid deployment. We are still not addressing
the core issues. What is actually missing is the
political will to acknowledge and implement many of
the recommendations.

On the question of mandates, of the 15 current
peacekeeping missions, six have 15 or more mandate
components and five have between seven and 10.
We would like to know if there are any assessments
of whether such missions can do justice to all their
mandated components with the limited resources
available to them. Several recent mandate renewals
have once again shown the limitations ofa process that
continues to be led by a few and is primarily driven
by numbers and individual national agendas rather
than by the aim of providing adequate resources for
realistic mandates.

The Council could utilize its Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations to debate and agree on
strategic objectives for the missions, design mandates
and monitor the capacity to achieve them. The Working
Group could submit recommendations after engaging
with a broad range of actors, including the Secretariat
and troop- and police-contributing countries. The
Council could review and modify mandates when
needs on the ground shift, rather than waiting until the
mandate cycles end.

I now want to turn to the very serious concern of the
increasing loss oflives of United Nations peacekeepers
due to attacks on missions. In the past four years, of the
176 fatalities due to acts of violence, 43 were the result
of attacks by improvised explosive devices (IEDs). We
believe that missions facing such threats should have
dedicated resources for countering IED threats. There
should be concerted efforts to upgrade the security
infrastructure of the camps. Capabilities for timely and
reliable medical and casualty evacuation, including
the use of helicopters with night-flight capability and
night-retrieval operations, are essential. In addition,
force commanders should be given direct command
over such air assets for missions in order to respond in
a timely manner to crisis situations and accidents.

An issue that is much discussed is the importance
of greater female participation in peacekeeping.
However, actual progress in this regard still leaves
a lot be desired. According to the latest data of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the overall
percentage of female United Nations military observers
and staff officers is currently around 8 per cent. India,
the first country to contribute a women formed police
unit to peacekeeping, is one of only 26 countries that
have reached the goal of 15 per cent for women military
observers and staff officers. The fact remains that most
other countries have yet to reach that target.

With its long experience in United Nations
peacekeeping, India believes that peacekeeping's
success should be judged on missions' ability to sustain
peace by enabling political solutions through integrated
responses. That is, of course, the shared responsibility
of the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop-
and police-contributing countries. We hope that the
collective political will to address peacekeeping's well-
known challenges effectively will emerge sooner rather
than later.

