Ms. Wever-Croes (Netherlands): The Kingdom of
the Netherlands aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union, as well
as with the statement to be made by the Permanent
Representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.

I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Executive Director of UNICEF for their briefings.
I would like to say thank Ms. Yenny Londofio for
reminding us that today's debate is not only about
shocking numbers and trends. Indeed, behind the
statistics are real-life individuals who can be empowered
to make a change in real-life situations.

Allow me to highlight three elements today: first,
the erosion of international humanitarian law and
the imperative of accountability; secondly, the vital
importance of child protection in conflict prevention
and sustaining peace; and, thirdly, the importance of
strong tools for an effective, credible and transparent
children and armed conflict mandate.

First, at last year's open debate on children and
armed conflict (see S/PV.8082), the Kingdom of the
Netherlands expressed concern at the increased lack
of respect for international humanitarian law, and we
do so again today. The 30 per cent increase in grave
violations as identified under the children and armed
conflict mandate in 2017 is shocking. Together we must
do everything in our power to immediately turn the tide
of the erosion in respect for international humanitarian
law. That also includes commitments to binding
instruments, such as the Optional Protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, and to non-legally
binding commitments such as the Paris Principles, the
Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers.

Resolution 2427 (2018), which we adopted today,
calls on all States to put an end to impunity for the
most horrendous crimes perpetrated against children.
Importantly, it highlights the contribution of the
International Criminal Court in holding to account
those responsible for the most serious crimes. The
hardened pressure against the Court is undeniable,
however, which makes it all the more important to stand
firm and strongly resist all efforts to weaken the Court,
including by introducing ambiguities to language on its
role. Protecting populations at risk of mass atrocities is
a goal of both the International Criminal Court and the
Security Council, as is the prevention of conflict.

Secondly, the Council must also focus on preventive
measures in all phases of cycles of conflict. In that
regard, I thank Sweden for facilitating a resolution
that incorporates important gains. The Council now
recognizes that the protection of children affected by
armed conflict should be part of strategies to resolve
conflict and sustain peace. It recognizes the importance
of addressing root causes of conflict and violations of
human rights, as well as the importance of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development in formulating an
integrated approach to conflict prevention.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains
convinced that even more must be done. It is crucial
that the Council listen carefully to testimonies like
Ms. Londofio's. The progress observed in Colombia
provides a strong case for how mainstreaming child
protection and prioritizing children's issues in peace
processes can contribute to lasting peace.

My third point concerns the importance of strong
tools for an effective, credible and transparent mandate.
The mandate for children and armed conflict is equipped
with tools that have real and significant impact on the
ground. That includes the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and the annual report by the Secretary-
General and its annexes that list parties committing
grave violations.

It is important to remember that the Council, in its
resolution 1612 (2005) of 13 years ago, underlined the
importance of timely, objective, accurate and reliable
information for those tools to remain effective. Timely
information enables the Council to act in an apt and
swift manner. A high frequency of conclusions in
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
and the timely publication of the annual report of the
Secretary-General are crucial in that regard. Accurate
information is only possible if there are enough actors
on the ground to report and verify violations and if they
are assured proper access.

Objective and reliable information includes
transparency on listing criteria. That allows for
meaningful dialogue and safeguards the credibility and
impartiality of the children and armed conflict mandate.

The children and armed conflict mandate is unique
in its effectiveness and makes a distinctive difference
to children affected by conflict. The Council bears
continuing responsibility to stop the unacceptable plight
of these children. The Kingdom of the Netherlands, as
a member of the Council and beyond, is a committed
partner in this endeavour.

