The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Qatar.

The State of Qatar is eager for all States to
comply with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT). That is a matter of principle
to which we are committed because we believe in the
important role of the Treaty in saving humanity from
destruction - and the threat of destruction will persist
as long as nuclear weapons exist on Earth. For that
reason, we have tirelessly appealed for a Middle East
region free from all weapons of mass destruction. We
have also called on nuclear-weapon States to submit
their facilities to the inspection regime of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Further,
we have never ceased our call upon States possessing
nuclear stockpiles to work towards dismantling those
stockpiles. Moreover, my country has supported all
United Nations resolutions calling for such measures.

The State of Qatar believes that commitment to
the Treaty, within the framework of the IAEA, which is
the international forum for the sharing of nuclear
information and technology among developed and
developing countries, can encourage the safe use of
nuclear technologies, help build confidence among
States and promote understanding among nations.

The State of Qatar considers that Iran has the
right to undertake research on nuclear technology and
to use that technology and produce nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. No one can invoke articles I and II
of the NPT to take away that right. But atomic
concepts designed for destruction have given rise to
advanced technologies that can be turned to peaceful
purposes, provided that standards for safety, including
the safety of nuclear reactors, are in place. Such
standards would avert accidents. Great benefits can
come of cooperation with the IAEA in this sphere,
because the Agency is a centre for exchanging
information and for establishing guidelines.

With respect to this difficult issue, Qatar has no
suspicions concerning the sincerity of Iran's intentions
as regards the peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme. But we must not risk the potential benefits
of cooperation with the IAEA in guaranteeing nuclear
safety, particularly since this draft resolution would
impede delivery of equipment necessary for the Iranian
nuclear programme, which could have dangerous
repercussions for the nuclear safety issue. That is why
we appeal once again to our sisterly neighbour Iran and
urge it to respond to this draft resolution. We know that
the draft resolution is tough, but we are confident that
there is wide scope for diplomatic cooperation, given
that Iran has expressed readiness to continue to permit
inspection activities under IAEA safeguards, including
settling outstanding questions, so long as the issue
remains within the IAEA's purview, in conformity with
Iran's letter dated 27 April 2006 addressed to the
Director General of the IAEA.

The Council's draft resolution also states that the
measures to be enforced would be suspended to
provide an opportunity for negotiations. These are
issues that can be overcome, so long as we act in good
faith. Iran can use its wisdom to address the situation
with the rationality that is required. Our vote is
prompted by our concerns over the safety of Iranian
nuclear facilities.

Finally, we hope that the Council will stand
united in the search for a peaceful settlement and that it
will use such a settlement to limit nuclear proliferation
in other regions, in accordance with existing
resolutions, in particular with respect to the Middle
East region, and especially with respect to Israel,
which has recently made statements concerning its
nuclear deterrence capability.

For all those reasons, the State of Qatar will vote
in favour of the draft resolution.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2006/ 1010.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America

The President (spoke in Arabic): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1737 (2006).

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


