Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and
Herzegovina; the European Free Trade Association
country Norway, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.

First of all, I would like to join others in expressing
our condolences to the United States for the loss of life
suffered by its servicemen in today's helicopter crash.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2013/72l), and his Special
Representative Mr. Jan Kubis for his briefing and the
very hard work he is doing in the face of very difficult
challenges. I would also like to thank Ambassador Tanin
for his remarks.
We are approaching the start of a very important
year for Afghanistan and the Afghan people. In April,
Afghans will elect a new President and, by the end
of 2014, Afghan security forces will have exclusive
responsibility for maintaining and increasing security
across the country.

We are very much encouraged by the lively
political debate and the progress made in preparing for
the presidential and provincial elections, including the
important technical roles played by the Independent
Election Commission and the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission. It will be vital for the
elections to be inclusive and transparent and lead to
a legitimate outcome. The Afghan authorities must
ensure that a comprehensive security plan is in place
to enable as many Afghans as possible to have an
opportunity to exercise their democratic right. It will
also be important that appropriate measures be in
place to minimize multiple voting, in particular men
voting on behalf of women, ensure the security of
ballot boxes and combat electoral fraud. From our side,
we will continue to provide financial and technical
support through the United Nations and other bodies to
strengthen the electoral process.

A political solution and a genuine peace and
reconciliation process are key to lasting stability and
development. A genuine peace and reconciliation
process should be Afghan-led, inclusive and based on
the Constitution.

The security transition has been implemented
successfully according to plan. However, we should
not underestimate the remaining security challenges.
Further strengthening the capacity to address those
will be a prerequisite for progress.

In that regard, we would like to emphasize the
importance of the bilateral security agreement between
the Government of Afghanistan and the United States
ofAmerica. It will both provide the basis for continuing
international support to train and develop the capability
of the Afghan National Security Forces and facilitate
the continued provision of significant international
development assistance to the Afghan people across the
country.

The international community's engagement must be
matched by continued progress on Afghanistan's agreed
commitments under the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. While recognizing that important progress
has been made, there are continued concerns about the
human rights situation in Afghanistan, in particular
the situation of women and girls. The Government
of Afghanistan needs to take all possible measures
to tackle corruption and improve the business and
investment climate, especially to address the concerns
regarding the economic situation, as expressed in the
current Secretary-General's report.

Looking ahead to the mandate renewal of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in March, we would like to reiterate our full support for
the important role played by UNAMA and all United
Nations agencies in supporting the Afghan people
and in coordinating the international community's
assistance to Afghanistan. UNAMA will play a key role
as a sounding board for the Afghan authorities and civil
society in preparation for the elections. But the role of
the United Nations will be even more important after
2014 in ensuring that the international community's
assistance continues to reach people on the ground. It is
therefore critical that the United Nations have enough
resources to retain a broad countrywide presence and
that it support the Afghan Government in ensuring that

development efforts gradually lead to self-reliance.

With those brief remarks, we would like to conclude
by underlining that the international community
should remain strongly committed for the long term
to progress in Afghanistan. From our side, we will
remain firmly focused on supporting the people of
Afghanistan in achieving their aspirations. Our goal
remains clear - the emergence of a fully self-reliant,
peaceful, democratic and prosperous society for the
benefit of all Afghans.

