Mr. Alasania (Georgia): For the past 12 hours,
the inhuman and indiscriminate aerial bombardment of
Georgian territory has continued. The scale of the
devastating destruction and loss of innocent life has yet
to be assessed. An armed invasion by Russian ground
troops has already been transformed into a full-scale
occupation of parts of Georgian territory. The process
of exterminating the Georgian population and
annihilating Georgian statehood is in full swing: a
6,000-strong Russian occupying force with 100 tanks,
115 armoured military vehicles and 300 mortars has
entered the Tskhinvali region from the Russian

Federation. A Russian regular military unit comprising
4,000 servicemen has been deployed in Ochamchir, a
city close to the Upper Kodori that is under the control
of the Abkhaz separatist regime. Villages in my
country, most of them located well outside either zone
of conflict, have been attacked several times. Three
bombs have been dropped on the aviation plant in
Tbilisi; as a result, it has been totally destroyed. The
airfield located in western Georgia, at Kopitnari, has
also been attacked. Russian jets have attacked Zugdidi.
In addition, Gachiani, in the Gardabani district, 20
kilometres south-west of the capital and also outside
the conflict zone, has been bombed; it is close to the
Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline.

The Russian air force continues to bomb Gori,
located 60 kilometres north-west of Tbilisi. The city of
Oni, in the western part of the country, has been
bombed several times. The port of Poti, located on the
coast of the Black Sea 360 kilometres west of
Tbilisi- which is, of course, outside the conflict
zone - has been heavily bombed. The Russian navy
has prevented a humanitarian cargo ship carrying
wheat from entering the Poti port; the ship was forced
to go back. Other Russian battleships have been
deployed in order to enforce the blockade against
Georgia.

One of the pilots detained has testified that pilots
in general have been instructed to carry out an
unlimited number of overflights and indiscriminate
bombardment, which clearly reflect elements of war
crimes. Russia is forcing Abkhaz separatists into the
conflict, compelling them to open up another warfront,
as described by the Secretariat. Attacks on Uta confirm
that they are seriously preparing for an assault on
Kodori. Russian planes have bombed the villages of
Avadhara and Bilisi, in Upper Abkhazia. There are
signs that the attacks will continue, and, as noted by
the Secretariat, the claims made by the de facto Abkhaz
authorities have been translated into reality. The
Russian air force has bombarded Chkhalta, the
administrative centre of Abkhazia. Four thousand
Russian troops from Sebastopol have landed at the port
of Ochamchira, on the Black Sea.

All of this means that Russia is continuing its
full-scale offensive. As a result of deliberate inaction
on the part of the Russian peacekeeping forces, a
military unit has passed through the conflict zone, as
has already been stated here. That fact was confirmed
today by the Secretariat. The population of the Upper

Kodori Valley is facing an imminent threat. We
strongly urge all members of the Security Council to
advise the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) to find a way to resume its monitoring of
Upper Abkhazia, because that is the only way to save
the civilian population there.

As stated numerous times yesterday by the
Russian leadership and in diplomatic circles, it appears
that Russia has its own justification for an all-out
invasion. First, we have heard repeatedly that the
Georgian side violated agreements. From the same
point of departure, the Russian assertion is that they
are engaging in peacemaking, or so-called peace
enforcement. That is truly in the category of absurdity
and nonsense. The actions of the Russian side have no
foundation, either in existing agreements or in
international law. The question is being asked whether
Russia is trying to replace the Security Council, when
in reality it is an aggressor in this conflict.

As has been stated here, the Georgian leadership
reached out overnight to the Russian political
leadership. Unfortunately, the President of the Russian
Federation refused to directly engage with his
Georgian counterpart in dialogue. In order to visibly
demonstrate the seriousness of our ceasefire offer, the
Georgian Ministry for Foreign Affairs in Tbilisi, as
indicated here, conveyed a note verbale to the envoy of
the Russian Federation indicating that the President of
Georgia had issued a declaration to cease all military
activities in South Ossetia. All Georgian troops have
been withdrawn from the conflict zone, and the
Georgian side has opened a humanitarian corridor
south of Tskhinvali to allow the peaceful population
and the wounded peaceful population to leave the
conflict zone. During the ceasefire, Georgian forces
have been bombed many times and prevented from
making a full withdrawal.

Georgia calls upon this institution, the highest
legitimate international authority in the world, for an
immediate diplomatic and humanitarian intervention to
protect Georgia from the ongoing Russian aggression
and occupation. We should all act immediately to
prevent further loss of human life.

