Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for his briefing. I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your country's assumption of the
presidency of the Council, and thank the Permanent
Representative of Azerbaijan and his delegation for the
way in which they led our Council in October.

I endorse the statement to be made by the observer
of the European Union (EU).

We have just adopted resolution 2123 (2013),
reauthorizing the action of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR) Operation Althea, which
maintains a residual executive mandate to support the
capacity of the authorities of the country to preserve
the security environment if the situation so requires.
However, the Operation also continues to be evaluated
regularly, in particular based on the situation on the
ground, so as to achieve progress towards meeting the
conditions that will enable it to complete its mandate.
Indeed, the security situation on the ground has
remained consistently calm and stable for several years.
Furthermore, as the military authorities of the European
Union have pointed out, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities have to date proved able to cope with any
threats to the security climate.

The reconfiguration of the mission to Bosnia and
Herzegovina therefore should continue. It has already
led to a decrease in the forces deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and enabled them to refocus their role on
capacity-building and training. The action of EUFOR
Operation Althea in the drawdown phase must remain
complementary to that of other stakeholders on the
ground, in particular the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. Duplication of efforts would
lead only to confusion and be counterproductive.

Despite a calm and stable situation on the ground, as
I have just mentioned, we remain nonetheless concerned
by the stalemate in the political situation. The successive
political crises distract the Bosnian authorities from
their Euro-Atlantic integration goal. Nationalist
rhetoric continues to fuel tensions and suspicions. We
regret those excesses, especially because other States
of the region have overcome and continue to overcome
historic stages in the Euro-Atlantic integration process.
The Council therefore urges the Bosnian Government
to resume its efforts towards reform, above all with
by respecting the Sejdie-Finci ruling of the European
Court of Human Rights, which is a decisive question
for progress towards EU membership, as the Council
has chosen to underscore in its resolution.
We should like to see the current Government
bring the Constitution into line with the European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms. We also call on the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities to continue their cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the residual mechanisms. That is a
crucial criterion for Bosnia and Herzegovina's being
accepted within the European family.

However, the absence of action by the Bosnian
authorities is slowing movement towards accession.
We are of course committed to the prospect of seeing
Bosnia and Herzegovina joining the European Union
as a unified, sovereign country enjoying full territorial
integrity. However, it is up to the Bosnians and their
leaders to find historic compromises that would endow
the country with effectively functioning institutions.
That clearly would not allow for the current usage of
the current institutional framework inherited from
the Dayton Peace Agreement. A country that is under
supervision and deeply divided cannot as such become
part of the European Union.

Nonetheless, political tensions have never
undermined the security climate. High Representative
Inzko, a guarantor of the peace agreements on behalf
of the international community, has our full support.
But the current governmental crisis reminds us that it
is high time to empower the Bosnian political class to
reclaim its unity for the sake of the singular priority of
the European Union membership being extended to the
country. The functions of the High Representative must
therefore also significantly evolve. The consideration of
how to reconfigure the Office of the High Representative
has been initiated. Those efforts must continue in order
to make that Office more effective based on the key
role of the European Union. We hope that the relevant
decisions will be taken shortly.

