I thank the Special Envoy for his comprehensive briefing to the Security Council today. We remain concerned about the security situation in Syria. While we are not seeing the levels of violence in the north-west today that we saw at the beginning of the year, we are well aware of the recent clashes between armed groups and regime forces south of the M4 motorway and the regime's ongoing shelling of the Idlib de-escalation zone. The ceasefire in Idlib and in the north-east of the country must be upheld in practice and not in name only. We also fully condemn continued attacks by extremist forces, including Da'esh. We remain concerned about a rise in violence in the south of the country and the risk that this violence might cause reconciliation agreements there to fall apart. We would be grateful for an update, including from our Russian colleagues, on implementation of those reconciliation agreements reached in summer 2018. It remains vital that localized ceasefires lead to a nationwide ceasefire, as called for by the United Nations Special Envoy and the Secretary-General. This is necessary not only to bring an end to this devastating conflict in accordance resolution 2254 (2015) but to enable full attention to be devoted to the fight against coronavirus disease (COVID-19). In that regard, we continue to support efforts led by the World Health Organization to confront the real risk posed to all parts of Syria by COVID-19. We recognize the efforts made by authorities across the country and urge practical cooperation among them all to confront a disease that knows no boundaries. There remains an urgent need for medical supplies and other necessary humanitarian aid to reach recipients in need without hindrance. We should not be dogmatic about the modalities of making that happen, including by renewing cross- border assistance to all areas that need it. We will have an opportunity to further discuss this matter tomorrow. As to sanctions, in support of what some others have said, goods and medical supplies used for humanitarian purposes are not subject either to European Union sanctions or United Kingdom national sanctions. Additional exemptions from sanctions are also available for humanitarian activity in Syria. I would just like to note that the United Kingdom and our United States and European partners are the leading donors for humanitarian aid in Syria, including in regime-held areas. The problems facing the Syrian health sector and the economy are a result not of sanctions, but of the Syrian regime's actions through its cronyism, corruption and brutal conduct of the war, which includes, I am afraid, politically motivated punitive restrictions on humanitarian aid. If the Syrian regime and its allies want to see removal of sanctions, then they know what they have to do: engage seriously with the Special Envoy and the United Nations-led political process to achieve a peaceful end to the conflict in the country. Now, with regard to the political process, we are disappointed that, despite the urgent humanitarian needs, the deteriorating economy and the continued threat of COVID-19, there still appears to be no urgency in working with the Special Envoy to achieve political progress towards a political settlement. Like others, we welcomed the formation of the Constitutional Committee last year, but it has been over a month since the agenda for the Constitutional Committee was agreed and nearly six months since its last meeting. We cannot let hard won progress on this front be lost because of lethargy and disinterest from Damascus. I call on Russia to bring its influence to bear on its Syrian clients. In order to support momentum and keep the progress alive, we encourage at least that the co-Chairs of the Committee urgently meet by videoconference to discuss outstanding issues, including how a full meeting can work in practice. We also urge the regime to make widespread releases of political prisoners and vulnerable people and to ensure that medical care is available for those still in detention. While we welcome negotiated releases, we would note that one-for-one releases are insufficient in a context where the regime holds far more detainees than opposition forces do. I would like to emphasize once again - and for the record - that there cannot be any reconstruction funding from the United Kingdom without the regime's genuine engagement with a credible and sustainable political process. Let me conclude by reiterating what I believe we all have said, namely, that the deliberate targeting of humanitarian infrastructure and civilians is never acceptable, whether it be through ground attacks, barrel bombs, air strikes or chemical weapons. We note Amnesty International's recent report detailing 18 attacks on medical facilities and schools between May 2019 and February 2020, which only adds to the evidence provided by the Board of Inquiry and the Commission of Inquiry. As with the chemical-weapon attacks carried out by the Syrian regime and detailed in the report of the Investigation and Identification Team of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, those responsible must and will be held to account. In the meantime, such disregard for international humanitarian law must cease.
