Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the delegation of Senegal
for convening this important debate on water, peace
and security. I would also like to thank the briefers for
their important contributions.

Our planet suffers from the unequal geographic
distribution of potable water resources. As every study
and international report has stressed, the scarcity of
water will be the primary cause underlying many
challenges leading to conflicts among States. That is
reflected in numerous disputes covered in the Security
Council in which competition over the control water
resources has become a primary cause of conflicts.

Egypt suffers from water scarcity since it relies and
depends on a single source for its potable water, the river
Nile. Egypt is also situated in the arid region of North
Africa where rainfall is scarce. Egypt's water scarcity
problem is compounded by overpopulation. The per
capita share of renewable water sources for Egypt is
600 cubic meters per year, which means that the people
of Egypt are below the real rarity threshold. Moreover,
adding to the problems of water scarcity, Egypt's share
of water coming from the Nile has remained unchanged
at 55.5 billion cubic meters annually, which does not
meet its basic needs suppressing 102 billion cubic
meters per year. It is difficult to rely on underground
water reserves as they are located at extremely profound
depths and represent a non-renewable source of potable
water. All those factors are compounded by the fact that
Egypt is a downstream country. The repercussions of
climate change has affected the Nile basin.

Egypt believes that water should be a catalyst
for cooperation, thereby achieving development in
water security. Accordingly, Egypt helped found
the Nile Basin Initiative in 1990. Today, Egypt is
implementing bilateral projects with the Nile Basin
Countries to benefit from those water resources without
encroaching upon the interests of any single country.
In keeping with the efforts that Egypt initiated in the
1960s, it began implementing the Egyptian initiative
for the development of the Nile Basin countries in
2012, including joint projects in water, agricultural,
commercial, economic and medical areas.

As well as bilateral and regional efforts aimed
at promoting cooperation and security among
neighbouring riparian States, Egypt believes in
the crucial role that the United Nations can play in
preventing conflicts fuelled by competition over water
resources or preventing any one party from adopting
unilateral measures that run counter to the principles of
common benefit and thereby threaten the water security
of those who share the same watercourse. That can be
achieved through the following measures.

First, it can be accomplished through abiding
by the principles of causing no harm and providing
prior notification among riparian States of the same
river, especially with regard to upstream States in
their relation to downstream States. In that vein, the
implementation of projects by upstream countries
on common watercourses that are not based on
comprehensive studies showing no consequent negative
impact on other riparian States, especially with regard
to the downstream countries, represents a flagrant
Violation of those two principles.

Secondly, countries must respect their obligations
within the framework of international law, including
bilateral and multilateral agreements based on cross-
border water resources. Countries must also abide
by their rights and duties in line with international
humanitarian law.

Thirdly, other international non-State parties,
in particular charitable institutions, banks and
construction companies, must respect international
norms for establishing water facilities on cross-border
watercourses. Such entities must stop financing or
construction if there is no prior approval of all riparian
States, in particular the downstream States, to prevent
causing any future disputes among those countries.

Fourthly, international expertise must be
exchanged and successful experiences shared in the
joint management of water resources, while at the
same time developing existing mechanisms to address
all challenges relating to the common benefit of water
resources. We should also adopt a comprehensive
approach for managing joint water resources that would
ensure the participation of all States in the management
process and the accrual of shared benefits. In that
regard, we recall the vital role played by the European
Agreement on Main Inland Waterways of International
Importance, which is an awareness-raising example for
countries throughout the world of Europe's success in
the area.

Fifthly, the United Nations must assume a clearer
role in developing the cooperation mechanism among
riparian States with regard to tansboundary rivers, as
well as capacity-building, to maximize the benefits
derived from water and efforts to prevent conflicts
resulting from water issues among nations.

The theme of water as a source of achieving
international peace and security or as a threat to the
latter requires our sustained attention. We must address
the issue in a timely manner, or else the prophecy made
in 1991 by former Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-
Ghali - that future wars will be ignited by conflicts
over water resources - will become a reality. Although
the world is more aware today of the importance of
preventing conflicts, water could be the most pressing
entry point to activating prevention mechanisms.

