Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
We regret that it has been necessary to meet today in this
Chamber, but this is dictated by the fact that the
Government of Iraq not only is not complying with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, but is also
actually defying them. This is inadmissible.

On 29 October the Government of Iraq took the
decision to impose conditions on its cooperation with the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM). On that
same day, the Security Council reacted by condemning that
decision and demanding that Iraq cooperate fully in the
discharge of UNSCOM's mandate. However, that was not
enough, and we have witnessed Iraq's continued obstruction
of the work of the Special Commission.

Let us recall that UNSCOM. has a mandate from the
Security Council - that is to say, from the international
community - to ensure that Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction are eliminated. That mandate imposes an
inescapable obligation on Iraq. Regrettably, Iraq has
hindered the fulfilment of that mandate, and we now find
ourselves compelled to respond with a new Security
Council resolution.

It is very important to bear in mind that this draft
resolution has behind it the full weight of the Council,
which is acting unanimously. The Government of Iraq must
understand the clear message that is being sent to it by the
international community through this draft resolution.

We should like nothing better than to see this
difficult situation created by the Iraqi authorities resolved.
This will be possible only to the extent that the
Government of Iraq fully complies with the relevant
resolutions of this Council.

We wish to reaffirm once again our support for the
Special Commission in its effort to fulfil the mandate
entrusted to it by the Security Council. In this context, we
would remind the Government of Iraq of its responsibility
in connection with the security of the personnel of the
Special Commission, which includes nationals of my
country.

Lastly, my delegation would like to place on record
today our particular appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the initiative that he took at the beginning of this
crisis, once again honouring his commitment to peace.

