Mr. Durrani (Pakistan): Pakistan would like to
thank Portugal for having organized this important
debate on the issue of the protection of civilians in

armed conflict. We warmly welcome the presence of
the President of Portugal, His Excellency Mr. Anibal
Antonio Cavaco Silva, and thank him for opening this
important debate. The Pakistan delegation also
commends Portugal for its able presidency of the
Council for this month and for the constructive role it
has played in general.

Regardless of the circumstances, attacking or
killing civilians cannot be condoned. Pakistan has
always condemned such acts. During a recent debate
on this subject in the Security Council, Pakistan
expressed its concerns over the frequent and pervasive
violations of the rights of civilians around the world, in
particular in the situations of foreign occupation. These
violations continue unabated, and the very fact that
there is no robust mechanism of accountability, in
particular for those who have enjoyed continued
immunity despite well-known attacks and killings of
civilians on various pretexts, has led to its spread in
many other instances.

The lack of accountability for such acts and the
impartial or politicized handling of specific situations
have resulted only in increased suffering for innocent
civilians in areas of armed conflict or under foreign
occupation. We hope that the Security Council, in
accordance with its mandate, will take impartial and
non-politicized action in all situations, in particular on
those situations that have been on its agenda for
decades.

Pakistan has been a strong and active supporter of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Over the
years, Pakistan has contributed to international efforts,
particularly those led by the United Nations, to protect
civilians in armed conflict. The most tangible
demonstration of this, as members of the Council are
well aware, is our participation as one of the leading
troop-contributors in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. We will continue to work closely within the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations for the
development of protection of civilians strategies in
peacekeeping missions, in compliance with their
mandates, in accordance with international law and in
full respect for the primary responsibility of host
States.

The importance of objective reporting, a
prerequisite for the consideration of this important
issue, cannot be overemphasized. We call upon all
concerned to cooperate in this exercise, and urge those

11-5866]
involved in the reporting of such violations to perform
their duties with the utmost care and impartiality.

Pakistan would also like to reiterate the
importance of framing the debate in its proper context.
The Security Council should address situations arising
from armed conflicts and of people living under
foreign occupation. We hope that future reports on this
issue will be balanced and more carefully drafted to
avoid politicizing important questions relating to
international humanitarian law.

Pakistan would also like to stress some of the
important elements raised by a number of Member
States, such as the importance of observance by all
parties to an armed conflict of their obligations under
the United Nations Charter and international law,
including humanitarian law, which prohibits the
targeting of civilian populations, properties and
installations, including attacks on humanitarian
personnel and relief material. The United Nations must
take the lead in promoting knowledge and observance
of these principles among Member States.

In conclusion, Pakistan expects that, in situations
of armed conflict, the basic canons of international
humanitarian law - including accountability, which is
crucial to ending impunity - shall be applied.

