Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): On behalf of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, let me commend Kuwait
for convening this open debate. Let me also thank
Mr. Ian Martinfor his excellent briefing earlier today.

Discussing working methods is not a mere exercise
in style or in process. The way the Council operates
influences our impact in the field. It affects the lives
of million of people, especially those suffering from
crises and conflict.

Last year, we welcomed the adoption of the
comprehensive new note by the President of the
Security Council S/2017/507. The note is the legacy
of Ambassador Koro Bessho of Japan during his time
on the Council over the past two years. Now it is
time for us to fully implement the note. I will focus
on positive practices in three domains that we find
particularly important: prevention, accountability and
peacekeeping. And then I will add some additional
suggestions for further improvements.

On my first point, that of prevention, we welcome
the annual joint consultative meetings and informal
dialogues of the Security Council with the African
Union Peace and Security Council. They are a key tool
to better understand the situation on the ground and to
help prevent conflicts from breaking out. Better use
of that tool would be an important step in addressing
regional problems, providing shared solutions and
preventing escalation.

Another important aspect in the new note 507 is
the acknowledgment of the role of civil society and
non-governmental organizations. We should enhance
interaction with those actors, for instance, by inviting
them more often as briefers in a debate, such as to
the one we are having today. The implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, demonstrates that very clearly.

That brings me to my second point, that of
accountability. We really welcome the fact that the
Security Council's annual reports to the General
Assembly include information on the work of its
sanctions committees and of the international tribunals.
This illustrates the point that the Council uses the
means at its disposal to promote the international rule
of law and to counter impunity.

That bring me to my third point, that of
peacekeeping. The note contains a number of measures
that can contribute to more effective peacekeeping, and,
in particular, I refer to paragraph 91. We welcome the
suggestion in the note for more interactive and focused
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries and other stakeholders in the meetings of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations.

That bring me to my additional suggestions for
improving the working methods of the Council.

First, in order to facilitate the peaceful settlement
of disputes, the Council could explicitly weigh the
means and options provided for by Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations, guided by an inventory
of past experiences.

Secondly, we need to foster the mechanisms aimed
at monitoring compliance with Security Council
resolutions. In that regard, enhancing cooperation with
international legal mechanisms is essential. In that
context, we express our concern about the continuing
vacancy of the Ombudsperson for the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999).

Thirdly, we think that the role of the Military Staff
Committee should be strengthened, especially when
it comes to the performance of missions in relation
to the mandates. In that Committee we need a more
proactive and intensified dialogue between elected and
permanent members.

Fourthly, as I have noted in the previous open
debates on working methods, we fully support the
French-Mexican initiative to limit the use of the veto in
case of mass atrocities. That was also jut mentioned by
our French colleague.

In conclusion, we need to fully implement the last
update of note 507. That is the best way to ensure that
the Council works effectively. Making the Security
Council more effective via better working methods is
crucial in order to uphold the principles of the Charter,
to maintain international peace and security in the
interests of the peoples of the world.

