Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We express our
appreciation to the Japanese presidency for convening
this open debate.

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and by the
representative of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.

Bangladesh welcomes the fact that the Palestinian
question is being discussed in the Security Council
periodically in the wider context ofthe Middle East. This
should help build impetus for resuming negotiations
to resolve all the final status issues, as also envisaged
for the international conference to be convened in the
coming months.

We stress the need for upholding the spirit of the
joint communique issued by the ministerial meeting
in Paris on 3 June. The overriding message is that the
world expects the Council to act in a determined, visible
and sustained manner to find a just and lasting solution
to the Palestinian question. The continued occupation
of the Palestinian territories, the systematic human
rights Violations, the indiscriminate attacks against
civilians and the expansion of illegal settlements by
Israel, the occupying Power, constitute an affront to the
values and principles that the Organization stands for.
The Council must demonstrate its resolve to address the
Palestinian question as a matter of urgency.

The continued breaches of international
humanitarian law and the occupation of Palestinian
territories have given rise to an egregious culture
of impunity. In the absence of any international
accountability or sanctions, the occupying Power
continues to kill Palestinian citizens, especially youth
and children, imprisoning and abusing scores of
Palestinians in its detention centres and injuring and
displacing thousands of Palestinian families through its
construction and expansion of illegal settlements. It is
obvious that the settlements and the wall in and around
occupied East Jerusalem are being deliberately pursued
in order to fundamentally change the character, status
and demography of the occupied Palestinian territories.
That will serve only to indefinitely postpone the Middle
East peace process, and thus destabilize the prospects
for a two-State solution based on the pre-l967 borders.

The Council has a moral obligation to prevail
upon Israel to immediately halt its illegal settlement
regime in the occupied Palestinian territories, lift the
blockade of the Gaza Strip and put an end to all forms
of occupation. Immediate priority must be given to
ensuring international protection for the Palestinian
people, who have suffered for decades from Israel's
policy of collective punishment.

The recently released Quartet report provides a
rather dismal assessment of the humanitarian situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories. Yet the report
has probably only covered part of the concerns that
continue to characterize the lives of Palestinians in
the West Bank and Gaza. As has been noted, Israel
continues to announce and implement its settlement
expansion plans in the occupied territories, including
in and around East Jerusalem, even in the aftermath of
the release of the Quartet report. That casts a shadow
on the possibility of moving towards implementing the
recommendations of the report.

We have stated a number of times here, and will
continue to do so, that the continued injustice with
regard to the Palestinian question remains at the root of
a number of scourges that bedevil international peace
and security. Among a host of potential scenarios, the
resolution of the Palestinian question will help dry
up the ideological reservoir that many international
terrorists and violent extremist groups tend to draw on.
The moral and ethical issues involved in the Palestinian
question need to be unequivocally upheld in order to
defeat the twisted and corrosive massaging used by
Violent extremists to serve their own vested agenda.

That was recently brought home to us in Bangladesh
in the most gruesome manner, as we have witnessed
an expansion in the demographics of our home-grown
terrorists, now also being drawn from a section of
educated cosmopolitan youth. Initial investigations
show that some ofthose young people had been exposed
to narratives that tend to build a case for extremism
under the pretext of religion, on the basis of real or
perceived injustices suffered by people in the Middle
East and elsewhere, especially in Palestine. That is a
challenge that we are not in a position to deal with on
our own. If we are to succeed in our efforts to address
the internal and local drivers of violent extremism
and terrorism, we need the international community's
meaningful support and commitment to resolve the
external drivers, including foreign occupation and
protracted conflicts.

In line with our constitutional commitment, the
Government and the people of Bangladesh maintain
their unwavering support for the just and legitimate
struggle of the Palestinian people for their inalienable
rights, including their right to self-determination and
the establishment of an independent, viable, contiguous
and sovereign Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side-by-side with Israel. Our Prime
Minister, Sheik Hasina, has consistently articulated
that in her annual address at the General Assembly.
We continue to urge all key actors to remained seized
of efforts to pursue a comprehensive solution to the
Palestinian question, consistent with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and in accordance with
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map and the
principle ofland for peace.

We take this opportunity to reiterate our support
for a draft resolution of the Council to revive political
efforts aimed at achieving the desired two-State solution
and at the convening an international conference to
address the multidimensional aspects of the Palestinian
question in a focused, structured and holistic manner.

