Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the presidency of the United Kingdom for convening
this meeting. China strongly condemns the terrorist
attack that took place in Mali. Terrorism is the common
enemy of all humankind. The international community
must strengthen coordination and cooperation and fight
together against terrorism.

China thanks Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his briefing and welcomes his implementation report,
submitted on the basis of the recommendations of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/682). Peacekeeping operations are an important
means for maintaining international peace and security.
They should both remain faithful to principles and also
progress with the times. In that connection, China
wishes to stress the following four points.

First, peacekeeping operations should abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the three principles of peacekeeping.
They should respect the sovereignty of the countries
concerned and their wishes. They should help the
countries concerned, on the basis of their specific
needs, in realizing peace and stability and enhance
capacity-building in the sphere of peace and security.

Secondly, the Security Council should strengthen
the macromanagement of peacekeeping operations to
ensure that the mandate is practical and feasible, with
clear goals, focus and priorities. The Council should be
able to adapt the scale and mandate of peace operations
in accordance with the developments on the ground and
to formulate an exit strategy at the appropriate moment.

Thirdly, the United Nations should enhance
the efficiency of peacekeeping operations, expedite
force generation and deployment, optimize logistics
capabilities and improve the effectiveness of the use
of peacekeeping resources. The United Nations should
strengthen the training of peacekeepers and reinforce
discipline and monitoring procedures so as to safeguard
the image of peacekeeping operations.

Fourthly, the United Nations should strengthen
coordination and cooperation with regional
organizations in peacekeeping, giving full play to the
latter's unique advantages so as to form synergies. In the
long term, the United Nations should increase support
to the African Union and other regional organizations
to enhance Africa's own capacity for peacekeeping, so
as to help Africans settle African problems in African
ways.

As a permanent member of the Security Council
and the largest developing country, China has been
a firm supporter of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and is one of the major troop contributors
and donors to peacekeeping operations. China has
announced that it will join the new United Nations
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System, take the
lead in setting up a permanent peacekeeping police
squad and build a peacekeeping standby force of
8,000 troops. China will deploy more personnel with
engineering, transportation and medical expertise. In
the next five years China will train 2,000 peacekeeping
personnel for various countries and implement 10
demining assistance projects, including providing
training and equipment. China will provide the African
Union with a total of $100 million of free military
assistance and deploy the first helicopter squadron to
United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa.
Some of the resources in the China-United Nations
Peace and Development Fund will be used to support
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

China is making every effort to implement the
above-mentioned initiatives. We are willing to work
with all those concerned to put into practice the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and contribute further to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

