The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Georgia and Germany in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Chkheidze
(Georgia) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Eitel

(Germany) took the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, document S/ 1998/51.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1998/79, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1998/25, which contains the
text of a letter dated 12 January 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of Georgia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting the text
of a statement issued by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of Georgia.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
[8/1998/79] before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America


The President (interpretation from French): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been

adopted unanimously as resolution 1150 (1998).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.20 pm.

