Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): Gabon

echoes the condemnations of the attack in Abuja,

Nigeria. We extend our condolences to the families of

the victims and to the United Nations family as a

whole. We support the Secretary-General in this matter
and express our solidarity with Nigeria.

I concur, Mr. President, with previous speakers in
welcoming both your initiative in organizing this
debate and the fact that it comes from your country,
India, which is currently one of the largest troop
contributors to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. That stands as yet further proof of your
country's commitment to the maintenance of
international peace and security. I also welcome the
presence of the Secretary-General here today, and
thank him for important contribution to our
deliberations.

Peacekeeping operations lie at the heart of the
United Nations actions in peacemaking and post-
conflict reconstruction. The emergence of other
challenges to peace, such as violence against civilians,
has made peacekeeping operations increasingly
important. New demands require missions to be
allocated resources commensurate with their
challenges and expectations.

I shall address the question of peacekeeping
operation mandates and relationships among the
various stakeholders in their success, especially the
Security Council and the troop-contributing countries.
In recent years, the United Nations has considerably
improved the planning and conduct of missions. That
evolution is largely due to greater United Nations
awareness of the need to define mandates that are clear,
credible and achievable and that will lead to successful
missions.

My delegation welcomes the increasingly
multidisciplinary approaches to mission mandates, as
emphasized by the Secretary-General in his 2008
report. Those include the protection of civilians,
strengthening the rule of law, mechanisms to prevent
the resurgence of conflicts, support for electoral
processes, and peacebuilding and reconstruction
programmes, such as in the cases of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, to mention only a
few.

All of those many dimensions were a response to
the need for the Council to provide missions with
mandates that are based on clear goals and measurable
results, and that are provided with sufficient resources
to fulfil all their tasks. Still, certain shortfalls and gaps
remain that the Council must address. Missions such as
MONUSCO, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) are still lacking in logistical and
human resources, whether it be aerial, financial or
material resources. That point was made clear at the
Council's meeting last month with Force Commanders
on the ground (see S/PV.6592). My delegation
encourages the international community to allocate to
missions material and financial resources that are
consistent with realities and actions on the ground.

As others have noted, we continue to believe that
a good mandate must take into account the causes of
conflict, and that its implementation should be founded
on rigorous planning of the different phases and
sequences of the process, and on the identification of
criteria for ending a mission at the right time. That
would keep the United Nations from slipping into an
occupying role and from wasting resources that would
be better spent elsewhere.

Regarding relations among the various actors in
peacekeeping operations, my delegation welcomes the
fact that the Council has enhanced its dialogue with its
partners in peacekeeping operations over the years. We
welcome, for example, the Council's regular
consultations with the troop-contributing countries,
including non-members. The same is true of the
ongoing consultations of the President of the Council
with the President of the General Assembly and States
that are not members of the Council on matters that
affect international peace and security.

To increase the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations, it is important to continue and strengthen
consultations between the Council and the troop-
contributing countries. Such regular exchanges allow
the Council to better understand the situation on the
ground and to make better decisions. In that vein, we
welcomed the Council meeting on 27 July with the
Force Commanders. The briefings we heard that day
clearly reflected the daily reality of peacekeeping
operations as a whole and the difficulties they
encounter on the ground. In this context, we also
support the recommendation contained in the draft
presidential statement that we are to adopt today,

whereby the Council requests the Secretariat to provide
troop- and police-contributing countries all necessary
information and documentation by the 15th of each
month.

Because the maintenance of international peace
and security is at the heart of the political, strategic and
ideological system of the United Nations, it is
important to continue to work with regional and
subregional organizations, especially regarding the root
causes of conflicts and strategies to settle conflicts.
Gabon would like once again to urge the United
Nations to continue to support the African Union,
especially by building its capacity and supporting its
peacekeeping missions on the ground. In the case of
the mission deployed in Somalia, the current
weakening of Al-Shabaab should encourage us to
strengthen the capacities of AMISOM. in order to gain
ground and significantly reduce the threat of that
armed group.

While welcoming the significant progress
achieved in the area of peacekeeping, Gabon feels that
an additional effort should be made with regard to
conflict prevention. We have stated this and reiterate it
today. A culture of prevention would save enormous
resources that could then be channelled towards
economic and social development. Thus prevention
must become our priority in the maintenance of peace
and security.

Lastly, Mr. President, I would like to express my
delegation's support for the draft presidential statement
prepared by your delegation.

