Mr. Ouyahia (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, President of the People's
Democratic Republic of Algeria, has asked me to
convey to the Security Council his deep regret at not
being able to be here in person to attend this important
meeting due to an especially busy national agenda. He
has also asked me to convey to the Council his best
wishes for the success of this meeting between the
African Union and the United Nations. He has also
given me the honour of reading out to the Council the
following message on this occasion.

"I wish at the outset to thank the President
of the Security Council for having taken the
initiative to organize a high-level Security
Council debate on strengthening partnership
between the Security Council and regional
organizations, particularly the African Union
through its Peace and Security Council. It has
indeed become urgent to improve the capacities
and to strengthen the action of regional
organizations, especially the African Union, in
the critical area of maintaining peace and
security.

"For the African continent, seeking and
maintaining peace and security represents a major
challenge as significant as the issue of
development. In that respect, we note with
pleasure the decrease in recent years of the
number of conflicts and crisis situations on the
continent, as well as the undeniable progress that
has been made in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Burundi,
Cote d'Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That trend should strengthen and grow
thanks to Africa's collective commitment to
peace, embodied in the actions of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. It should
2

also be encouraged and robustly supported by the
entire international community.

"At the tenth summit of the African Union
that took place in Addis Ababa in January, the
Secretary-General stressed the importance of
tightening cooperation links between the African
Union and the United Nations. He pointed out
that it was vital to enhance that partnership in
order to overcome the obstacles to peace and
security on the continent. I welcome the high
quality of cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union and the success
that has been achieved in that area.

"In the framework of that cooperation, a
transfer of authority took place late last year from
the African Union Mission in Sudan to the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. That major development was based on
a dynamic balance between imperative political
considerations and unavoidable operational and
logistical requirements. Elsewhere, the United
Nations has supported such African countries as
Burundi, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau under
the programme of work of the Peacebuilding
Commission. In January 2007, two of those
countries benefited from the Peacebuilding Fund.
Unfortunately, the allocated budgetary envelope
has not been fully disbursed.

"With respect to issues of peace and
security, the situation in Africa has been
characterized by emergences from crises and the
perpetuation of conflicts that we had hoped to see
resolved, first, by the mobilization of Africans
themselves, and later by that of the international
community. That is the case with the Western
Sahara, where the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara has been deployed
for more than 15 years. It is also the case with
Somalia, where the African Union Mission has
clearly been unable to provide the conditions
necessary for resolving the security, policy and
humanitarian aspects of the situation.

"The implementation of a peace and
security architecture of the African Union -
including a mechanism for the prevention,
management and settlement of conflicts, the
Peace and Security Council and a council of
elders - reflects Africa's resolve to take
08-30700
responsibility for itself and to act in favour of
political solutions that integrate the values of
conciliation and reconciliation and ensure the
sustainability of agreements reached.

"I hope that this high-level Security Council
debate will represent a decisive step towards
strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular
the African Union. Such cooperation, based on
the principles of the United Nations Charter,
could give rise to innovative modes of operation.
In that respect, it would be extremely useful for
us to adopt a more ambitious interpretation of
Chapter VIII of the Charter, which is the legal
basis for peacekeeping operations led by regional
organizations. Such an interpretation could take
account of local realities and favour responses
adapted to specific contexts and characteristics,
with a clear view of each party's respective
responsibilities and complementarities.

"It is indeed important that the as yet
unexploited potential for synergy, interaction and
coordination of cooperation between the Security
Council and regional and subregional
organizations be fully achieved. There is no doubt
whatsoever that a successful synthesis of regional
and subregional efforts with the activities of the
international community will allow us to mobilize
all the energy necessary to achieving goals that
serve the cause of peace.

"In that context, as soon as it is approved by
the Security Council, a peacekeeping operation
on the African continent should be treated in the
same way as operations led by the United
Nations, particularly in terms of the management
and disbursement of funding, which should be
adequate and regular. The time has come to
institutionalize funding and to move beyond the
ad hoc approach of some financing that makes it
difficult to plan and manage such missions.

"If we are to lay such uncertainties to rest
once and for all, we should consider funding
mechanisms that are more consistent and better
coordinated. In that respect, the path laid out in
January 2007 by the heads of State of the African
Union - which consists of organizing missions
that are led by the Union, agreed with the
Security Council, and funded by assessed
08-30700

contributions of United Nations Member States in
the context of Chapter VIII of the Charter -
should be endorsed and implemented as soon as
possible. Such an approach would allow us
sustainably to overcome the significant funding
constraints facing Africa. It would help to
enhance the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations and to reassert the
authority and credibility of the Security Council
in its supervision of regional initiatives, which
would then be undertaken with clear objectives,
effectively and in the certainty that funds would
be put to best use, to the satisfaction of the
international community as a whole."

Having read out President Bouteflika's message, I
should like very briefly to add two comments on behalf
of the delegation of Algeria.

First, we support the statement made by the
President of the United Republic of Tanzania, the
current Chairman of the African Union, and endorse
the proposal he made on behalf of Africa.

Secondly, Algeria pays homage to the personal
efforts of President Mbeki to convene this meeting and
to draw up the draft resolution that has been submitted
to the Security Council. Such a commitment on his part
is a tribute to his country, South Africa. It does honour
to Africa. On behalf of President Bouteflika, we thank
him very warmly.

