Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this informational
meeting on the threat that the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant poses to international peace and security as
well as on the efforts made by the United Nations to help
Member States to counter this threat. It congratulates
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
and Ms. Michele Coninsx, Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
on their high-quality briefings.

Terrorism is one of the major security challenges
facing humankind today. The report of the Secretary-
General on this scourge (S/2019/103) has prompted
my delegation to make a number of comments on the
terrorist threat, the challenges to be met and the role of
the United Nations.

Concerning the level of the threat, my delegation
notes with concern that despite the important setbacks
that Da'esh has experienced, it remains a real threat
to international peace and security owing to its
capacity to adapt, the lure of terrorist propaganda and
its considerable financial reserves. According to the
Secretary- General's report, the organization has several
thousand combatants around the world, including
in the Middle East, Africa and Asia. My delegation
concurs with the Secretary-General's assessment of
the danger represented by foreign terrorist fighters,
whose movements and return to their countries of
origin remain a major source of concern. It believes
that prisons are potential areas of radicalization and
supports the conclusions reached on the expansionist
tendencies of terrorism, whose ramifications affect
all regions of the world. In the face of this constantly
evolving threat, the mobilization of the international
community remains more necessary than ever.

On the challenges to be met, it is undeniable that
the fight against terrorism requires a holistic approach
on the part of the international community based on
harmonized actions that will allow us to respond to this
threat effectively. Indeed, in order to be effective, this
combat requires the full implementation by all Member
States of their obligations at the international level, in
particular with respect to monitoring and the criminal
prosecution of terrorist activities. This will also require
an updating of our measures to combat this phenomenon
and a revising of legislation aimed at strengthening the
effectiveness of counter-terrorist criminal justice.

At the national level, States must prevent
radicalization by improving coordination between
services focusing on detection and those dealing
with suppression. We also must devise strategies
to manage and control the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters. Particular attention should be paid to the
situation of women and children connected to such
fighters. The strengthening of aerial safety measures
is also essential. This will require awareness-raising as
concerns the threat and the sharing of passenger name
records, in a framework of international, regional and
subregional cooperation.

Furthermore, the eradication of terrorism requires
that everyone be involved in the fight against the
financing of this global phenomenon. Our joint efforts
must contribute to cutting off sources of financing for
Da'esh and its affiliates. With this in mind, my delegation
calls for the creation of appropriate cooperation
mechanisms, better information-sharing, the promotion
of cooperation between the public and private sectors
and the strengthening of our legislative frameworks.

On the role of the United Nations, my delegation
welcomes the support provided by the United Nations
to Member States in the implementation of their
respective obligations. It commends in particular
the outstanding work done by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate, which led
to the adoption on 27 December 2018 of an addendum
(S/2018/ll77, annex) to the Madrid Guiding Principles
of 2015 aimed at helping Member States deal with the
return and relocation of foreign terrorist fighters and
their accompanying family members.

My delegation also welcomes the launch of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact on 6 December 2018, which
is aimed at strengthening joint United Nations action
against terrorism. Cote d'Ivoire welcomes also the
support provided to Member States in the devising
of comprehensive prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration strategies in the fight against violent
extremism, as well as the assistance provided to
improve security and safety in prisons.

In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms the need
for all States to resolutely commit to the fight against
terrorism until it is eliminated. For its part, Cote
d'Ivoire will continue to support actions initiated
within the framework of multilateralism with a view to
giving a robust global response to the terrorist threat. In
that context, we welcome the forthcoming regional and
thematic events planned as part of the follow-up actions
to the High-level Conference of Heads of Counter-
Terrorism Agencies, held in New York on 28 June 2018.

