Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Rwanda wishes to explain
its vote on the text of the draft resolution (S/2014/ 189)
before us. It is unfortunate that we have come to this
today, as the situation could have been avoided. Voting
for the text before us was a hard decision we had to
make, and that is so because we are not convinced that
the timing of the draft resolution was productive to
the objective and purpose of the Security Council. It
is hinged on the timing of the planned referendum in
Crimea, which may not resolve the entire crisis. More
cynical is the objective being stated in these corridors
and in some capitals to isolate each other, including
important stakeholders, in our search for a peaceful
solution to the crisis in Ukraine. There is no need to
isolate; however, there is a need for a real and frank
dialogue. That is why we are in the Chamber, all of us,
as a United Nations.

The situation in Ukraine has rapidly unfolded. We
are concerned that the rhetoric of, and pressure from,
many actors have blinded us from carefully analysing
the situation and understanding the root causes, thereby
preventing us from finding a suitable solution and, in
the process, de-escalating the crisis. Why, then, did we
vote in favour? The draft resolution contains important
principles on which we all agree: respect for the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
countries and the need for a de-escalation of the crisis.
Most important to us is the fact that the draft text calls
for a Ukrainian inclusive political dialogue.

We believe that the crisis in Ukraine can be settled
primarily by a more vigorous campaign geared towards
winning the hearts of all Ukrainians and ensuring the
protection of all. To date, we have not seen such steps.
There has not been intercommunal dialogue. It is time
for Ukrainians to listen to their hearts. It is time to see
statesmen on all sides helping their communities to
identify that silver thread that has kept them together
as a united and prosperous nation for all these years.

In that regard, we appeal to all conflicting blocs
in Ukraine to pause a little, close their ears to all
aggravating rhetoric and give intercommunal talks a
chance. If there is a need for credible mediators, the
United Nations should rise to playing that role.
Once again, we invite both sides to consider
the mutual interests of the people of Ukraine and to
uphold their commitment to bilateral and multilateral
agreements. We call on the international community to
fulfil its obligation, to ensure no further deterioration
and to respect the principles of peace and security.

Finally, this situation is not a win or a loss to any of
us. Also, it should not be seen as bringing dishonour to
any of us. But let it be a lesson to us all to truly commit
and constructively work towards finding a sustainable
solution to the process.

