Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing on the
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/1030). We also
commend Ambassador Cardi, as the Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for his
briefing on the Facilitator's report (S/2017/1058), and
express our appreciation for all that he has done as he
comes to the end of his term. We also appreciate the
statement by Ms. Adamson on behalf ofthe Coordinator
of the Joint Commission.

As stated in the Secretary-General's report, the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)

"constitutes a major achievement in nuclear
non-proliferation and diplomacy in addressing
issues that could have an impact on regional and
international peace and security" (S/2017/1030, para. 1).

Through the JCPOA, the participating States
managed to establish a framework that so far has
continued to ensure the peaceful nature of the Islamic
Republic of Iran's nuclear programme, with the
necessary verification and monitoring of Iran's nuclear-
related commitments.

We note from the reports of the Secretary-General
and the Facilitator that the Islamic Republic of Iran
continues to implement its nuclear-related commitments
under the J CPOA, as verified by the International Atomic
Energy Agency. The continued provisional application
of the Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement
by the Islamic Republic of Iran is encouraging. It is
also noteworthy that the Secretary-General and his
predecessor have not received any report on the supply,
transfer or export to Iran of nuclear and dual-use items,
materials, equipment, goods and technology.

However, we note the challenges in the broader
implementation of the JCPOA by the participating
States, as indicated in the reports of the Secretary-
General and the Facilitator. In that regard, Iran's ballistic
missile tests, although not strictly an integral part of
the JCPOA, do affect mutual understanding, which is
so critical to ensuring the successful implementation
of the JCPOA. Reports of arms seizures by the United
States in the vicinity in the Gulf of Oman also affect
mutual understanding, and we await the outcome of
the investigation on the matter. Such activities could
impact the overall implementation of the JCPOA and
increase tension among countries of the region and
beyond. Those are all matters that affect stability and
security in a region that is already very sensitive.

That notwithstanding, the JCPOA continues
to provide a very good framework for addressing
some of the most pressing proliferation-related
issues related to nuclear and other weapons of mass
destruction through political and diplomatic means.
We hope that all participating States will address any
challenges and difficulties, particularly in relation to
implementation, through cooperation in good faith
within the proper format, and we echo the call made
by the Secretary-General in that regard. We also
believe that all participating parties need to continue to
maintain an attitude conducive to confidence-building
among the JCPOA participants, as indicated in the
Facilitator's report.

It is important that the Islamic Republic of Iran
refrain from acts that could undermine the overall
implementation of the JCPOA, such as ballistic missile
tests, and continue to fully implement its commitments
under resolution 2231 (2015), including the travel bans
and restrictions on arms transfer. On the other hand, it
is imperative that all the JCPOA participating States
continue to fully implement their commitments in all
their aspects. As we stated during the meeting under
the format of resolution 2231 (2015), we will await the
outcome of the independent investigation on reports
of ballistic missiles launched by the Houthis, as well
as information received by the Secretariat in relation
to the use of unmanned surface vessels allegedly used
against the Saudi-led coalition.

Finally, while expressing appreciation to all
dedicated efforts by Facilitator Ambassador Sebastiano
Cardi and his team during the past year, we hope
the incoming Facilitator will further strengthen his
engagement with, and outreach to, Member States
in order to address issues raised in the report of the
Secretary-General in relation to the general lack of
understanding of resolution 2231 (2015).

