Mr. Mukongo Ngay (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would like first of all to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June and to say how honoured we are to see China, a
friendly country, steering the Council's deliberations
today. I would like to assure you, Sir, of my delegation's
support for the success of your very noble task, and
to thank you for having given me the opportunity to
address the Council at this meeting on the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
an issue of vital importance to my country, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Mehdiyev of Azerbaij an, on his outstanding
Security Council presidency last month.

I would particularly like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, who has spared no effort in his quest
for solutions to restore lasting peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo since his accession to the head
of the Organization. The positive efforts of MONUSCO
and of his Special Representative for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mr. Roger Meece, whose
presence here I welcome, should be underscored, in
particular at this time when our own sources have
established beyond doubt, as MONUSCO reported at
the very beginning, that Rwandan elements, estimated
at between 200 and 300 men, who continue to fight
within the ranks ofthe rebels of Bosco Ntaganda's M-23
movement, were recruited, trained and deployed from
Rwanda. That support continues since, despite the 38
tons of equipment recovered by the Forces armees de
la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC), the
insurgents' firepower has increased since they moved
closed to the Rwandan border.

To return to the subject of my remarks this morning,
my statement covers the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2012/355),
the main points of which Mr. Meece has just outlined.
My statement will focus on three key points, namely,
MONUSCO's mandate, thejoint assessment mechanism
and the restructuring of the Independent National
Electoral Commission.

As is often the case, the conclusion ofMONUSCO's
mandate, which the Council is about to renew today,
coincides with the resurgence of violence in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo as an immediate
consequence of the desertion of some elements of
the armed forces that came under the command of
Mr. Ntaganda. He has been subject to an International
Criminal Court arrest warrant since 2006. He thought
that he would be able to evade it by peacefully seeking
refuge within our armed forces.

However, with his arrest looming, he did not hesitate
to defect and launch a mutiny against the national army
in a part of the country already gravely affected by the
destabilizing actions of foreign and national armed
groups that are raging there. As can be expected, such
conflicts have caused the massive displacement of
people from the affected areas within the country and to
neighbouring countries.

But what then is the rationale behind the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo? Unwavering in his resolve to support the
stabilization and peacebuilding efforts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, when he was in Kinshasa for
the fiftieth anniversary of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, in June 2010, the Secretary-General said
that we must certainly continue to give priority to the
protection of civilians, in particular women, who bear
a disproportionate burden. The Secretary-General
pledged to spare no effort in combating that very grave
violation of fundamental rights.

Today, I am pleased to note that MONUSCO's
mandate will be renewed in respect of the
Secretary-General's vision, pursuant to the spirit and
the letter of resolution 1925 (2010), of 28 May 2010.
The protection of civilians displaced or threatened by
clashes must continue to be at the heart of the Council's
concerns. That is one of the main reasons behind the
reconfiguration of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo into
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. At the time,
the Council emphasized that the protection of civilians
should be the priority in deciding on the usage of available
capacities and resources. It authorized MONUSCO to
use all necessary means to fulfil its protection mandate,
which includes the effective protection of civilians.

Likewise, the idea ofrefocusing MONUSCO 's action
on the Kivus, where foreign and national armed groups
rage, must underpin any extension of the mandate of that
United Nations Mission. That is our understanding of
the MONUSCO mandate that the Council will renew,
and the justification of the importance of the United
Nations Mission to the Congolese populations in the
affected areas, whether they be in Rutshuru-Lubero,
Walikale-Masisi or Kitchanga in North Kivu, or in
Bunyakiri-Hombo in South Kivu.

In paragraph 86 of the report, the Secretary-General
rightly commends the close cooperation and enhanced
dialogue between the United Nations and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo authorities. We also commend
it. However, for the Government, whose position has
remained unchanged since MONUSCO's establishment,
the work of the joint assessment team, established
pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 1925 (2010), must
take priority in renewing MONUSCO's mandate. Indeed,
the resolution gave the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO three major
goals, with concrete results to be achieved for each.

With regard to the findings of the joint assessments
on the military operations and to reducing the threat posed
by armed groups, the fact remains that the operations
led by the FARDC, with MONUSCO's support, have
drastically reduced the operational capacities of the
armed groups, even though, owing to their number, their
criminal activities are still a threat to the population's
security in some of the country's remote areas.

Progress in reducing the threat against the
population's security and in improving the conditions
for the Government's handling of that security has been
noted. With regard to the resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's Government to effectively
protect the population and to increasingly take on
MONUSCO's security functions, work to provide
the Democratic Republic of the Congo with effective
security forces is under way and will continue.

Reports of the FARDC 's reorganization, with actions
to identify and to manage troops, equipment and training
through the reopening of academies, schools or training
centres, the reorganization of forces into regiments,
the relaunching of officer training and the retraining
of existing troops, are encouraging. Now is the time to
ask MONUSCO to resume joint FARDC-MONUSCO
operations against national or foreign armed groups.

In terms of performance, from 2008 to 2012,
cooperation between MONUSCO and the FARDC has
proved productive. To take but one example, the Lord's
Resistance Army, which raged in Orientale province,
has gone from 1,200 troops in 2008 to almost zero
today. The roads from Dungu to Doruma, from F aradje
to Watsa and from Dungu to Bangadi, once closed to all
traffic, have now been reopened.

Things have certainly changed since the insurgents
who deserted the ranks of the Congolese army at the
start of April turned their weapons against the regular
army. Everything leads us to believe, however, that, in
terms of balance of forces on the ground, the serious
upheavals created by the mutiny could be totally brought
under control, provided that the proven involvement in
and support for the mutiny on the part of neighbouring
countries ceases. Already, we should note that, from
Goma to the foothills of Masisi, the Congolese army
has taken up positions and calm has returned, and the
rebels who crossed the national park have now moved
back to the border.

Be that as it may, the Government is determined to
put a military end to the war in the territories occupied
by the armed groups, whether Congolese and foreign, as
stated by the Prime Minister and head of Government,
Mr. Augustin Matata Ponyo Mapon, upon his arrival
in Bunagana, North Kivu, at the head of a major
Government delegation on Thursday, 7 June.

With regard to the Congolese National Police,
we would note the training of the border police, the
deployment of police units emanating from armed
groups, the retraining of police forces by MONUSCO,
and the promulgation a year ago of the organic law on
the organization and functioning of the National Police.

With regard to improving the rule of law throughout
the country through the establishment of civil
administration, the guarantor of the rule of law, which is
our third goal, we note that the legitimate authorities of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo control virtually
all of the territory that was once under the control of
armed groups. Today, the Congolese National Police
is present virtually throughout all of the liberated
territories.

The judicial apparatus is increasingly present
and is becoming increasingly functional. New civil
prosecutors have been recruited, trained and deployed
in sensitive areas. Moreover, in provinces where there
have been atrocities, mobile military and civilian courts
have been brought in, with the support of MONUSCO,
to resolve the problem of poor access to courts and
tribunals in places where violations have taken place. In
that respect, I should like to refer to paragraph 46 ofthe
Secretary-General's report.

The struggle against impunity continues without
leniency. Charges have been brought against members
of armed groups, the National Police and the FARDC,
and even against corrupt magistrates and economic
operators, for serious violations of human rights, which
have often resulted in long prison terms, even life
imprisonment. In that respect, the Government supports
the process of establishing prosecution support cells
that MONUSCO launched to help the victims of sexual
violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In conclusion, there is a need for us to take strategic
decisions that, inter alia, allow the Government to ensure
security, good governance, the consolidation of the rule
of law and the economic development of the country. To
do that, we are duty-bound to work together to define
parameters that will allow us to draw a timetable for
the disengagement of United Nations troops while
the training of the Congolese army continues. More
specifically, it is a matter of working on a road map
devoted to an effective and tested transition from a
peacekeeping operation to a peacebuilding operation, an
operation for supporting the stability of the country.

On a different tack, as a stabilization mandate,
MONUSCO's mandate requires a transition to economic
recovery after a number of years of instability. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo already has a
stabilization and reconstruction plan for areas emerging
from armed conflict and an International Security and
Stabilization Support Strategy for the province of North
Kivu that extends to cover the districts of Haut-Uele
and Bas-Ue'le' in Orientale province, the province of
Maniema, the district of North Tanganyika to Katanga,
as well as the districts of Sud-Ubangui and Equateur in
Equateur province.

It is therefore natural, when considering the economic
recovery and social rehabilitation and integration
components of the stabilization and reconstruction
programmes, to think of the need to reassess them and
adapt them to the realities of the time. The regions of the
north and west, while having been free of conflict, are
facing the repercussions of instability in the north and
east of the country. We hope that the implementation of
the stabilization and reconstruction programme and the
programme drafted by the United Nations country team
aimed at consolidating and developing the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should take into account that
dimension of the matter.

I now come to the restructuring of the Independent
National Electoral Commission, one of the most
controversial subjects, both within and outside the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo. In paragraphs 76 and
77 of his report, the Secretary-General stresses the need
to restore the credibility of the Commission. I would
like to reassure everyone here that the Government
fully shares that concern and is about to review the
Commission. Within the Commission itself, a process
of self-criticism has also begun.

To give greater credibility to the next elections, the
Commission has adopted a series of measures, including
intensifying consultations with its various partners;
drafting timetables that take into account the technical
and operational demands; conducting advocacy with the
State and all partners for the reallocation of revenues
to new expenditures dictated by operational needs;
defining a vision and intensifying its consultations
with stakeholders, such as media, political parties and
other partners in the process; stabilizing the electoral
register and making it more reliable by including those
who have been omitted; reopening dialogue with the
political class on the subject of the electoral register;
and strengthening the criteria for recruiting and training
electoral agents, and more specifically those working in
polling stations and in local centres for the compilation
of results.

It is under that new impetus that the Commission
published on 6 June the timetable for provincial,
senatorial and gubernatorial elections. According to
the timetable, three dates have been set aside for the
holding of the various elections, which will conclude
the electoral process that began on 28 November
2011 with the presidential and legislative elections.
The date of 25 February 2013 has been designated
for provincial elections, 5 June 2013 for senatorial
elections, and 22 June 2013 for elections for governors
and vice-governors of provinces.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
Government's willingness to continue its partnership
with MONUSCO with regard to military operations
against armed groups, justice and the struggle against
impunity, as well as in consolidating authority of the
State, and in support of the future reconfiguration of
MONUSCO. I would also like to reassure all interested
parties that the reforms launched last year in the security
sector have continued with a view to establishing a
police and army that is fully able to guarantee security
throughout the country and improving the already
favourable conditions for the restoration of economic
and social development.

Likewise, I would also like to call on the
international community and on friendly countries that
wish to do so to come to our country to make major
investment and participate in our country's development
and economic recovery. The potential of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the vivacity of its population
could enable win-win cooperation. Some countries have
already understood that, and we call on others to follow
in their footsteps and help us along that road.

Finally, when the Council is called on to take action
on the extension of the MONUSCO mandate at the end
of the consultations that will soon be under way, the
people and the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo expect it to condemn, in the strongest
terms, the Bosco Ntaganda mutiny, which has disrupted
our joint efforts to stabilize and consolidate peace in the
Democratic Republic. The Council will also, we expect,
condemn and remind States in the subregion to respect
the commitments that they freely agreed to - that
would be justice.

