Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): My delegation would
like to begin by welcoming the timeliness of this open
debate on Angola.

We would also like to warmly welcome the ministerial
delegation of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) Organ on Politics, Defence and
Security to this Security Council meeting.

Indeed, the lack of progress in the peace process,
which is a source of concern to the international
community, clearly warrants the convening of this meeting.
The presence of the SADC ministerial delegation reflects
the seriousness of the situation in Angola, as described by
the Secretary-General in his comprehensive report on the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and on the work of
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III).

Our initial hope that the parties had embarked on a
definite path towards national reconciliation has been

 

frustrated by the continued failure in the implementation
of the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol according to the
agreed timetable and outlines established by the Security
Council. The lack of progress in the implementation of
the Protocol has rendered the task of UNAVEM. III
infinitely more difficult.

The failure of UNITA to take concrete steps in
compliance with the Lusaka Protocol as scheduled is
alarming. We must note with deep concern the delays,
particularly in the areas of the quartering of UNITA
troops; the selection of soldiers for incorporation into the
Angolan Armed Forces (FAA); and the slow process of
the transfer of UNITA commanding officers to join the
FAA, as well as the handing over to UNAVEM. III of
insufficient quantities of weapons and the poor quality of
those handed over, and the continued presence of UNITA
police.

Furthermore, prospects for progress have been
dashed by the refusal of Mr. Jonas Savimbi to participate
in the summit of the SADC Organ on Politics, Defence
and Security, held on 2 October 1996 in Luanda.

All of these developments have cast serious doubt on
the political will of UNITA in implementing the Lusaka
Protocol.

The international community has invested a great
deal in the efforts to promote peace and national
reconciliation in Angola. UNAVEM. III, which is
currently the largest of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations, has contributed considerably to the
improvement of the situation in the country, notably the
ceasefire, which is generally holding. However, we note
that ceasefire violations persist in the diamond-producing
provinces.

Another area in which UNAVEM. III has clearly
contributed to enhancing security is in that of landmine
clearance. However, the continuation of the practice of
placing new mines does not reflect positively on the
desire of the parties to cease fighting. This practice,
which is a veritable scourge in Angola, is affecting the
operational capacities and the safety of UNAVEM. III
personnel.

My delegation expresses its deep regret at the
casualties suffered by UNAVEM. III troops due to
landmines. Also, the fact that UNITA has placed
restrictions on UNAVEM. III in its demining operations is
unacceptable. The presence of mines is impeding the

 

rehabilitation of rural communities. It is jeopardizing the
new planting season and is also posing a serious threat to
the resettlement of internally displaced persons.

In this regard, we must commend UNAVEM. III and
the United Nations for their efforts in demining and in
training in demining. We encourage close cooperation
between the various agencies, and call on UNITA and all
parties to respect the mandate of UNAVEM. III.

We are also quite concerned by the reports of
harassment of humanitarian relief workers. We call on all

parties to respect their security and activities.

The goal of national reconciliation, towards which all
the parties in Angola are striving, is not easy to attain. The
beginning of nation-building can, unfortunately, be
jeopardized, given the economic and political challenges
that Angola must still surmount, as well as the lack of
mutual trust and confidence among the parties.

My delegation hopes in the near future to see serious
efforts in disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating former
soldiers into civilian life; the completion of the formation
of the Angolan Armed Forces; and the extension of State
administration throughout the country. Substantial progress
in these areas is fundamental for ensuring peace, security
and stability in the country.

Angola has been ravaged by civil war for more than
two decades, and the divisions are deep. While national
reconciliation may prove to be a long and arduous task, the
parties themselves have committed to this path, which is
imperative for the future of Angola.

We continue to believe that the Government of Angola
and UNITA will strictly uphold their obligations under the
Lusaka Protocol and the commitments they entered into at
the meeting in Libreville, Gabon, on 1 March 1996.

It is in this context that the Indonesian delegation fully
supports any measures that will further encourage the
parties to keep the process on track. The recent regional
initiatives taken by SADC to pursue the process must be
supported by the international community. My delegation is
encouraged by SADC's intention to convene another
summit, and stresses the need to create a favourable
atmosphere to ensure the participation of Mr. Savimbi. At
the same time, we strongly urge Mr. Savimbi to show his
good faith by participating in the forthcoming summit.

 

Angola remains a point of instability in southern
Africa. Resolution of this conflict will contribute greatly
to the establishment of peace and cooperation in the
region. At this crucial juncture, it is essential that
President Dos Santos and Mr. Jonas Savimbi continue to
meet and resolve all remaining issues of contention,
including constitutional matters.

Having expressed its position on the developments
in Angola, the Indonesian delegation is ready to support
the Secretary-General's recommendation that the mandate
of UNAVEM. Ill be extended. We will endorse the option
of a shorter-term mandate, until mid-December. Although
UN ITA continues to profess its commitment to the peace
process, we wish to stress that it cannot continue to stall
the implementation of the Lusaka accord, lest it
jeopardize the entire peace process.
Before concluding, I would like to convey my
delegation's appreciation to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Beye, for his tireless
endeavours to further the peace process, and to the
personnel of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III) for their work under difficult
circumstances. We also recognize the efforts of the three
observer States and, finally, we would like to commend
the efforts of the countries of the region, especially the
States members of SADC.

