Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to join previous speakers in thanking the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin
Inzko, for his report (S/2013/646, annex) and for the
work he is doing in the service of the Bosnians.

Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to
be made on behalf of the European Union.

In his most recent report, the High Representative
highlights the continuing gridlock that prevents reforms
that are nevertheless crucial for achieving the goals
that the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina have set
for themselves in terms of European and Euro-Atlantic
integration. The ongoing discord between political
officials continues to impede the proper functioning
of Bosnian institutions. Legislative work at various
levels has been insufficient, and the authorities have
been unable to respond to the legitimate aspirations of
their citizens who are demanding an effective system of
governance. The demonstrations in June in the streets
of Sarajevo to protest against the authorities' inability
to issue identification numbers to its citizens also
testifies to the discontent of the population as regards
that situation.

On a more positive note, the intensity of the political
crisis in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
waned, particularly following the intervention of the
High Representative. Like Mr. Inzko, we also welcome
the fact that last month the Bosnian authorities were
able to carry out a population and household census,
with the support of the European Union. It is the first
census organized since the end of the war.

Despite the political difficulties and a worrisome
level of unemployment, the security situation has
remained calm and stable. The European Union-led
force Operation Althea did not need to intervene in
order to restore peace given that the Bosnian authorities
were able to address potential security threats. That is
a fact that should be welcomed. It fully justifies the
decision of the European Union to focus the Force's
main efforts on capacity-building and training while
preserving the means to contribute to the deterrent
capacity of the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Ongoing efforts to prosecute the perpetrators ofwar
crimes is an key component of reconciliation efforts.
Luxembourg attaches particular importance to that
issue. We share the concerns of the High Representative
as regards the manner in which the leaders of the
Republika Srpska are using the decision issued on
18 July by the European Court of Human Rights in
the case of Maktouf and Damjanovic' v. Bosnia and
Herzegovina for the purposes of calling into question
the Court and the Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is the duty of the Bosnian State
to ensure that justice is done and that perpetrators of
serious crimes under international law are prosecuted,
tried and punished; that faculty cannot be called into
question. In the same vein, we call upon all communities
and their political representatives to respect the
authority of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, whose work remains crucial.

The European aspiration of Bosnia and Herzegovina
was solemnly reaffirmed by President Zeljko Komsic'
in his speech to the General Assembly on 24 September
(see A/68/PV.6). To fulfil that aspiration, the political
leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina must make tangible
progress, including by fully implementing the decision
rendered on 22 December 2009 by the European Court
of Human Rights in the case of Sejdic' and Finci v.
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

On 1 July, Croatia became the twenty-eighth State
member of the European Union. For their part, Serbia
and Kosovo have taken significant steps on their path to
European integration by continuing the implementation
of the 19 April 2013 agreement. We deeply believe that
the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a united, stable
and multi-ethnic State lies in a European perspective.
As a member State of the European Union and as an
elected member of the Security Council, Luxembourg
will spare no effort to help Bosnia and Herzegovina
to achieve its European future. It is in that spirit
that we have lent our full support to resolution 2123
(2013), which was facilitated by our colleagues from
Azerbaijan and adopted unanimously this morning by
the Security Council.

