Ms. Tayob (South Africa): We thank Special Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Ambassador King, in her capacity as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), for their briefings. South Africa continues to reiterate its support for Mr. Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and for all his efforts to find a peaceful solution to the situation in Yemen. South Africa thanks the Panel of Experts for its comprehensive report covering the year 2019 (see S/2020/70).My delegation would like to reiterate that a causal nexus exists between the political impasse, the dire humanitarian situation and the security situation. Our intervention will therefore focus on those three elements. First, on the political process, South Africa urges the parties to commit to a political process, which can be achieved only through dialogue. There has been no further implementation of the Riyadh agreement. South Africa therefore wishes to reiterate its call for the implementation of that vital agreement between the Yemeni Government and the Southern Transitional Council, as well as the full implementation of the December 2018 Stockholm Agreement. Like Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, we call on the Yemeni actors to unite around a vision of Yemen addressing the conflict and restoring peace within the country. Secondly, on the humanitarian situation, South Africa commends the work of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Yemen regarding the commencement of the medical air bridge evacuation between Sana'a and Amman. That agreement was achieved with the collaboration of all the parties to the conflict and highlights that progress can be made when the political will is strong. It is heartening to note that the spokesperson of the World Health Organization indicated that the organization was covering the costs of the victims' medical treatment, transport and accommodation. However, of equal importance to note are the restrictions on humanitarian operations in the north, which continue to cause much frustration with regard to the reliable delivery of aid, further threatening to suspend aid altogether. We call on the parties to the conflict to allow the free, regular and unimpeded passage of food and other humanitarian relief and not to take actions that would deprive civilians of their rights to food and health care. In that regard, we remind the parties to the conflict that all necessary measures should be taken to respect the Geneva Conventions. Thirdly, on the security situation, South Africa is dismayed that, after much political traction and relative calm, the recent escalation of fighting in Yemen has effectively reset the conflict resolution process. The number of fatalities continues to rise as the levels of violence and conflict escalate in Nihm, Ma'rib and Al-Jawf. In that regard, South Africa calls on the parties to observe the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah and to contribute towards a nationwide cessation of hostilities. A cessation of hostilities in Yemen, or even parts of Yemen, would greatly assist the negotiation process towards a political solution for the country. In conclusion, this unprecedented humanitarian crisis necessitates an urgent commitment to a ceasefire and the pursuit of a negotiated, peaceful and inclusive solution to the crisis. We wish to reiterate that the only sustainable solution to this conflict is a Yemeni- led political settlement that is inclusive and fair and puts the interests and well-being of all the citizens of Yemen first.
