Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes today's briefings by the Committees tasked
with supporting the implementation of the Security
Council's measures to counter the threat to peace and
security that is posed by terrorism.

The United Nations has an indispensable role in
efforts to combat global terrorism. The framework
provided by the United Nations Global Strategy on
Counter-Terrorism, the 16 international counter-
terrorism instruments, Security Council resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) and their
successors has established the principles, norms and
mechanisms underpinning counter-terrorism efforts
globally and provided them with authority and
legitimacy. The sanctions implemented by the
Committees form an important element of this
framework.

Over the past decade, targeted United Nations
sanctions have proved an effective tool in global
counter-terrorism efforts. United Nations sanctions
have played an important role in collective efforts to
restrain and disrupt the activities of individuals,
entities and networks engaged in or providing support
to acts of terrorism, and to restrict their movement and
access to weapons and resources. It is nevertheless
essential to keep such measures under constant review
to ensure that they remain effective, credible and
relevant, and to consider further enhancements to their
design and implementation.

New Zealand is a strong supporter of targeted
sanctions, which offer the global community a means
of achieving its political and security objectives while
minimizing unintended humanitarian and human rights
impacts. We have therefore been encouraged by this
Council's recent steps to enhance the transparency and
effectiveness of its existing sanctions regimes,
particularly through the changes introduced in
2

resolution 1822 (2008) to strengthen procedures for
listing and delisting, notification and availability of
information relating to the consolidated list of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). New Zealand welcomes the progress made by
the 1267 Committee in preparing publicly accessible
narrative summaries outlining the reasons for specific
listings.

Upcoming decisions on the renewal of the
mandate of that Committee's Monitoring Team will
provide an important opportunity for the Council to
take further practical steps to ensure that its sanctions
regimes are effective, transparent and fair, and that its
listings remain accurate, relevant and actionable. For
example, in order to ensure that United Nations
sanctions regimes are accurate, fair and capable of
effective implementation, it is important that listings be
backed by sufficient information. New Zealand
supports further measures to promote a cleaner, leaner
list of greater utility. We also support consideration of
further steps to strengthen the Committees' listing and
delisting procedures to ensure these are as rigorous and
transparent as the special circumstances of their work
will allow.

Full and conscientious implementation of
measures mandated by the Council under Chapter VII
of the Charter is a fundamental obligation for all
Member States. This in turn places a responsibility on
the Council to ensure that such measures are practical,
targeted and fair. New Zealand is conscious of the
difficulties in meeting international counter-terrorism
obligations faced by small developing States, including
many in our own region. We therefore welcome recent
efforts by the Secretariat to enhance engagement with
small developing States in the Pacific and elsewhere to
encourage and support compliance.

New Zealand is also determined to take all
necessary measures at the domestic level to prevent
and combat terrorism and to ensure that New Zealand
is neither a target nor a source of terrorist activity. We
continue to improve our legislative, policy and
operational capabilities in line with international
standards and obligations, including prioritizing work
to ratify all 16 international counter-terrorism
instruments. Last month, New Zealand enacted new
legislation aimed at combating money laundering and
countering the financing of terrorism, and designed to
implement fully the recommendations of the Financial
Action Task Force. New Zealand was also pleased to
09-60696
host a highly productive visit by the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate in July.

Much has been achieved over the past decade
through the collective efforts of the global community
to combat terrorism. Yet, sadly, continued attacks
around the world remind us of the continued threat
posed by terrorism and of the enduring need to combat
it through international cooperation. New Zealand fully
supports the vital contribution of the Council and its
sanctions Committees to such endeavours, and
encourages them in their efforts to ensure that their
measures remain as effective, transparent and credible
as possible.

We know full well that no single measure will be
sufficient to counter the threat to peace and security
posed by global terrorism, but equally we know that
sanctions imposed by this Council play an
indispensable role in efforts to combat that threat. New
Zealand therefore reiterates its wholehearted support
for this Council and its Committees in the
implementation of those measures.

