I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing on developments and trends on the ground. We also welcome the participation of His Excellency Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Observer State of Palestine, and our colleague, Ambassador Gilad Erdan, Permanent Representative of Israel. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains steadfast in our view that the only way to achieve lasting peace is on the basis of agreed and long-standing international parameters, the relevant United Nations resolutions and a negotiated two-State solution that recognizes the legitimate aspirations and security needs of both Palestinians and Israelis. Both Israel and Palestine must make sincere efforts to build mutual trust for the progress of direct negotiations and to not undermine the peace process. This year marks 53 years of the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory. At this time, the international community must reaffirm our collective support for a two-State solution on the basis of the 1967 borders and spare no efforts to achieve a viable solution to the conflict. We therefore welcome President Abbas' call for an international conference in early 2021 to resume peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians. The time has come for the international community to meet our collective responsibility under international law to bring an end to the occupation of the Palestinian State. On 14 and 15 October, the Israeli Government approved a plan to build 5,000 settlement units in the West Bank. Those settlements, as well as the acquisition of Palestinian territory by force, are illegal. We denounce those illegal and provocative actions and call for full respect of, and adherence to, the Charter of the United Nations, international law, long-standing international consensus and the relevant United Nations resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016). Turning to Gaza, we condemn the illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip by Israel and call on the Israeli Government to immediately lift the siege of the Gaza Strip and allow the free movement of people. It is time to fully end the occupation that began in 1967 and resolve all final-status issues on the basis of resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and subsequent resolutions on this item. We also call on Member States to increase funding to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as it continues to provide assistance and protection to millions of Palestinian refugees with limited resources. In conclusion, we sincerely hope that a two-State solution, with Israel and a Palestinian State living side by side in peace and security, will be realized in the near future, and that this will lead to a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
