Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me first
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of May.
I would also like to pay a tribute to the Permanent
Representative of the Czech Republic for the excellent
manner in which he guided the work of the Security
Council last month.

The issue for the discussion of which the Council has
been asked to convene this meeting is not the first
abhorrent practice of the Israeli regime, nor will it be the
last one. The recent Israeli decision to confiscate areas of
the holy Quds should be considered in the broad context of
Israeli policies towards all occupied territories. The Zionist
regime decided long ago to change the demographic
characteristic of the occupied territories. To achieve this
objective, Israel has spared no effort in expanding illegal
settlements in Palestine and uprooting the Palestinian people
from their homes.

What makes the latest heinous decision of the Israeli
regime even more acute and, indeed, painful is the violation
of the holy status of Quds, which has been honoured by the
followers of the great divine religions for centuries. The
land of the holy Quds has been enduring harmful actions by
the Zionist occupation for decades. Now, the recent Israeli
decision is aimed at perpetuating this suffering, unless the
occupying Power is stopped. The Security Council's
responsibility to prevent the Israeli regime from further
destabilizing the situation in the region is crystal clear.
The Security Council should deal effectively with
continued Israeli threats to peace and security in the
region. It is indeed unfortunate that the supporters of the
Zionist regime, especially those within the Council, are
even trying to bar the Council from taking the slightest
step to prevent Israel's violations of international law.
The fact is that the holy Quds, with its
Islamic-Arabic characteristic, is the legitimate and
recognized capital of a Palestinian State. Those who, like
the Israeli regime, disregard this fact indeed misuse peace
as a shield and a pretext for their own agenda. In fact, the
recent decision of the Zionist regime reveals once again
the real intention of that regime and of its agenda in the
current process.

Less than three months ago, the Security Council
met to consider the dangerous situation in the occupied
territories arising from the Israeli violations of
international law. The result of that meeting was quite
frustrating. The Council merely decided to remain seized
of the matter. The result of this meeting as well as the
future meetings on the subject will also be frustrating if
the Council decides to do the same thing or to act in a
manner that fails to protect the people of Palestine against
continuous oppression and occupation of their homeland.

