Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Special Representative Honore for her useful briefing.

While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union, I would
like to make a few comments in my national capacity.

Unfortunately, as we deliberate in this Chamber,
Haiti is suffering the consequences of the devastating
hurricane. In that regard, I would like to convey our
sincere condolences to the people of Haiti on the loss
of hundreds of lives and the destruction of thousands of
homes. Ukraine stands in solidarity with this nation in
the face of such a challenge. Yet even before the latest
natural disaster struck Haiti, it was going through a
critical humanitarian and socioeconomic situation.

According to the latest report (S/2016/753) of the
Secretary-General report, an estimated 3.6 million
people, or one third of Haiti's population, face food
insecurity after three years of severe drought. Over
61,000 individuals remain internally displaced since
the 2010 earthquake. It is during such natural disasters
as Hurricane Matthew and the 2010 earthquake that the
weakness of Haiti's State governance becomes most
visible. On numerous occasions, the Security Council
appealed to the political parties in Haiti to urgently
resolve the political deadlock. A lack ofprogress on this
track and the inability of players to reach compromises
and to adopt long-overdue decisions keep the country's
State machinery on the perpetual verge of collapse. The
people of Haiti deserve better than that.

After a long period of political uncertainty and
delay, the country was getting ready for elections
last Sunday. Yet those plans were disrupted by the
hurricane. In that context, we hope that a new electoral
calendar will be announced soon. Ukraine reaffirms its
support for credible, transparent, inclusive and secure
elections that will reflect the will of the Haitian people.
The international community needs the Government of
Haiti as a reliable partner in advancing development,
democracy, human rights and other vital objectives.

Ukraine welcomes the Secretary-General's
recommendations concerning the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
We support the idea of extending it for six months until
15 April 2017, and of deploying a strategic assessment
mission by the end of that period. We share the opinion
that it would be preferable to conduct the strategic
assessment mission after a President has been elected
and inaugurated. However, considering the troubling
trends in the country's political development, we do not
think the assessment mission should be contingent on
the inauguration timetable.

Ukraine commends the important role that
MINUSTAH continues to play in ensuring stability and
security in Haiti. Its contribution to strengthening the
capacity of the Haitian National Police is particularly
important. It is encouraging that we have seen some
progress in that area, but according to the Secretary-
General's report (S/2016/753), the police are currently
present in only 261 of the country's 570 communal
sections. It will therefore be extremely important to try
to achieve the goal of 15,000 fully operational serving
police officers by the end of 2017.

Finally, we would like to underline the necessity
of ensuring that the United Nations, other multilateral
agencies, international and regional partners and
Member States continue their efforts to support Haiti's
critical needs, and in that regard to highlight the flash
appeal launched by the United Nations yesterday.

