Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks Mr. Zebari for his
briefing. This is the first time that the Security Council
has heard from the representative of the interim Iraqi
Government on the current situation in that country and
on the new Council draft resolution. We hope to have
more such opportunities.

As stated by Secretary-General Kofi Annan, the
formation of the interim Iraqi Government symbolizes
a new beginning. China welcomes the formation of the
interim Iraqi Government, and we hope that that will
soon lead to the restoration of full Iraqi sovereignty
and to the stabilization of the situation in Iraq. We hope
and trust that, with the broad support of the Iraqi
people and the strong support of the international
community, the interim Government will accomplish
its mission smoothly.

The Security Council's timely adoption of the
new draft resolution will be significant for Iraq's future
development. To that end, all the parties have adopted
constructive attitudes and have conducted in-depth
consultations on the draft resolution concerning the
Iraqi issue, as proposed by the United States and the
United Kingdom.

We believe that the new draft resolution should
send two clear signals. The first is the termination of
the military occupation of Iraq to return full
sovereignty to the Iraqi people. After 30 June, the
interim Iraqi Government will exercise full sovereignty
in the political, economic, security, judicial and
diplomatic areas. Secondly, the deployment and the
mandate of the multinational force should effectively
respect Iraqi opinion. Prior consultation and consent
should be sought from the interim Iraqi Government on
major military operations, to express the fact that the
interim Government has full authority. In addition, the
duration of the multinational force should be in
keeping with the political process in Iraq.

We believe that, in our consultations on the draft
resolution, we should listen to Iraq's opinions and to
those of its neighbours. Only when we produce a good
draft resolution that enjoys broader support will we be
able to actually produce something that will be
conducive to the stabilization of Iraq's security
situation and to the smooth implementation of Iraq's
reconstruction.

I would also like to take this opportunity to ask a
number of questions of Foreign Minister Zebari. First,
what are the expectations of the new interim
Government of Iraq with regard to a new draft
resolution? Does he have any suggestions in that
regard? Secondly, what are the hopes of the interim
Government regarding the specific role of the United
Nations? And thirdly, what progress has been made
with respect to the security agreement as negotiated by
Iraq and the multinational force?

