Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Two
years ago, the international consensus enabled us to
respond quickly and effectively to the reports of the
use of chemical weapons in the conflict in Syria, whose
shocking images have remained with us, images of
Syrian civilian victims ofchemical weapon attacks in the
Guta area of Damascus. International diplomatic efforts
resulted in a historic decision taken by the Executive
Council of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on dismantling the Syrian
chemical weapons programme and endorsed by the
Security Council through its adoption of resolution
2118 (2013). The unity, particularly in its objective,
demonstrated by the Council, aimed at making concrete
progress regarding the issue of Syria's chemical
weapons, helped to ensure the resolution's adoption.

However, despite our adoption of resolution
2209 (2015) today, we are seeing new and extremely
disturbing reports of the use of chlorine gas as a
chemical weapon in Syria, undermining the progress
that has been made by flagrantly ignoring the views
of the international community as a whole and all our
human values. There is a need to address this issue in
the context of cooperation with the OPCW in a precise
and effective manner. Silence would only distance us
further from the international community's goal of
ending such crimes.

Jordan voted in favour of resolution 2235 (2015) on
the basis ofits firm condemnation of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. The use of toxic chemicals, such
as chlorine gas, contravenes the Chemical Weapons
Convention, international humanitarian law and the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Jordan
wants the United Nations to remain seized of this
question, in line with the Security Council's Charter
mandate and its own resolutions.
It will therefore be necessary to follow the work
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism as closely as
possible so as to ensure that it addresses all occurences
of the use of chemical weapons. We must all cooperate
with the Mechanism and impose the relevant measures.
A failure to implement the provisions of resolution 2118
(2013) would require long-term follow-up to ensure
that such acts do not recur. Those who have used such
weapons must be brought to justice and held accountable
for their actions.

In conclusion, the adoption of resolution 2235
(2015) is intended to end the use of chemical weapons
in Syria, but our brothers and sisters there continue to
suffer horrifically every day. We therefore hope that
henceforth the consensus reached on this dossier will
enable us to move forward and progress in the United
Nations efforts to find a political solution to the Syrian
crisis, based on the first Geneva conference, so as to
fulfil the hopes of the brotherly people of Syria that
they Will find a role to play in a new era, that stability
can be restored and the social fabric repaired, and that
the refugees can return voluntarily to their country.

