Mr. Sinhaseni (Thailand): Let me join others in
congratulating the United Kingdom presidency of
the Security Council for convening this significant
debate. I also thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict; Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Ms. Yoka Brandt; and Mr. Gregory Ramm for their
important statements. Allow me to recognize the
efforts exerted by Luxembourg as Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. The presence
of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Luxembourg underscores the importance
that Luxembourg places on its chairmanship.

On the issue of child protection, Thailand is no
less concerned than any other Government. Last
September, Thailand was the first country to sign the
Optional Protocol to the Convention to the Rights of the
Child on the communications procedure. Our current
efforts to harmonize domestic laws and regulations
and the relevant protective mechanisms in service to
our children further underscores our commitments
to enhancing child protection. Our cooperation with
UNICEF and other relevant United Nations agencies
has been fruitful, constructive and efficient for many
decades, and it continues to be enhanced.

Although Thailand is neither in a situation of armed
conflict nor on the Security Council's agenda, Thailand
attaches great importance to the issue of children and
armed conflict. We condemn all grave violations and
crimes against children in situations of armed conflict,
and we support the effective implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions on the issue.

During the open debate on children and armed
conflict held last September (see S/PV.6838), Thailand
offered our humble views on certain aspects of how the
United Nations could better perform its tasks to address
the issue of children based on the interest of the child
and national specificities. Let me reiterate our views.

First, given the number of United Nations actors
working on child-related issues, it is absolutely
imperative that each and everyone has a clear mandate
and that those mandates and responsibilities are
respected. The United Nations is a principle- and
rules-based Organization. Respective mandates cannot
and must not be conducted, expanded or interpreted
arbitrarily. The misinterpretation or stretching of
such mandates will not lead us to our common goal
of enhancing child protection, but can rather weaken
the joint effort of the United Nations and inadvertently
put children at higher risk. Mandates should be
carefully drafted, endorsed, reviewed and adapted,
not in competition with one other but in support of the
comparative advantages and respective roles that each
United Nations actor should play.

Secondly, situations on the ground in different
countries are unique and require different approaches
and expertise. Therefore, the United Nations absolutely
needs to work in close cooperation with and with the
consent of concerned Governments, particularly when
it has a mandate to engage with non-State parties in
order to avoid unintended negative consequences.

Thirdly, the Secretary-General's report on children
and armed conflict (S/2013/245) and the appropriate
approach to bring about successful solutions rely
heavily on data collection and unbiased analysis.
We value receiving important information from all
stakeholders, including civil society as appropriate,
but such information needs to be accurate, objective,
reliable and verifiable. Thailand wants to emphasize
strongly the importance of the involvement and consent
of Member States in preparing the report from the
outset.

Fourthly, more new parties to the conflict continue
to be listed in the annexes. In this connection, it is
imperative, as well as a logical expectation, to see
both listing and de-listing criteria clearly specified in
the report after being discussed among the Council
members and formally endorsed by the Council, as
stipulated in operative paragraph 19 (d) of resolution
1882 (2009). Thailand encourages the Council to give
equal importance to both listing and de-listing, as well
as to carry out the necessary discussions on this issue
in a transparent manner, in close consultation with
affected Member States.

Thailand cannot stress strongly enough the
importance we attach to the mandates of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. We believe that children
and women alike must stop bearing the brunt of war and
conflicts. The Security Council has a clear role to play
in their protection in situations of armed conflict or in
situations threatening international peace and security,
but this role has to be applied with precision and within
the framework of a clearly-defined mandate.

For other situations outside the realm of armed
conflict, in accordance with international humanitarian
law, an inclusive and holistic remedy must be adopted
to ensure the promotion and protection of basic human
rights, sustainable development efforts and security
considerations. Anything else could exacerbate the
situation on the ground and become a self-serving
prophecy when the wrong remedy is applied to the
wrong situation. A case in a point is Thailand, which
is neither in a situation of armed conflict nor on the
Security Council agenda. The issue of independent
monitoring and access should not be raised because it
is simply not in the mandate and will not be granted.
Moreover, the Thai Government and the United Nations
country team have already put in place mutually
agreed arrangements and continue to enjoy very close
cooperation.

Finally, the diversity of views by Member States
should not be misinterpreted as a sign of opposition to
this important cause, as negligence or non-cooperation,
but instead as critical input to strengthen and sustain
the work of the United Nations in the protection of
our children for the long term. I believe we all aim
to strengthen Governments' capacity to protect our
children, our future.

