Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would very
much like to thank the Chairman-in-Office for his
briefing. I should also like to thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity today discuss the work of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and its partnership with the United Nations.

What the Chairman-in-Offlce said about
partnership between the United Nations and the OSCE
tracks very well with our thinking. I would also like to
echo what was said on behalf of the French presidency
of the European Union (EU) about the overall
relationship between the United Nations, the OSCE
5
and those of us who have the honour to be members of
all three organizations.

I would like to start, if I may, with something that
the Minister did not touch on in detail, but which we
think is important - OSCE support for the
implementation of United Nations principles in
tackling a number of serious horizontal issues. I am
referring to such issues as counter-terrorism, small
arms and light weapons and trafficking in human
beings. I would also like to welcome Minister Stubb's
work to re-energize the OSCE's efforts in the area of
conflict resolution and crisis management, as well as
his desire for closer cooperation with the United
Nations.

Obviously, I think, many people are interested at
the moment in the issue of Georgia, as the Chairman-
in-Office himself said. We would like to take this
opportunity to thank him for his efforts throughout,
including his role in helping to broker the six-point
plan. We look forward to closer United Nations-OSCE
cooperation on this issue and on humanitarian tasks, as
well as in playing a role in support of the EU special
representative for Georgia. We welcome the OSCE's
being fully involved in the preparations for the Geneva
conference.

We are grateful to the Chairman-in-Offlce for his
update on the negotiations on the OSCE military
monitors. We share the disappointment of Belgium
about some of the difficulties that those negotiations
have encountered due to the objections of one Member
State. However, what the Chairman-in-Office went on
to say about the prospects for a positive result, building
on his own contacts with Foreign Minister Lavrov, was
very encouraging.

We look forward to seeing genuine and sufficient
access for the OSCE military monitors, in sufficient
numbers. As we said, the OSCE is uniquely placed to
play that role, with its European and wider
membership. It is important that we have mechanisms
to monitor withdrawals. In order to monitor
withdrawals properly, of course, proper access to South
Ossetia is essential. I would also like to take this
opportunity to call for the proper protection of the
OSCE monitors who are on the ground, as well as to
ask all parties to ensure that they have adequate
protection to do the job that has been assigned to them.

I should now like to turn to Kosovo, on which a
number of speakers have touched. The OSCE is
playing an important role in helping to develop a multi-
ethnic and tolerant society in Kosovo. It has been there
since the inception of resolution 1244 (1999) and has
played a very encouraging role. Its continuing
engagement, in particular in ensuring the protection of
minorities and respect for human rights, is of critical
importance. It has a very valuable asset in its extensive
field presence, in particular as the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo downsizes.
We hope that OSCE engagement can reinforce the
efforts of other international actors on the ground,
above all those of the European Union.

Turning to Afghanistan, we strongly support
OSCE engagement on that country's northern border,
including inside Afghanistan. That is helping to
stabilize the country. The OSCE has a role to play in
helping Afghanistan to secure its borders with the
Central Asian States, to improve policing and to
combat drug trafficking. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the chairmanship of the OSCE for
the efforts it has made in the cross-border area, as well
as to say that we support the package of project
proposals that is currently on the table in Vienna. We
also agree that OSCE engagement must be fully
coordinated with the United Nations, which is the
principal coordinator of international involvement in
Afghanistan.

