The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity as the representative of Greece.

Five years ago, on 17 July 2000, the Security
Council, in its collective wisdom, adopted resolution
1308 (2000), under the agenda item entitled "The
responsibility of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security:
HIV/AIDS and international peacekeeping operations".
For the first time, a health-related issue was linked to
international peace and security.

One can point to many notable statements in
looking back at the discussion that took place during
that meeting. To me, three stand out as the most
significant, namely, that the world was breaking the
silence around AIDS; that HIV/AIDS was not someone
else's problem, but everyone's problem; and that AIDS
was not just a problem of a single country or continent.
Resolution 1308 (2000) was the Council's response to
the pandemic and its implications for international
peacekeeping operations.

I wish to extend our most sincere thanks and
appreciation to the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
and to the Executive Director of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
Mr. Peter Piot, not only for their informative and clear
presentations, but also for all of their continuous
efforts in implementing resolution 1308 (2000). The
most recent report submitted to the Council is tangible
proof of the leadership of UNAIDS and of the level of
awareness that it has brought to the international
community.

HIV/AIDS is a worldwide threat, one that makes
no distinction as to gender, colour or age. AIDS is not
only a health problem; it also affects development and
security. It can have a uniquely devastating effect on
all sectors and at all levels of society.

Unfortunately, and despite all of the efforts made
so far, HIV/AIDS remains one of the biggest global
threats. We need to do more and to develop a long-term
strategy mobilizing all the available resources to fight
the disease and minimize its effects. The seriousness of
the problem calls for well-coordinated international
action.

Uniformed personnel is inevitably one of the
most vulnerable groups for a number of reasons,
including military life itself, interaction with local
communities, the tendency of young people to ignore
danger, and the inevitable exacerbation of the disease
under conditions of conflict and instability.

Resolution 1308 (2000) recognizes this particular
vulnerability. It encourages Member States to consider
developing, in cooperation with the international
community and UNAIDS, effective long-term
strategies for HIV/AIDS education, prevention,
voluntary and confidential testing and counselling, and
treatment of their personnel. These strategies are an
important part of their preparation for participation in
peacekeeping operations.

Every resource should be utilized in the fight
against HIV/AIDS. Raising awareness is the all-
important first step, to be undertaken through
education and special training programmes. We also
encourage a rights-based approach in order to ensure
an ethical process for the conducting of testing, to
address the implications of a positive result, and to
reduce AIDS-related stigmatization and discrimination.

The level of awareness of, and the approach taken
by, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) in that respect are commendable. The
appointment of HIV/AIDS advisers within DPKO and
many peacekeeping missions is a considerable
achievement. This practice should be expanded to all
missions. The development of training material, policy
guidelines and the issuance of awareness cards are just
a few examples of the numerous significant
achievements made, but the nature of this devastating
disease dictates that more are needed.

We welcome the leading role played by UNAIDS.
We encourage the continuous strengthening of its
cooperation with interested Member States to further
develop strategies and best practices for HIV/AIDS
prevention, education, testing, counselling and
treatment. UNAIDS initiatives to develop, in
cooperation with interested States, national
programmes to address HIV/AIDS among their
uniformed personnel are very valuable. Well-informed
and trained peacekeepers can serve as a valuable tool
in the context of efforts to prevent the spread of the
disease.

Another initiative that could also be considered
by UNAIDS would involve the creation of regional
observatories for HIV/AIDS. Such observatories have
been tested successfully with respect to other issues.
They would contribute to the implementation of
resolution 1308 (2000) by registering data for certain
regions, raise the awareness of the risks involved
regionally, and contribute, at an early stage, to
preventing the spread of the disease by drawing
conclusions as to the necessary interventions and
changes. Such observatories should submit reports on
an annual basis.

We should not forget that the success of any
peacekeeping operation depends to a great extent on
the personnel who serve in the mission. The troop-
contributing countries should ensure the highest
possible standards for their people. Voluntary and
confidential counselling and testing, as well as care
and treatment, should be the minimum standard for all
peacekeepers in the fight against the HIV/AIDS
pandemic.

Greece has not only recognized the sensitivity of
the issue but also follows a strict policy requiring all
Greek military personnel who participate in
peacekeeping operations - United Nations or United
Nations-mandated - to be tested for HIV/AIDS. The
test is mandatory and confidential for all. There are
also provisions for assistance to those soldiers who are
infected.

The fight against HIV/AIDS should be
continuous and intense, employing every available
asset. It has to be multisectoral and be waged at the
national, regional and international levels. Regular
briefings by DPKO and UNAIDS on the progress made
will help to strengthen commitment and accountability
at the highest levels and ensure sustained monitoring
and evaluation of the impact of programmes.

In closing, I wish to convey my congratulations
once again to DPKO and UNAIDS. Today's discussion
has proved that they have unanimous support in their
efforts. I urge them to continue in the direction they
have taken so far.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the full implementation of
resolution 1308 (2000). The Council also recalls
the United Nations General Assembly
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS of
June 2001.

"The Security Council welcomes the
collaboration between DPKO and UNAIDS and
its co-sponsors to address HIV/AIDS awareness
among peacekeeping personnel, both uniformed
and civilian. The Council commends UNAIDS
for developing, in cooperation with interested
States, national programmes to address
HIV/AIDS among their uniformed personnel. The
Council recognizes the significant number of
direct and indirect beneficiaries of the
programmes worldwide.

"The Security Council recognizes that men
and women in the uniformed services are vital
elements in the fight against HIV/AIDS. The
Council welcomes the efforts by Member States,
including through existing national programmes,
DPKO, UNAIDS and other stakeholders, to
counter the spread of the disease. The Council
encourages Member States, in the preparation of
their personnel for participation in peacekeeping
operations, to employ best practices in HIV/AIDS
education, prevention, awareness, countering
stigma and discrimination, voluntary confidential
counselling and testing, and care and treatment.

"The Security Council recognizes that
United Nations peacekeeping personnel can be
important contributors to the response to
HIV/AIDS, particularly for vulnerable
communities in post-conflict environments. The
Council welcomes the action taken by the
Secretary-General and the United Nations
peacekeeping missions to integrate HIV/AIDS
awareness in their mandated activities and
outreach projects for vulnerable communities,
and urges them to pay particular attention to the
gender dimensions of HIV/AIDS. In this context,
the Council encourages further cooperation
between DPKO and UNAIDS and its co-
sponsors, non-governmental organizations and
civil society, bilateral and multilateral donors and
national Governments.

"The Security Council recognizes that
significant progress has been made in
implementation of resolution 1308 (2000) but that
many challenges remain. The Council expresses
its readiness to further promote and support the
implementation of this resolution. In order to
maintain and consolidate momentum, the Council
welcomes regular briefings, as needed, by DPKO
and UNAIDS on the progress made, as a measure
to strengthen commitment and accountability at
the highest levels and ensure sustained
monitoring and evaluation of the impact of
programmes. The Council reaffirms its intention
to contribute, within its competence, to the
attainment of the relevant objectives in the
declaration adopted at the twenty-sixth special
session of the General Assembly in carrying out
the Council's work, in particular in its follow-up
to resolution 1308 (2000)."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2005/33.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.
