Mr. Lancry (Israel): At the outset, I would like
to commend the Secretary-General for his report on
small arms and, in the same vein, to thank Under-
Secretary-General Dhanapala for his remarkable
introduction of the report this morning.

The State of Israel views the illicit trade and
trafficking in small arms and light weapons first and
foremost as a humanitarian issue. Such activity
invariably leads to the loss of innocent life and affects
the basic right of people to lead their lives peacefully,
without fear of getting killed simply for being in the
wrong place at the wrong time.

The humanitarian dimension of this problem must
remain foremost in our minds as we conduct
deliberations on this matter. Our aim must be to
prevent not only the irresponsible flow of arms,
ammunition and explosives, but also the indiscriminate
attacks which inevitably result from illicit trade and
trafficking.

Our actions must also deal directly not only with
States that engage in this activity, but also with non-
State actors - terrorist groups, criminal organizations
and others - that gain access to small arms and light
weapons. In the past year, the world has recognized the
threat that terrorism poses to freedom, security and
global stability. The international community has
resolved not only to combat terrorists directly, but also
to insist that States end the financial and logistical
support that makes terrorism possible. These efforts to
deny terrorists the means to carry out their attacks must
also include steps aimed at denying them access to
small arms and light weapons.

This may seem like an unattainable objective, but
in fact it is entirely within our ability to achieve. Israel
believes that the best way to curb the illicit circulation
of small arms and light weapons throughout the world
is, first, through strong national commitment and
determination. It is our view that States bear the
primary responsibility for ensuring that no weapons,
including small arms, are transferred from their
territory without proper oversight. States must
undertake adequate marking and recording procedures
for all weapons, stringent export controls and
appropriate domestic legislation to prevent the misuse
and proliferation of arms.

Action taken at the national level must be
supplemented by regional coordination and cooperative
international efforts. Arms proliferation is, after all, a
transnational problem, exploited mainly by
international terrorists and criminal organizations. If
States adopt clear and explicit commitments to bar
different entities under their jurisdiction from engaging
in the illicit traffic of arms, withhold assistance from
outside elements involved in this traffic, and cooperate
in international and regional frameworks, we can
greatly reduce the threat posed by these weapons.

The Programme of Action, adopted in July 2001
during the Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, represents
an important first step in this regard. All efforts should
be exerted to find ways and means to implement the
provisions of the Programme of Action, including
measures to pressure recalcitrant States to do more to
fulfil their obligations. We are pleased with the
progress that has been made, especially in several
regional initiatives which constitute an appropriate
framework for combating the illicit circulation of small
arms and light weapons. Still, more work needs to be
done to prevent arms from falling into the hands of
those who would use them for criminally destructive
purposes.

Israel is a country that, more than half a century
after its establishment, continues to face threats both
from States in the region as well as from terrorist
organizations with increasing access to conventional
weapons. Small arms in the hands of terrorist
organizations have exacted a high price in human
suffering, while also serving to obstruct efforts to
achieve a durable peace. Not only in Israel, but in other
parts of the world as well, terrorism has been a cause of
political instability and hinders social and economic
development. Clearly, small arms have not had small
consequences.

Moreover, the relative speed and ease with which
terrorist groups have built up significant stockpiles of
conventional arms even raises the spectre of their one
day being capable of deploying weapons of mass
destruction. It is imperative that we act now to prevent
even greater threats in the future.

In our region, we are particularly vulnerable to
the harmful effects of the illicit traffic in small arms.
Though the spirit and the letter of the Oslo agreements
greatly restrict the number and type of weapons
permitted to the Palestinian Authority, we remain
perpetually at risk due to the dangerous violation of
these accords.

In the early morning of 3 January 2002, the Israel
Defense Forces seized a ship called the Karine A,
carrying 50 tons of weapons and ammunition bound for
the Palestinian territories. The ship contained an
enormous cache of weaponry that would have
significantly elevated the ability of Palestinian
terrorists to kill and maim Israeli civilians. Among the
weapons found were a large number of rockets, mortars
and launchers; anti-tank weaponry, mines and
explosives; and other types of light weaponry,
including sniper rifles, assault rifles and hand grenades.
The Karine A and the weapons discovered aboard it
were financed by the Palestinian Authority with the
assistance of other States in the region.

The use of boats to carry weapons intended for
terrorist use, without any country accepting
responsibility, is a phenomenon that should be declared
unacceptable by the international community.

Furthermore, last April, in the course of
Operation Defensive Shield, Israel seized nearly 2,000
Kalashnikov rifles, almost 400 sniper rifles and over
2,000 long rifles from Palestinian terrorists. These
weapons are in addition to the pistols, mortars,
grenades, launchers, bombs and other explosive
devices that Israeli forces discovered. Much of this
weaponry was purchased with the help of other regimes
in the Middle East. It hardly needs to be mentioned that
these weapons are intended not for defensive purposes
but to escalate the terrorist campaign against the
citizens of Israel and that they serve only to create
ever-greater obstacles along the path to peace and
reconciliation. Many of the weapons seized were
subsequently destroyed.
We wish to take this opportunity to call upon our
neighbours and all the countries in the region to adopt a
responsible policy and to take the necessary measures
to stop the flow of arms from their territories to
terrorist groups. We expect the international
community to join us in that call. The result of this
flow of arms is the fuelling of the conflict by
increasing the amount of illegal arms in terrorist hands,
thereby adding to human suffering, animosity and
instability in the region. Terrorism, after all, is only
viable if countries allow, and even support, its
fortification by weapons transfers.

The Security Council, as the body now charged
with coordinating the international efforts against
terrorism, must also address the role of arms
proliferation in terrorist activities. Specifically, in the
context of the counter-terrorist measures it is requiring
of all States, the Council must issue a call for the
implementation of measures to prevent arms from
falling into the hands of terrorists.

Israel continues to face threats to its very
existence, as well as a regional build-up of
conventional weapons. We therefore have consistently
attached great importance to confronting overall
proliferation threats and challenges, including small
arms, and have placed counter-proliferation high on
Israel's security agenda. We share the efforts of like-
minded States to place this issue at the top of the arms
control agenda. We also believe that cooperation and
coordination at the international level should be
strengthened in the continuing fight against
proliferation.

Israel adheres to strict export control regimes.
Israel's firm arms-transfer policy includes tight
controls aimed, inter alia, at the prohibition of exports
to regions or States under United Nations Security
Council sales embargoes, non-State entities, subversive
and underground movements, terrorist or guerrilla
groups, criminal organizations, or areas where there is
ongoing internal armed conflict between rival parties.
Moreover, Israel's export control regulations
concerning the export of small arms and light weapons
obligate the exporter to apply for separate and specific
licences from the relevant authorities, including
negotiation permits and export licences.

In addition, Israel invests in research,
development and production of new technologies and
equipment to prevent the illicit smuggling of arms
along its borders and points of entry. Israel has an
extremely advanced marking and record-keeping
system, which is an integral part of the production
process. This marking is very reliable.

Israel is willing to work with other countries in
our region to coordinate our efforts and share our
experience in combating the illicit spread of small arms
and light weapons. We remain committed to working in
a cooperative, regional approach, as part of a shared
global commitment to end the tragedy caused by these
weapons.

Finally, Israel believes that the international
community should recognize the right of States to
acquire and produce small arms for self-defence and
the necessities of national security, as determined by
each State. However, the international community does
have the right to insist that the use of these weapons be
restricted to self-defence and national security purposes
only. Moreover, we have the full right - and, indeed,
the obligation - to demand that States ensure that
these weapons do not fall into unauthorized hands.

