Mr. Voronkov: On behalf ofthe Secretary-General,
I would like to start by expressing my condolences
and solidarity with countries where terror attacks
have recently taken place. I would also like to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the seventh report (S/2018/770)
of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh)
to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat.

The report was prepared with the input of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, and in close collaboration
with the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
and other United Nations entities and international
organizations. As requested by resolutions 2253 (2015)
and 2368 (2017), the report contains a strategic-level
threat assessment, as well as an update on the United
Nations contributions in support of Member States'
efforts to counter the threat. The report explains how
ISIL continues to present a serious challenge, especially
with regard to its transformation into a covert network,
the activities of its regional affiliates and the complex
threat posed by returning and relocating foreign terrorist
fighters foreign terrorist fighters and their families. It
also elaborates on how Member States and the United
Nations continue to strengthen, refine and promote
the effective use of tools and measures to address the
evolving transnational threat posed by ISIL. Allow me
to briefly touch on several key highlights of the report.

First, the report notes that, although the so-called
ISIL caliphate has suffered significant losses, it
remains a serious and significant concern. Since the
end of 2017, ISIL has been defeated in Iraq and is in
headlong retreat in the Syrian Arab Republic. Overall,
current ISIL membership in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic is estimated at more than 20,000, divided
fairly evenly between the two countries. Some ISIL
fighters are fully engaged militarily, and others are
concealed in sympathetic communities and urban areas.
ISIL has also decentralized its leadership structure to
mitigate further losses. Therefore, an ISIL core is likely
to survive in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic in the
medium term owing to the ongoing conflict and complex

stabilization challenges. In addition, significant ISIL-
affiliated members also exist in Afghanistan, South-
East Asia, West Africa and Libya, and to a lesser extent
in Sinai, Yemen, Somalia and the Sahel.

Secondly, the challenge posed by returning and
relocating foreign terrorist fighters remains complex.
The flow of foreign terrorist fighters towards ISIL
in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic has essentially
ended. However, the reverse flow - although slower
than anticipated - remains a serious challenge.
Moreover, the rising threat from ISIL's global network,
particularly from foreign terrorist fighters, will be
multidimensional and difficult to predict. For example,
the report notes that expertise garnered in conflict
areas is one of the dangers posed by returning foreign
terrorist fighters -such as with regard to the skills
required to prepare improvised explosive devices and
weaponize drones.

Thirdly, ISIL's evolution from a proto-State structure
into a covert network brings with it new challenges. For
instance, ISIL's finances in the Middle East are harder
to detect and analyse now that administrative functions
to manage finances have gone underground. In the wake
of its structural changes, ISIL remains able to channel
funds across borders, often via intermediate countries,
to their final destinations. Moreover, in considering
ISIL's activities in various parts of the world from the
Middle East, Africa - particularly North, West and
East Africa - to Europe and Central, South and South-
East Asia, the report notes ISIL's continuing presence
and influence, particularly through its affiliates. ISIL
has also continued attempts to expand its presence in
Afghanistan, and the terrorist threat extending from
Afghanistan into Central Asia is perceived to be
increasing. In Indonesia, Jamaah Ansharut Daulah - an
ISIL-linked local network of cells - launched a series
of deadly suicide bombings in May, while setting
the disturbing precedent of using families to launch
attacks. In Europe, there are concerns about the high
volume of commercially encrypted messages, as well
as radicalization in prisons.

The report highlights that Member States and
the international community must renew their efforts
to effectively counter the rapidly evolving and
transnational threat posed by ISIL. It also notes that the
role of the Security Council has been instrumental in
that regard, especially through the various resolutions
it has adopted over the past few years on the various
aspects of countering terrorism, as well as on the threat
posed by ISIL. The ISIL and Al-Qaida sanctions list
also remains one of the key global instruments in
that effort.
The Secretary-General's seventh report also
provides updates on how the United Nations system
is strengthening the coordination, coherence and
effectiveness of its counter-terrorism efforts in support
of Member States. It highlights the work being done
by various United Nations entities, in particular the
close partnership between my Office - the Office of
Counter-Terrorism - and CTED, in cooperation with
other entities such as the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, UNESCO, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
UN-Women. Together, the United Nations system is
striving to address critical aspects, such as countering
the financing of terrorism; organized crime; border
management and law enforcement; international
judicial cooperation; prosecution; rehabilitation and
reintegration; and countering terrorist narratives and
engaging communities. In particular, United Nations
counter-terrorism bodies have continued to focus on the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.

The United Nations capacity-building implementation
plan for countering the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters, steered by the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and CTED, has been updated and streamlined to reflect
the priorities identified in resolution 2396 (2017). It
now consists of 40 projects to be implemented by 12
United Nations entities. More than 20 of the 40 projects
focus specifically on returning and relocating foreign
terrorist fighters. To counter the threat posed by ISIL
and terrorism more broadly, international cooperation,
information-sharing and capacity-building are critical.
Moreover, the increasing sophistication of methods used
by terrorists requires counter-measures, particularly
technological ones that are commensurately complex
and advanced. All those topics were discussed by
Member States at the United Nations High-level
Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of
Member States, held this past June at the initiative of
Secretary-General Guterres.

The Secretary-General remains firmly committed
to supporting Member States in the fight against
terrorism, including ISIL and its affiliates. In particular,
he welcomes the Security Council's continued attention
to the matter, as it is only through a sustained and
concerted multilateral response that we can address the
scourge of terrorism.

As discussed with the Permanent Mission of the
United Kingdom in its capacity as President of the
Security Council, I also avail myself ofthis opportunity
to briefthe Council on my visit to Afghanistan last week.

I travelled to Kabul from 14 to 15 August
to participate in a conference organized by the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission to commemorate the International
Day of Remembrance of and Tribute to the Victims
of Terrorism. The Government of Afghanistan played
a leading role in establishing the annual International
Day of Remembrance on 21 August, through General
Assembly resolution 72/165. In my keynote speech at
the conference, I emphasized the need for solidarity
with victims of terrorism in Afghanistan and around
the world. I reiterated the commitment of the United
Nations to listen to the victims of terrorism, respect
their rights and provide them with support and justice.
I also met with a large group of victims from across
Afghanistan, who told me about the devastating
impact of terrorism on their lives. They asked simple
questions, which, however, were difficult to answer.
For example: despite the preventive measures taken
by the international community, why are terrorists
still able to collect money, arms and ammunition and
find new support that enables them to continue their
horrible acts? We must look into that and other critical
questions and meet the expectations of victims.

I am grateful that many Council members were
able to join the Secretary-General and me last Friday
at the launch of an exhibition to commemorate the
International Day of Remembrance of and Tribute to
the Victims of Terrorism. We must never forget the
tens of thousands of people who have been injured,
traumatized or lost their lives during terrorist attacks.
Sixty-four thousand people were killed or injured in
Afghanistant over the past nine years.

During my mission to Kabul, I also had an
opportunity to hold high-level consultations with
President Ghani, Chief Executive Abdullah, Foreign
Minister Rabbani and other Cabinet members and
senior officials of the Government of Afghanistan
responsible for countering terrorism. They told me
that counter-terrorism efforts should be considered in
the context of Afghanistan's peace and reconciliation
process, while taking a long-term and regional
perspective. They also indicated that they are strongly
in favour of the peace process. To that end, they all
proposed organizing a high-level conference in Kabul
next year, with the support of the United Nations
and regional and international partners, to develop
a regional counter-terrorism strategy with a focus on
Afghanistan. I shared that idea with the Ambassadors
of the permanent members of the Security Council and
Central Asian Ambassadors, as well as with the Deputy
Commander of NATO's Resolute Support Mission
during my meetings with them in Kabul. Of course,
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Yamamoto are involved in those discussions.
They all expressed initial interest with regard to the
idea of a conference.

The Government of Afghanistan also discussed its
counter-terrorism priorities, including addressing the
evolving threat from foreign terrorist fighters, border
management and aviation security, the prevention of
violent extremism and the links between terrorism and
organized crime. I will consult further with UNAMA,
the Department of Political Affairs, CTED and other
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact entities to discuss how best to support Afghan
counter-terrorism efforts. The United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism looks forward to continuing to work
closely with the Security Council, the Government of
Afghanistan and other key regional and international
partners to ensure a safe and secure future for the
people of Afghanistan.

