Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): We wish to thank Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing. We also thank
Ms. Al Hallak, from the Syrian Women's League,
for sharing her experience and information with the
Security Council.

Indonesia welcomes the launching of the
Constitutional Committee and the subsequent
discussions among Committee members in Geneva
few weeks ago. We share the view of others that the
Constitutional Committee is not in itself a solution to
the conflict. However, we also believe that the current
discussions in Geneva are crucial as a point of entry
to a broader Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political
process, facilitated by the United Nations and based on
resolution 2254 (2015).

My delegation is extremely concerned by the
escalating violence in the north-west, including the
recent attack that affected an internally displaced
persons (IDP) camp in Idlib, as previously reported by
Special Envoy Pedersen. The people in the IDP camp,
including women and children, are seeking safety;
however, even their shelters are now destroyed. They
have lost their homes and their shelters. We would
therefore like to reiterate our appeal for a complete end
to the violence in Syria.

With regard to the overall political process in Syria,
my delegation would like to highlight three points.

First, it is crucial to create a conducive environment
for the ongoing process ofthe Constitutional Committee.
All parties need to support the Committee in focusing
on its work, without unnecessary, additional pressure
from external actors. The international community
should allow the members of the Committee concentrate
on the substance and let the Syrians decide their own
future. We hope that the members can further discuss
their visions constructively during the next round of
Committee discussions starting next Monday.

Secondly, my delegation commends the role of the
Special Envoy in bringing the parties together, which is
not easy. We strongly support Special Envoy Pedersen's

robust efforts to build trust and confidence between the
relevant parties. Trust has to be nurtured carefully in
order for it to lead to a genuine dialogue. We believe
it is essential that the Council reaffirm its continued
support for this process and strongly signal our full
backing of the Special Envoy's work to all parties.

Thirdly, in order to achieve a lasting political
settlement of the crisis, it is absolutely essential that
all sides support the initial pathway to peace in Syria,
including by fully respecting the ceasefire agreements.
Both the political process and a ceasefire should move
ahead expeditiously, and de-escalation must be a top
priority in the interest of the well-being of millions of
people in Syria.

Before concluding, as was clearly stated by Special
Envoy Pedersen, the Constitutional Committee meeting
was potentially a historic moment. It is our collective
moral obligation to continue assisting all parties to
transform that potential into something real, namely,
the beginning of a better future for all Syrian people.

My delegation wishes to stress the importance for
all parties to avoid any provocative activities and/or
statements that could potentially disrupt the ongoing
process in Geneva.

