Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): My first words must be to
thank the Brazilian presidency for the choice of theme
for this debate. Since the 1992 Rio Summit, Brazil has
demonstrated undisputed leadership on the question of
security and development. We believe that leadership
remains strong as we prepare for the 2012 United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. The
Council has often called for an integrated approach to
issues of peace, security and development. This debate
takes us a step closer to realizing that aspiration.

I also want to thank the Secretary-General for his
useful briefing, as well as Ms. Cliffe for the insight she
has provided on this complex and multi-faceted issue. I
also welcome and thank my colleague Ambassador
Gasana for his significant contribution.

Although development is not strictly within the
scope of the Security Council's remit, we recognize not
only the inextricable linkage but also the
interdependence between security and development.
Our work, whether it relates to peacekeeping,
peacebuilding or preventive diplomacy, does not and
should not operate within a vacuum. In his 2005 report
entitled "In larger freedom: towards development,
security and human rights for all" (A/59/2005), then
Secretary-General Kofi Annan told us, as the South
African Ambassador has already pointed out, that we
would not enjoy development without security, we
would not enjoy security without development and we
would not enjoy either without respect for human
rights. At the 2005 World Summit, our leaders stressed
the need to translate that conceptual understanding into
concrete actions in the field and in the Security
Council - which, I must point out, is well-placed to
promote that process. In championing development
efforts in tandem with activities related directly to
peace and security, we in fact further our conflict-
prevention objectives, which go to the very core of our
Charter obligations.

The draft presidential statement before us today
recognizes that allowing space for national actors to
determine security and development priorities early
enough will no doubt ensure sustained goodwill and
sustained impact alike. It is our duty to remember that,
in securing any society, we are but one actor among
many committed to the long-term stability of that
nation.

That long-term perspective is crucial, as guarding
against a relapse into conflict preserves the gains from
development, which are frequently among the first
casualties of war. Indeed, the complementarity between
security and development can also lead to more
efficient deployment of efforts and resources towards
achieving development and security. Moreover, by
standing on points of principle such as the full
participation of women in peace and governance
processes, the provision of youth employment and the
promotion of human rights we can assist a society
emerging from conflict in achieving lasting peace. Our
work here in the Council is very pivotal to
strengthening Governments, civil society and the
private sector in readiness for an orderly transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and, ultimately, to
a timely exit and the sustenance of peace.

Although the task of maintaining a peaceful and
just society is the primary responsibility of national
Governments, the expertise that the United Nations
system can provide to societies at a tipping point can
make an immense difference. I wish to highlight the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) as a key interlocutor
in that regard. Sierra Leone is a concrete example of
how the PBC can bring all relevant international and
national actors together to settle upon a long-term
peacebuilding strategy. The momentum following last
year's PBC review must not be lost. It is our sincere
hope that the Security Council will have a stronger
relationship with the PBC.

Many developing countries, including those
experiencing recent unrest, are home to large youth
populations that place pressure on already strained
labour markets, which is a point well made in the
concept note to the World Bank's 2011 World
Development Report. Such problems are exacerbated
by the march of globalization, which has not only
increased overall global wealth but has also led to more
uneven distribution of wealth within countries, regions
and the world as a whole. The challenges of the
security-development paradigm are starkly in evidence
in Somalia, for example, where it is widely recognized
that youth unemployment, poverty and weak
governance are the major contributing factors in the
persistent piracy problem. Development activities can
help to rehabilitate economies, thereby playing a
critical conflict-prevention role. It is therefore
important that United Nations agencies directly
engaged in development possess the resources and
political backing to be effective.

Nigeria takes very seriously its responsibility to
facilitate peace through development. In 2009, 0.7
million units of account of debt relief under the Nigeria
Trust Fund was approved for Burundi and Togo. Easing
fiscal pressure in that way may create room for home-
grown development activities. In addition, within the
Economic Community of West African States, we have
provided enormous support to Guinea-Bissau and other
members in diverse ways, including concessionary
sales of crude oil. Those measures are aimed at
promoting subregional economic integration as the
bedrock for lasting peace in our subregion.
The Security Council has the challenge and
opportunity to promote security policies that integrate
development in order to progressively rid humankind
of the scourge of war. Through our work in that regard
we can help countries avoid conflict altogether and
reap the benefits of development. All peoples deserve
freedom from want as well as freedom from violence.
Development is therefore in itself freedom. However, if
we fail to recognize the impact that our policies have
on a society's path to development and larger freedom,
I submit that we leave our task only half done.

Let me emphasize that the consideration of the
development-security paradigm in the Council today
should by no means be regarded as an attempt to
duplicate the work of either the General Assembly or
the Economic and Social Council. Rather, it provides
the missing political link that is so essential to
promoting synergy in the United Nations partnership
for peace, security and development. In supporting the
call for a new security consensus based on the
interdependence of security and development, we must
recognize that development is indeed a foundation for
peace. We hope that the Council will build on today's
debate to harness its role in helping countries transition
from war to irreversible and sustained peace. That is a
plea for genuine cooperation, and indeed an appeal to
make good on our commitment to deliver as one in the
United Nations family.

