Mr. McLay (New Zealand): We thank Azerbaijan
for convening this important debate, we congratulate
Ambassador Perceval on her chairmanship of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, and we note that this debate
has now become an annual fixture on the Council's
programme. Having said that, we think that once a year
is not enough; working methods are too important to be
relegated to an annual discussion.

Over the past 12 months, we have seen occasions
when better working methods might have improved the
quality and effectiveness of outcomes. The Council's
engagement with troop-contributing countries while
establishing the Force Intervention Brigade in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo could have been
much better. Its slow reaction to unfolding political,
security and humanitarian crises in Mali and in the
Central African Republic are further examples.

We are pleased, however, to observe some minor but
positive changes. Presidential note S/2013/515 will be a
useful aid to transparency. Wrap-up sessions are now
convened with greater frequency, following Pakistan's
lead in January. Last week's briefings direct from Addis
Ababa and Entebbe were an obvious improvement in
the use of technology. But much more must be done
to enable the Council more effectively to perform
its most neglected Charter responsibilities - those
under Chapter VI, concerning conflict prevention and
peaceful settlement of disputes.

As New Zealand stressed in this debate last
year, preventive initiatives are less costly in terms
of resources and lives than peacekeeping or peace
enforcement, and are more likely to deliver lasting
outcomes that address the root causes of conflict. The
Council's attempts over the past year to better fulfil its
preventive function by resurrecting horizon-scanning
was an important recognition of a problem that must be
addressed.
We do recognize, however, that some States have
concerns about that format. We have a very open mind
on the name, format and modalities, which for us are
much less important than the underlying purpose of
enabling the Council to look ahead and assess emerging
threats to international peace and security, thereby
facilitating early and effective responses in supporting
or leading mediation and conflict prevention measures.
The case of Syria graphically underlines what happens
when there is insufficient attention to emerging
situations at early stages.

New Zealand also emphasizes that it is not just the
Security Council itself which has responsibility for
better using the available tools to facilitate effective
preventive action by the Council. Article 99 of the
Charter of the United Nations allows the Secretary-
General to bring emerging threats to the Council's
attention - a power that should be used more often.

The Council's monthly programme of work might be
a useful aid to transparency, as was just emphasized by
the representative of Costa Rica, but it must not become
a procedural fetter on the ability of the Secretary-
General or Council members to discharge their Charter
responsibilities to prevent conflict. Discussions on
emerging crises are often going to be very sensitive and
are therefore not always best suited to formal Council
meetings, and that reality could also be better reflected
in Council working methods.

In that same context, it is necessary to find
better ways to engage with the States concerned.
New Zealand also sees potential for a greater role for
Council subsidiary bodies, particularly the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa, to help facilitate more active Council roles
in conflict prevention. That could lead the Working
Group to focus more closely on subregional or country-
specific challenges, or to act as a mechanism for
more meaningful interaction on conflict analysis and
preventive initiatives between the Council and regional
and subregional organizations.

Similarly, advances in working methods are needed
to address wide concerns held outside the Council about
its working partnership with regional and subregional
organizations. They have an inherent advantage in
identifying emerging threats, they are better placed for
early threat identification, they often know the players,
and they have a greater stake in preventing conflict. The
Council would be much better placed to respond to such
threats if it had improved processes for engagement
with regional organizations, and we strongly urge that.
Much of what we achieve at the United Nations
relies on momentum, so we encourage Council members
to take to heart the many messages emerging from
today's debate. The range of issues raised by Member
States indicates our widespread interest in and concern
about working methods. We know that takes time; we
know that it takes energy. But given the challenges
and expectations of today's world, real and substantial
change is needed in the way the Council functions if it
is to deliver on its responsibilities; and that is what New
Zealand urges today.

