Mr. Smirnov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, our delegation would like to
join in the warm words and wishes for the respected
Ambassador Greenstock.

We are grateful to the Prime Minister of Cote
d'Ivoire, Mr. Diarra, for his briefing on the
development of the situation in the country. We support
him in his efforts to advance the peace process in cote
d'Ivoire. We are encouraged by the considerable
progress made in the settlement there in the context of
the implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement, thanks to the efforts of the President and of
Mr. Diarra, who heads the New Government of
National Reconciliation. We note in particular the
signing on 4 July by the defence and security forces of
Cote d'Ivoire and the Forces nouvelles of the
declaration formally ending the hostilities.

Much remains to be done, however, for the full
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.
At this time, the most pressing problems facing the
country are the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme;
the extension of Government authority to areas still
under the control of the Forces nouvelles; the
appointment of the ministers of defence and national
security; and the finalization of procedures to adopt the
amnesty law and measures to promote economic
recovery.

We deem it important for all political forces in
Cote d'Ivoire fully and promptly to implement all
provisions of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement and
other accords in order to proceed smoothly and
methodically towards the establishment of conditions
of stability for the 2005 elections.

It is important also for all players in the peace
process in Cote d'Ivoire to make every effort to ensure
that human rights are safeguarded.

We note the considerable role of the mediation
efforts of regional leaders in advancing the peace
process. We commend the fruitful efforts of the
Monitoring Committee, headed by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We fully
support the activities of the United Nations Mission in
C6te d'Ivoire (MINUCI) and expect that all forces in
the country will fully and comprehensively cooperate
with it. Russian representatives and liaison officers are
ready to take part in its work.

We also commend the peacekeeping efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) countries and of France and share the
concerns expressed as to the logistical and financial
difficulties encountered by the ECOWAS forces. We
join the appeal to donor countries to continue to
support those forces.

We are ready to support the draft presidential
statement, as prepared on the initiative of the French
delegation.

