Mr. Akram (Pakistan): At the outset, I should
like to express the appreciation of the delegation of
Pakistan to Ambassador Gunter Pleuger and to the
German delegation for the heroic efforts that they have
made in the past several days to evolve this unanimous
adoption of a resolution to provide humanitarian relief
to the Iraqi people in this present hour of their need.

This effort, and the outcome which we have
achieved this morning, is a positive signal that the
Security Council can be restored to the path of unity
and that we can, even in difficult circumstances, act
together when the political will of our Governments
can be combined around a common cause.

Pakistan's principal concern, even before the
onset of hostilities, was the welfare of the Iraqi people.
We believe that the Iraqi people, who have suffered for
a dozen years under sanctions, should not be made to
pay doubly by the outbreak of hostilities which were no
fault of theirs.

The Government of Pakistan has announced that
it is prepared to provide emergency relief assistance to
the people of Iraq, and we stand ready to do so as soon
as arrangements can be made. We have allocated
amounts of foodstuffs, tents, blankets, medicines and
medical equipment. Pakistani medical teams are
prepared to proceed on short notice to Iraq for this
purpose.

We joined in sponsoring the draft resolution
because we believed that the international community
needed to respond rapidly and appropriately to the
needs of the Iraqi people. We would, however, wish to
underline once again that there are certain principles
which will guide our position today and in future with
regard to dealing with the rights and conditions of the
Iraqi people.

First, we would consistently demand respect for
the inalienable rights of the people of Iraq, including
over their natural resources. We are glad that the
resolution takes account of this principle.

Secondly, the situation in which the Iraqi people
find themselves is not one of their own making.
Therefore, in the provision of humanitarian assistance
and in future, we must be circumspect and ensure that
the Iraqi people are not called upon to pay the
additional costs which the current conflict may impose
on the operations of the oil for food programme.

The resolution has authorized the Secretary-
General to undertake humanitarian assistance for Iraq.
First and foremost, we believe that the response of the
international community to the adoption of this
resolution should be a positive response to the
Secretary-General's flash appeal of yesterday seeking
funds from the international community for the Iraqi
people. We trust that the unanimity which has been
displayed in the Council will be reflected in the
unanimity of the international community's positive
response to the Secretary-General's appeal.

Finally, let me just say that the Secretary-General
will need to coordinate his activities in Iraq with those
who happen to be in actual control of any part of that
country. We have accepted that reality in this
resolution, but this is without prejudice to our view on
the legality or otherwise of the situation which the
Secretary-General may find on the ground in the
operation of the programme of assistance for the Iraqi
people.

