Mr. Arnault: I wish to thank the Security
Council for this opportunity to report to it on
developments in Afghanistan since the most recent
briefing by Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno, on 23 November 2005, and ahead of the
very important conference on the future agenda of the
Afghan peace process, which is to be held in London in
two weeks.

As the Council is aware, almost four years to the
day after the signing of the Bonn Agreement, the
political transition in Afghanistan was completed with
the inauguration, on 19 December 2005, of the new
Afghan National Assembly. That inauguration was the
capstone in a process that saw, in a very short four
years, the installation of an interim, and subsequently a
transitional, authority, the adoption of a new
democratic constitution, the holding of presidential
elections and, most recently, the parliamentary
elections of September 2005. As a result, the
permanent Government institutions have now been re-
established, as required under the Bonn Agreement,
and, it is fair to say that, as called for in the same
Agreement, they are broad-based, multi-ethnic, gender-
sensitive and representative.

Following the inauguration of the National
Assembly, in a narrow vote the lower house elected as
its chair Yonous Qanooni, one of the architects of the
Bonn Agreement, a former presidential candidate and,
until his assumption of that parliamentary post, a
leading opposition figure. The upper house elected as
its chair Mr. Sigbatullah Mojaddedi, former President
of Afghanistan, former chair of the Constitutional Loya
Jirga and current leader of the national reconciliation
programme. Of the five office-bearers in the lower
house, one - the second deputy speaker - is a
woman.

Since the inauguration, both houses have made
some progress in the discussion of their rules of
procedure. A number of the draft provisions have
already been adopted, and the remainder will be
applied on a provisional basis for three months, after
which they will be revisited for further consideration.
The National Assembly has also decided on the
establishment of parliamentary committees, although
their membership will need to be determined.

One of the major rules of procedure that has yet
to be finalized relates to the process by which the
parliament will exercise its constitutional prerogative
of endorsing the members of the cabinet. The
parliament has yet to decide whether it will do so for
the cabinet as a whole or for each minister individually.
At the request of the President, the actual review of
appointments will take place after the London
conference to be held at the end of this month, as he
has indicated that many of his cabinet members are
fully involved in the preparation of the Afghanistan
compact to be launched in London.
The Government also decided on the
establishment of a ministry for parliamentary affairs to
facilitate the interaction between the cabinet and the
National Assembly. While representatives from the
National Assembly will not be part of the Afghan
delegation to the London conference, the chairperson
of the lower house, Mr. Qanooni, has expressed an
interest in working with the Government and the
international community to examine the post-Bonn
agenda and to identify ways and means to ensure that
the benchmarks can be met. More generally,
Mr. Qanooni has stressed his intention to cooperate
with the Government and the international community.
That is a good start, and it is very important that
cooperation between the two branches of Government
should continue.

On other political developments, I am pleased to
report that, on 12 December 2005, the cabinet
approved the National Action Plan on Peace,
Reconciliation and Justice after several months of
discussions and consultations. The plan acknowledges
the plight of the millions who were victims of the
conflict and seeks to address their needs through
reparation, truth-seeking, the strengthening of the
justice institutions and national reconciliation. While
the implementation of the Plan is bound to face some
objections on the part of some groups, a conference on
transitional justice that took place in December
suggested that there is in fact broad support for truth-
finding, the vetting of Government officials and justice
as important components of the peace process.

Building on the disarmament programme
completed in July last year, a strategy for the
disbandment of illegal armed groups has now been
agreed by national and international partners. Those
groups number in the hundreds and are linked to the
drug trade, factions and organized crime and are major
contributors in the countryside to the weakness of the
Afghan State. Learning the lessons from the
disarmament programme, the strategy clarifies that

"success will not be defined by the collection of
weapons alone, but the actual disbandment of
illegal armed groups and advances in citizens'
security, good governance and the rule of law".
A concept of operations is near finalization. Herat and
Kapisa have been identified as the first two provinces
for implementation of the disbandment strategy.

Along with those positive developments, I must
once again bring the security situation to the attention
of the Council. While the overall number of violent
clashes and incidents countrywide has dropped over
the past two months, in keeping with the seasonal
pattern, the South, as members know, has witnessed a
negative trend in the tactics used by anti-Government
elements, with deadly effect. In a suicide attack two
days ago on 15 January, a vehicle-borne explosive
device detonated near a convoy of the Canadian
provincial reconstruction team in Kandahar, killing its
political director, Mr. Glyn Berry. Three Canadian
soldiers, as well as Afghan civilians, were injured in
that terrorist attack. Let me reiterate the tribute paid
yesterday by the Secretary-General to Mr. Glyn Berry,
a senior member of the Canadian Foreign Service and
former Vice-Chairman of the General Assembly's
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.

At the end of that day, Kandahar province was hit
again by another suicide bomber in Spin Boldak
district, leaving a toll of 20 reported dead and 20
injured. Hours before, a roadside explosive device was
detonated in Kandahar city, killing three Afghan
National Army soldiers and two civilians, and injuring
another 10. In total, of the 19 suicide attacks over the
past 12 months, 13 have occurred in the last 10
weeks - three in November, six in December and four
in January.

In another development, attacks using improvised
explosive devices have been carried out against
international military forces under NATO leadership in
parts of the country where such attacks had been rare,
such as Mazar-i-Sharif, Baghlan and Herat.
Furthermore, violence and threats against local
officials, religious leaders and schools are continuing
and intensifying, particularly in the South and South-
East of the country. The security dimension therefore
remains at the heart of the joint efforts of the
Government and the international community, both as a
priority concern that needs to be addressed through
military and non-military means and also as a
limitation on the ability of the international
community, and the United Nations in particular, to
operate throughout the country.

Let me now brief the Council on the planned
transfer of operational authority from Operation
Enduring Freedom to NATO. That will continue in
2006. The provincial reconstruction team in Kandahar,
previously led by United States forces deployed under
Operation Enduring Freedom, was transferred to
Canada in August 2005 and will eventually operate
under the command of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF). On 8 December, NATO
foreign ministers decided to expand the International
Security Assistance Force by an additional 6,000
troops, which would bring the total from the current
9,200 to a little over 15,000. Firm guarantees of
individual NATO member States to contribute
additional troops for that expansion, however, are yet
to be secured.

As it expands to areas previously under coalition
command, it is imperative that ISAF be provided with
the means necessary to its credibility, particularly in
the face of the unusually high number of attacks
carried out against international military forces that I
described earlier. That will require, in addition to a
robust combat capability and coherence across national
rules of engagement, a strong political will to stay the
course.

The unhappy news that I had to report on the
security front should be taken for what it is - an
indication that, while great gains have been made in
the past four years in many areas, the challenges are
still considerable and the job is far from clone.
Mobilizing the resources of the newly established
Afghan institutions and those of the international
community remains, therefore, key to the consolidation
of peace and stability in Afghanistan.

In that respect, in August 2005 the Security
Council welcomed

"the desire of the international community and
the Afghan Government to agree a new
framework for international engagement beyond
the completion of the Bohn process"
(S/PRST/2005/40, p. 2)

and took note of the intention of the Secretary-General
to hold consultations with the Government and all
concerned international actors on a post-electoral
agenda.

Those consultations have been going on since
September with a very wide range of actors, both
Afghan and international, and we look forward to their
outcome - the compact for Afghanistan - being
launched in London on 31 January. The Afghan
Government has taken the consultations very seriously
and, over the past four months, under the leadership of
President Karzai, senior ministers as well as staff from
the President's office have been engaging the
international community on a permanent basis. All
diplomatic missions in Kabul, international
organizations and NATO were consulted repeatedly on
the contents of the compact and hundreds of proposals
were made and discussed. As a result, the document
that is now in the last drafting stage is, we believe, a
comprehensive and strong blueprint for what will be, in
the next five years, an intensive exercise in
peacebuilding.

The compact addresses in an integrated manner
the major challenges that confront Afghanistan:
security; governance, human rights and the rule of law;
development; and counter-narcotics as a major cross-
cutting endeavour. It emphasizes the leadership that the
Afghan State, strengthened by the democratic process
that has unfolded in the past fours years, can and must
take. It also establishes some key principles aimed at
maximizing the impact of the peacebuilding process,
including sustainability, capacity-building, gender-
sensitive approaches, accountability and the key role to
be played by regional cooperation.

The compact also establishes, as precisely as can
be, key benchmarks and timelines with a view to
facilitating cooperation and follow-up, and also to
pacing popular expectation of what can be achieved in
the coming years. It seeks to improve the delivery of
assistance with detailed commitments to aid
effectiveness. Finally, it provides for the establishment
of a coordination mechanism that recognizes the
leadership of the Afghan Government and also, to
quote the Security Council presidential statement of
23 November,

"the central and impartial role the United Nations
continues to play for the consolidation of peace
and stability in Afghanistan and coordination of
the relevant international efforts"
(S/PRST/2005/56, p. 1).

Coming as it did in the wake of the great
achievement that was the completion of the Bonn
agenda, the latest tragic news from Kandahar has
served as a sad reminder of the magnitude of the
outstanding tasks in the consolidation of peace in
Afghanistan. But it should not distract us from one of
the main facts of the Bonn process, namely that, in the
past four years, Afghans have, as the draft compact
points out, successfully defied violent extremism and
hardship to lay the foundations for a democratic,
peaceful, pluralistic and prosperous State. They
deserve our confidence that, with undiminished
assistance from the international community, they will
be equally successful in the realization of the vision
contained in the compact for Afghanistan.

I trust that the Security Council will lead the
international community, as it did during the Bonn
process, into a full and lasting commitment to that
vision.
