Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank
Ambassador Mayoral, Ambassador Loj and
Ambassador Burian for their presentations on the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), the Counter- Terrorism Committee (CTC)
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) respectively. I should like once again to
congratulate Ambassador Burian on his assumption of
the important post of Chairman of the 1540 Committee.

Over the past three months, the 1267 Committee
partly completed its revision of the guidelines for the
conduct of its work and started the initial stage of its
cooperation with Interpol; the Counter- Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) was
reviewed by the Security Council and became fully
operational; the CTC made progress in clearing its
backlog and in facilitating technical assistance; and the
1540 Committee not only carefully considered reports
submitted by Member States but also played an active
role in coordinating the assistance provided to Member
States in their implementation of the resolution. All of
that is conducive to the effective worldwide
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and to the strengthening of the Security
Council's constructive role in the international struggle
against terrorism. China would like to express its
appreciation for the outstanding work carried out by
the three Chairpersons and the Committees under their
leadership.

We believe that in the ensuing stage the 1267
Committee should, in connection with the revision of
its work guidelines, further improve listing and
delisting procedures so as to ensure the fairness and
integrity of the consolidated list and that it should work
to reduce the number of pending issues. The CTC
should continue its efforts to help developing countries
build their counter- terrorism capacity and should
expedite the implementation of the provisions of
resolution 1624 (2005). The 1540 Committee should
focus its attention on the key task of producing by
April a comprehensive, objective and balanced report.
Moreover, it is our hope that the three Committees and
their subsidiary bodies - the Monitoring Group, the
Executive Directorate and the group of experts - will
strengthen their cooperation and coordination and put
forward as soon as possible practicable
recommendations for improvements in areas such as
the simplification of reporting mechanisms.

Terrorism continues to wreak havoc in various
parts of the world. Numerous innocent civilians,
including many Chinese citizens, have been deprived
of their right to life in a most cruel manner. Bloody
events have shown once again that the threat of
terrorism is ever- present and that no country can hope
to remain unaffected by minding its own business. A
poisonous snake will hurt people no matter what
disguise it wears. If one pays attention only to
combating terrorist individuals or entities endangering
one's own country while turning a deaf ear to the
legitimate demands of other countries or even blocking
other countries' efforts, or if one is focused only on
combating individuals or entities currently plotting
terrorist attacks while showing leniency towards, or
even deliberately shielding, terrorist forces which lie
low and conceal their true colours, then there is little
hope that international anti- terrorism cooperation can
develop smoothly and continue in the future. Only
when countries regard terrorist forces threatening other
countries as their own enemies and join hands with
other countries in effectively combating such forces
will all the gaps in the international struggle against
terrorism be filled. Only then can there be hope that
this scourge on mankind will finally be eliminated.

Finally, I wish to reiterate that resolutely fighting
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations is both a
common obligation of all countries and the basis on
which the Security Council can deepen counter-
terrorism cooperation. China will continue to take an
active and constructive approach in promoting genuine
and effective implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

