Mr. Mowla (Bangladesh): We are privileged to
have High Commissioner Ruud Lubbers this afternoon
at the Council. We thank him for his briefing and for
the material that he made available to us.

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) mission in the
region is of critical importance, given the fragile
security situation on the ground. As the situation in the
subregion deteriorated with attacks by the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) into Guinea and the
fighting in the area, we had expressed our concern for
the humanitarian situation, for the deliberate targeting
of refugees, for the wanton destruction of refugee
camps and for the targeting of United Nations and
other humanitarian personnel.

We are happy that the High Commissioner's
proactive role, soon after his assumption of office, has
resulted in some definite improvements. But, the
precarious security situation persists with the refugees
caught in the middle, in particular in the "parrot's
beak" region. We agree therefore that measures for
protecting refugees and internally displaced persons
have to be strengthened. One of the ways that the High
Commissioner has pointed out, in fact he mentioned
that this was the only practical way now, is through the
strengthening of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) in order to provide protection to
refugees. We still have to see this as a somewhat long-
term solution, because efforts to strengthen UNAMSIL
will take some more time to materialize in concrete
terms, as other delegations have also pointed out.

But, we agree that the plight of the refugees
cannot wait. The short-term and pressing needs of
affording them protection and securing access to them
have to be looked into. They may have to be relocated,
especially those caught in the middle. We have to look
at all options available to us. Here, we would like to
pay a tribute to the Government and the people of
Guinea for hosting a large refugee population for so
long and in a difficult situation. We believe that in
order to look at all options the Council should
undertake a comprehensive discussion on ways and
means with advice from the Secretariat, in particular on
the feasibility of opening safe passages. We have heard
the High Commissioner say that it is the best way.
Others here and outside have expressed different
opinions. There is clearly an urgent need for detailed
advice on this and for further deliberations by the
Council.

Mr. High Commissioner, you have mentioned
cooperation by the RUF in assisting refugees in
distress. Like other delegations, we too believe that we
need to also put effective pressure on the RUF and not
only rely on their goodwill for the safety of refugees
and humanitarian personnel.

Finally, we agree wholeheartedly with the High
Commissioner on the need to provide the resources that
the UNHCR needs. This is a problem involving a
massive refugee population, and more resources than
are available now are definitely required. We urge
United Nations and all other donors to increase their
contributions.

