Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, may I thank Mr. Paul Volcker for
introducing the report of the Independent Inquiry
Committee into the United Nations Oil-for-Food
Programme.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement early in this meeting.

The clearest indication of the good work done by
Mr. Volcker and his colleagues, Mr. Goldstone and
Mr. Pieth, is the very lengthy report before us. Given
that we obviously have not yet had time to study that
very complex document, our immediate reaction here
can be only preliminary. Once we have thoroughly
analysed it and the conclusions and recommendations
it contains, we shall comment further.

In our view, the conclusions presented by
Mr. Volcker are extremely important and deserve
thorough study, not only by the Security Council and
the Secretariat, but also by the General Assembly, the
agencies of the United Nations system, and, of course,
each and every State Member of the Organization.

We continue to believe that, despite all its
constraints, the oil-for-food programme was successful
in alleviating the humanitarian crisis in Iraq over a
number of years. It helped to provide food and
medicine to innocent and vulnerable civilians.
Unfortunately, as the report indicates, the programme
was manipulated by Saddam Hussein's regime for
political and economic benefit. Private companies also
manipulated it, and we await a more detailed report on
that aspect when the Committee completes its work.

The benefits to Saddam Hussein's regime were
made possible, as has been noted here, by the many
breakdowns in administration, planning, auditing and
supervision on the part of the Secretary-General and
the Secretariat. The Security Council also clearly bore
a certain degree of responsibility in that respect,
particularly on the part of its most influential members,
which allowed their attention to and management of an
extremely sophisticated and unwieldy programme to be
distracted.

However, we believe that is all in the past. It
seems important to us to think now about the future
and to act collectively in the implementation of in-
depth reforms that will make it possible in the future to
solve the problems identified by the Committee so as
to avoid the recurrence of this kind of situation.

However, based on what he have just heard, we
think it is important to underscore the fact that that
reform, like all reforms that the United Nations should
carry out, is a responsibility of all Member States - all
the Member States of the Organization. The Security
Council also has a responsibility in that area, and it is
for that reason that we are prepared to work within the
Council, with the requisite energy, to attempt to restore
confidence in the Organization in this extremely
important year for its reform. We believe that is the
single major undertaking we should carry out at the
moment in order to be able to mount future missions
with the magnitude and complexity of that attempted
by the programme we have been speaking about.

