Ms. Sughayar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Mladenov, for his comprehensive briefing.

This discussion comes at a critical point in time,
not just because it coincides with recent developments,
which have included many actions on the Palestinian
political track, but also because it touches on important
issues in the Middle East since the appointment of
the new Secretary-General. We hope that the new
Secretary-General will directly and effectively exert
influence to bring about stability and security in the
region. The Middle East region requires sincere, major
efforts in order to achieve unity and peace, efforts that
address the root causes of the conflict.

The resolution of the Palestinian - Israeli
conflict requires reasonable and wise decisions that
do not repeat the mistakes of the past and that end the
policies of tyranny and deprivation of rights. This has
only brought more tension, extremism and violence to
the region. The efforts made recently at all levels to
break the stalemate in the conflict have had increasing
political significance given the adoption of resolution
2334 (2016) and the Paris Conference held two days ago.

Jordan welcomes the adoption of this resolution
and the French initiative. In this regard, we call on
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities;
enhance the momentum achieved; and implement the
resolution in full and use it in the context of innovative
initiatives that would lead to a two-State solution being
realized and to a comprehensive settlement in terms of
final status.

The adoption of resolution 2354 (2015) and
its condemnation of Israeli settlement plans in the
occupied Palestinian territory, particularly East
Jerusalem, reflects the reaction of the international
community to settlement activity, in particular in view
of the unprecedented increase in settlements and in the
number of settlers on occupied Palestinian territory.
It asserted the important principle that the Security
Council would not acknowledge any changes to the
1967 borders, that settlements are illegal, and that Israel
should be compelled to adhere to its obligations under
international law and needs to put an end to all illegal
settlements on Palestinian territory.

We have repeatedly condemned Israel's illegal
practices and its unilateral actions, as an occupying
Power, against the Palestinian people as well as the
policy of imposing a new reality on the ground,
including the demolition of homes, the confiscation of
land and the displacement of civilians. Peace cannot be
imposed or even achieved unless the two parties take
bold action that end the tension and violence and build
confidence. Statements by Israel that it is committed to
the two-State solution and is ready to negotiate directly
with the Palestinians will not have any significance
unless they are coupled with concrete action on the
ground based on international resolutions.

We reaffirm our principled position that the
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will happen
only when the occupation ends and an independent and
Viable Palestinian State is established that is based on
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
based on international terms of reference that include
the Arab Peace Initiative and the relevant United
Nations resolutions. We reaffirm that we will continue
to defend Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem
and to protect them. This is based on the custodianship
of the Hashemite Kingdom over Islamic and Christian
holy sites. That is the mandate of Abdullah II, King
of Jordan.
We support any serious initiatives aimed
at promoting the peace process through serious
negotiations and also supported the Paris Conference,
which reflected the true will of the international
community towards a solution to the conflict. We
reaffirm that negotiations aimed at a two-State solution
need to take place within a specific time frame. Despite
the fact that such efforts will not lead to an immediate
end to the conflict, it is, however, a chance to end
the long stalemate in the peace process and create
momentum to end the political vacuum, which will,
sooner or later, lead to a more severe conflict between
the two parties and in the region as a whole.

Israel must objectively and positively look at
recent developments. Its continued intransigence with
regard to and rejection of developments and settlement
activities is a threat to the two-State solution and its
own security. Those international efforts are not
directed against Israel but aimed at achieving the
two-State solution in accordance with international
law. Success in reaching an agreement would actually
achieve the aspirations of the Palestinian people and
security for Israel.

The Palestinian question is the primary concern of
the countries of the region and many others throughout
the world. Failure to reach a just and comprehensive
settlement of the issue would lead to an increase in
extremism, Violence and terrorism in the region. The
region cannot sustain any more tension and violence. The
continued lack of stability would lead to the targeting
of many parts of the international community, helping
the terrorist groups to become the biggest winner.

Jordan reaffirms that, now more than ever, serious
cooperation and willingness at the international
and regional levels to combat terrorism must receive
the utmost priority. We therefore need to respond to
threats that affect stability and undermine security in
the region, in particular, and international peace and
security in general. We need to support such a response
so that we can confront the terrorist groups that have
exploited the instability and political vacuum in the
region to expand their power. Those terrorist groups are
responsible for the fear not only of only individuals but
of entire communities because of their bloody tactics
and horrible crimes, which have claimed the lives of
countless civilians.

Turning to Syria, since the beginning of the
crisis we have maintained a principled position
aimed at ending the violence and reaching a Syrian-
led political process, led with a unified international
vision for its guiding principle based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) and the recommendations of the
International Syrian Support Group that would ensure
Syria's unity and territorial integrity and support the
pluralistic nature of the State of Syria.

We support all sincere efforts to end the crisis
in Syria. We encourage the parties in Syria to build
confidence so as to reach a comprehensive political
solution. The current phase calls for concerted efforts
to help the Syrian people overcome the crisis. Jordan
is pleased to note the Turkish-Russian agreement for
restoring calm in Syria and other positive developments
that have led to concrete results with regard to the safe
evacuation of Syrian civilians from Aleppo. We look
forward to the political discussion to take place in
Astana. We hope that they will foster an environment
conducive to the resumption of the United Nations-
sponsored Geneva discussions.

