Mr. Helgesen (Norway): My delegation aligns
itself with the statement to be made by Austria on
behalf of the Human Security Network later in this
debate. Allow me, however, to make the following
remarks in my national capacity.

I would like to start by expressing my gratitude
for the presence here today of the Secretary-General
and the Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). Their
contribution to today's debate is very much
appreciated. I would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Oshima for his introduction of the
report of the Secretary-General (8/2002/ 1300).

While serving on the Security Council, Norway
has taken a keen interest in the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. Since the first report on
this issue by the Secretary-General in 1999, a
comprehensive framework for action has been
established. We also very much welcome achievements
made at the field level in various locations. Still, the
main challenge before us is to ensure proper
implementation and thereby the effective protection of
the millions of civilians affected by conflict every day.

In that context, we should recall that this is not an
agenda item for the Security Council alone. Various
United Nations bodies, international agencies,
international governmental organizations, non-
governmental organizations and Member States must
all live up to their respective responsibilities so that the
efficient protection of civilians can be ensured. As a
means of establishing broader support among Member
States, my delegation is currently in the process of
establishing a support group here in New York for the
protection of civilians, which we hope will contribute
towards that goal.

Allow me also at this stage to recall that the most
vulnerable part of the civilian population is children. In
too many conflicts, children are not only affected by
war, they are made combatants. One of the conflicts in
which the recruitment of underage combatants has been
a problem is the Sri Lankan conflict.

I am pleased to inform the Council that at the
third session of the Sri Lanka peace talks in Oslo last
week, the parties underlined that children belong with
their families or other custodians and not in the
workplace, whether civilian or military. The Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam will now engage in a partnership
with UNICEF to draw up an action plan for restoring
normalcy to the lives of children, including
rehabilitation of child soldiers and bringing a halt to
recruitment of underage combatants.

Norway welcomes the third report of the
Secretary General (S/2002/ 1300). We note with
particular interest its outline in terms of strategies to
address the crucial challenges of access, separation and
the rule of law and justice. Moreover, the introduction
of new issues to this agenda, such as terrorism and
sexual exploitation, is most timely and appropriate.

Lack of humanitarian access to vulnerable
populations continues to be a major problem. We
simply cannot accept that parties to a conflict,
including non-State actors, blatantly ignore basic
international standards in this regard. We concur with
the Secretary-General's recommendation relating to the
need for coordinated efforts by humanitarian and
United Nations agencies with regard to access
negotiations. We also support the option of framework
agreements being further elaborated and implemented.
Finally, we share the grave concerns expressed
regarding the denial of humanitarian access by means
of targeting humanitarian workers or civilians. Such
acts should be recognized as war crimes and dealt with
accordingly.

Slowly, and with increasing momentum, the
international community is rising to the challenge of
protecting individuals and human dignity in armed
conflicts, bringing to justice the perpetrators of
atrocities. But first and foremost, every State has the
obligation and responsibility to protect their inhabitants
in conflict situations. The entry into force of the
International Criminal Court, on 1 July this year, is a
historic turning point for humanitarian law and for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. I wish to
reiterate Norway's full and longstanding commitment
to the establishment of a strong and truly credible
Court, with the broadest possible support.

We must vigorously uphold the agreed standards
of protection in crises, war and strife. Those who are
close to populations in need have a particular
responsibility to uphold the principles and moral
foundation on which the United Nations is founded.
The blue berets and the blue and white United Nations
flag must continue to symbolize freedom, safety and
trust. We cannot tolerate any kind of exploitation of
vulnerable, war-affected populations. Therefore, we
welcome the serious and engaged response and
corresponding recommendations by the Secretary-
General to incidents of sexual abuse and exploitation
by humanitarian personnel and peacekeepers.

Allow me now to turn to some initiatives aimed
particularly at promoting implementation of this
agenda.
The aide-memoire on protection of civilians,
adopted by the Council in March this year, has proved
to be a useful tool in terms of promoting
implementation and increased resolve with regard to
protection issues. However, in order for it to be useful
over time, the aide-memoire cannot be a static
instrument. It is our View that it should be updated at
yearly intervals to reflect new developments and
thereby contribute towards improved compliance with
protection standards. We put this idea forward for the
consideration of the Security Council.

We very much support the idea of further reviews
of existing Security Council mandates based on the
aide-memoire. In our view, the exercise conducted on
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, under the
United Kingdom presidency in July this year, was an
excellent opportunity for the Council to reflect on
protection challenges in a specific operation, as well as
on ways and means to address them. Moreover, further
reviews of this kind will also serve the important
purpose of enhancing the Council's awareness and
capacity to address protection issues in general.

The road map is another tool which can facilitate
further implementation of protection measures among
the different actors involved. We acknowledge that the
version annexed to the current report is provisional,
and we encourage the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) to continue its good
work towards a road map which will further clarify
responsibilities, enhance cooperation and facilitate
implementation.

Increased cooperation and liaison between
different agencies and departments is crucial for the
further advancement of the protection agenda. In this
regard, we welcome current cooperation between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the
Department of Political Affairs and OCHA, and we
support and encourage continued efforts towards
implementation of the so-called Standard Operating
Procedures. That will, above all, facilitate DPKO's
incorporation of protection strategies in mission
planning and in training of peacekeepers.

Finally, I would like to commend OCHA for its
active engagement in coordinating regional workshops
in which States and regional bodies can address
protection issues. This is a critical undertaking in terms
of disseminating and promoting the protection of
civilians, as well as in terms of gaining experience
from national and regional initiatives and challenges. If
protection needs are acknowledged and properly
addressed by Member States of the United Nations, we
will have come a long way in addressing the plight of
all those civilians, men, women, and children who are
victims of conflict and distress.

