Mrs. Albright (United States of America): Today, the
Council acts once again to assist Haiti in its journey from
tyranny to democracy. In so doing, it contributes to regional
stability and serves well the principles of human rights,
freedom and social progress that are inscribed in the United
Nations Charter.

Since assuming responsibility from the United-States-
led Multinational Force early last year, the United Nations
Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) has helped to ensure a climate
of security within which free elections could be held,
economic activity could increase, political reconciliation
could occur and the construction of democratic institutions
could begin. These activities have advanced the cause of
freedom and human development throughout the
hemisphere.

Today, in response to the request of Haitian President
Rene Preval, we have approved the establishment of the
United Nations Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH), as a
follow-on to UNMIH. Its mandate is to assist the
Government of Haiti in professionalizing the police and in
maintaining the secure environment required for the
welcome changes in Haiti to solidify and grow deeper
roots.

History teaches us that the construction of a durable
and democratic society is not an event, but a process. In
Haiti, that process requires the patience needed to heal old
wounds and learn new ways.

The Haiti of three years ago was infected by despotic
and illegitimate leaders. The army and police were used not
as instruments of national defence or civil order, but as the
means of repression. Between October 1991 and September
1994, thousands of Haitians were murdered, tens of
thousands were terrorized into hiding and tens of
thousands or more took to the seas. Let us not forget -
for the people of Haiti will never forget - that when the
illegitimate leaders fled, they left behind, nailed to the
walls of prison offices and police stations, the obscene
photos of those they had ordered tortured, abused and
killed.

Today, thanks in part to the actions of this Council,
Haiti is recovering. The Government chosen by the people
is committed to serving the people. The systematic
deprivation of human rights has come to an end. The
pervasive fear has been replaced by a resurgence of hope.
The process of economic revitalization is under way.

But Haiti continues to need a helping hand against
those who will use violence or corruption to obtain what
they cannot, or will not, earn through honest work. Haiti
needs the means by which to protect itself from these
lawless elements, but the past perversion of power has
required that this capability be built from the ground up.
That process of building effective law enforcement,
judicial and prosecutorial capabilities takes time.

In the months ahead, the United Nations role in Haiti
will continue to diminish. Not that long ago, there were
22,000 foreign troops in Haiti. In February of last year, a
United Nations deployment of 6,000 was approved.
Today's resolution authorizes a United-Nations-funded
force of 600 military, with the understanding that
additional troops will be funded on a voluntary basis by
the United States and Canada to keep 1,300 troops ready
to assist the Haitian Government and the civilian police
monitors. This trend is a dramatic rebuttal to those who
suggested that any intervention in Haiti would lead, as in
the past, to occupation.

Over the next five months, international civilian
police monitors will continue their efforts to
professionalize the fully deployed, but still inexperienced,
Haitian National Police. The United Nations military
contingent will help deter those who might be tempted to
disrupt the democratization process.

At the same time, it is vital that the Haitian
Government and the international financial institutions
agree on the terms of economic assistance. Friends of
Haiti, both governmental and non-governmental, must
continue their efforts to help Haitian society move ahead,
and the door to private investment must be open. There
is no better answer to the plagues of Haiti's past than

 

freedom, jobs, basic education and the means for average
citizens to put food on the table for their families.

The international presence in Haiti is designed to
bolster the ability of freely elected leaders to exercise
sovereign power. That is a necessary and proper role, but
it is also temporary. Ultimately, Haitian authorities will
have to assume full responsibility for public order. They
understand and desire that. Our shared objective is to
accomplish that transition in a manner that allows economic
and social progress to accelerate.

In closing, I want to express the gratitude and
admiration of my Government to those who have
contributed to the United Nations Mission in Haiti, and
especially to the Government of Canada, which since
February has fulfilled in an outstanding manner the
leadership role.

We are heartened as well by the continued strong
support for Haitian democracy that has been demonstrated
by the Organization of American States and by the
members of this Council. This support reflects the fact that
Haiti's progress has had, and continues to have,
consequences beyond the borders of that country.

The future of a democratic Haiti is not assured, but the
international community can be satisfied that those with the
commitment to build a free Haiti have that chance. By
allowing that opening, this Council has kept faith with the
people of Haiti and honoured its own responsibility as a
guardian of international security, law and peace.

