Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation supports the draft
resolution before us today. We hope that, upon adoption,
it will play a positive role in the settlement of the
question of Georgia.
The world is very much concerned about the long
absence of a solution to the question of Georgia. The crux
of a political settlement of the Georgian question is
whether this newly independent Member State will
continue to maintain its sovereignty and territorial
integrity or will be dismembered. The position of the
Security Council on this question is clear: the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Georgia must be fully
respected. A comprehensive political settlement of the
Georgian question must proceed within this framework.

The Georgian Government, proceeding from the
fundamental interests of the Georgian people, of all ethnic
groups, has adopted a responsible attitude in promoting a
comprehensive settlement of the Georgian question and
has put forward constructive proposals, including that of
establishing a federal State and granting Abkhazia wide-
ranging autonomy. This position has provided a basis for
an early settlement of the Georgian question, and we wish
to express our appreciation and support for it.

Regrettably, however, the Abkhaz authorities still
cling to a rigid position and continue to set obstacles to
a political settlement, which has brought the peace
process to a standstill. We cannot but express our deep
concern over this situation.

 

N0 country can be prosperous, with its people living
in peace, without ethnic harmony and territorial integrity.
Therefore, we urge the parties concerned, particularly the
Abkhaz authorities, to adopt a realistic approach and take
concrete action to focus on settling the political status of
Abkhazia so as to advance the peace process in Georgia
and enable the Georgian people, of all ethnic groups, to live
and work in peace and contentment at an early date.

The Secretary-General and his Special Envoy have
made tremendous efforts for a comprehensive political
settlement of the Georgian question, for which we wish to
express our support and our thanks. We also believe that
the countries concerned in the region, particularly the
Russian Federation, can play a unique mediating role, and
indeed have already been doing so. The Council should
therefore encourage them to continue and increase their
efforts to that end.

We have noted that the peace-keeping forces of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG)
and the Commonwealth of Independent States enjoy good
cooperation and are together playing a positive role in
stabilizing the situation in the region and promoting the
peace process in Georgia. Therefore, we support the
Secretary-General' s recommendation to extend the mandate
of UNOMIG.

