Mr. Sommaruga (International Committee of the Red Cross) (interpretation from French): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for inviting me to address you today.
This is undoubtedly clear evidence of the
complementarity that exists between the Security
Council's political action and the humanitarian,
independent, impartial and neutral work of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).

I am delighted to be able to say this, just as I am
delighted at the convergence of views expressed at the
Council's meeting on 21 January, when the Council heard
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello. We should be encouraged by
the reaffirmation that political and humanitarian action
need to follow clearly distinct paths. As we seek to fulfil
our respective goals, we must all renew our efforts to
protect and assist all those who, in every part of the
world, are not or are no longer participants in the
conflicts that are devastating our planet yet who are the
victims of these conflicts.

Nonetheless, I feel obliged to echo certain concerns
which were expressed here on 21 January. Does this
interest in humanitarian affairs not mask a certain feeling
of impotence at the magnitude of the task that confronts
us? We all know that those organizations which are
striving to deliver protection and assistance to victims of
armed conflicts are unable to cope on their own with
situations whose very size and extreme complexity are
beyond them.

The topic which I should like to address today, as
you indicated, Mr. President - protection of civilians in
armed conflicts - is at the heart of my organization's
concerns. This year, which marks the fiftieth anniversary
of the Geneva Conventions, it is more necessary and
important than ever that we reflect on this theme.

The ICRC is faced today with 20 open conflicts the
world over, in many of which civilians are the first and
principal target. Women, children, the elderly, the sick,
refugees and internally displaced persons have been

 

attacked in large numbers and methodically driven from
their homes. They have suffered from conflicts in which
every conceivable means, even the most reprehensible, has
been and is still being used against them.

Genocide, "ethnic cleansing", attacks on humanitarian
personnel and the repudiation of the principles of humanity,
impartiality, independence and neutrality have become
increasingly prevalent. At the same time, the politicization,
"instrumentalization" and devaluation of humanitarian
action are making it more difficult than ever for us to assist
all victims. This insidious trend has been observable in the
Great Lakes region, in West Africa, in the Balkans, in the
Caucasus and in certain Asian countries. The full horror of
the consequences is familiar to us all. The unimaginable
pain borne by the populations in these areas can leave none
of us indifferent. Not only that, it compels us to take action
on their behalf.

And then, as in the Caucasus, there are situations
where neither war nor peace prevails and millions of people
are unable to return to normal life. Driven from their
homes, they have been waiting for years for a negotiated
solution to put an end to their misery. The basic
infrastructures required for daily living no longer exist. The
land cannot be cultivated because it is mined or too close
to the front lines. The political, economic and psychological
consequences of these stalled conflicts must not be
underestimated. They will ultimately lead to new cycles of
Violence whose principal victims will once again be
civilians. If there is no sustained effort to achieve peace,
the slide back into war seems inevitable. We need only
think of the recent return to hostilities in Angola or between
Ethiopia and Eritrea.

When negotiations are getting nowhere it takes a lot
to convert a ceasefire into lasting peace. The same tragic
situation could easily be repeated tomorrow in other parts
of the world.

Furthermore, there are conflicts where humanitarian
action has always been or has recently become impossible
because Governments or other parties to the fighting see
humanitarian action as interference in their internal affairs
or as dictated by political concerns. Worse still, the
presence of humanitarian organizations is sometimes
refused so that there will be no witnesses to mass slaughter.
In such cases, humanitarian workers are no longer seen as
the bringers of help but rather as unwelcome observers.

Sadly, the same workers are more and more frequently
prevented from doing their job when they themselves come
under serious assault. There is no question of our
becoming resigned to such incidents, in which so many
people engaged in humanitarian endeavour have been
injured or even killed, because these incidents, too, are
serious violations of international humanitarian law. I
have said this many times before, and I wish to reiterate
it here and now: such conduct is unacceptable. This point
cannot be made often enough to all those concerned, just
as they need to be reminded that the protective emblems
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent must be respected at
all costs.

On 21 January, in this Council, the importance of
basing humanitarian work on the principle of impartiality
was rightly underlined. Humanitarian assistance cannot be
used as an instrument for bringing political pressure to
bear on any party to a conflict. It is indeed my
wholehearted conviction that any humanitarian work is
most effective when free of all political bias. The ICRC
took this stance in Somalia. It is taking the same stance
now in Afghanistan, where my organization, with the
support of numerous national Red Cross and Red
Crescent societies, is the only international agency
reaching out to all victims, in every part of the country,
even those of the recent earthquake. This was also true in
Sri Lanka and Congo-Brazzaville, to cite just a few other
examples.

Finally, it is also important to consider the
phenomena of economic globalization and the
privatization of tasks that were previously the
responsibility of States. These phenomena have also
created new situations and raised some burning issues:
What are the duties of economic groups that raise their
own security forces to protect their interests? What
political responsibilities do States have when such
economic groups encroach on their areas of jurisdiction?
There is no easy answer to these questions, but it must be
recognized that the authority of the State and the notion
of collective security, which is a cornerstone of the
Charter of the United Nations, are dangerously weakened.
In this connection, I welcome the fact that Secretary-
General Kofi Annan, present today, has called on
economic players not to remain indifferent to the
problems caused by this new state of affairs, a call I
myself have made on several occasions.

(spoke in English)
These rather pessimistic observations must not be a

cause for gloom. On the contrary, they are a reminder that
at least the ICRC, notwithstanding the difficulties, is able

 

each day to offer protection and assistance to hundreds of
thousands of people. They should also give us pause for
thought on what can and must be done if the plight of
civilians caught up in armed conflicts is to be alleviated.
Allow me to look briefly at a few of these issues.
The States parties to the Geneva Conventions
undertake in common article I to respect the Conventions
and to ensure their respect. This article is in every way the
primary expression of the respect due to those who are not,
or who are no longer, taking an active part in hostilities.
While it is addressed to the individual States parties to the
Conventions, it also concerns, I believe, their collective
action under the auspices of the Security Council.

The early 1990s saw more and more instances of
peacekeeping forces being deployed by the United Nations
or regional organizations. Despite the many intrinsic
advantages of such interventions, it is my view that they
have sometimes led, as a political, military and
humanitarian amalgam, to a certain amount of confusion.
They have also demonstrated how crucial it is to make
peacekeepers familiar with the relevant principles of human
rights and international humanitarian law. A Secretary-
General's bulletin on the observance of international
humanitarian law by members of United Nations forces has
been prepared by the Office of Legal Affairs jointly with
the ICRC. I hope very much that this can be promulgated
before the fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions.

Members will agree that this is just as much a legal as
an ethical issue: legal because of the undertakings of the
States parties to the Geneva Conventions; ethical because
troops deployed by the United Nations are required to set
an example by scrupulously complying with international
law. In order to respect and ensure respect for the law, one
must first understand it. Through its programme of
dissemination to the armed forces, the ICRC has for many
years been raising awareness among those who bear arms
all over the world. It has been doing the same for civilian
populations, with a particular emphasis on targeting young
people.

What is needed, then, is to remind all States and all
parties to conflicts of their duty to protect civilians from the
effects of war. And we must not overlook the major
responsibility of the Security Council in this domain.

If the principles of humanitarian action are to be fully
respected, aid workers must have access to people affected
by conflicts. Where these people are also suffering from
economic sanctions imposed on their country, caution must
be exercised. Nothing can justify punishing an entire
population for its Government's misdeeds. It is not the
ICRC's place to comment on the use of economic
sanctions per se; however, it is duty-bound - a duty
which it has frequently carried out - to request
exemptions to sanctions so that needy populations can
receive humanitarian assistance. I am again in full
agreement with the Secretary-General, who has said that
sanctions are known on occasion to have tragic
consequences for civilian populations. The ICRC
therefore welcomes the fact that the Security Council has
instructed the sanctions committees to examine the
humanitarian impact of sanctions on the most vulnerable
groups.

The ICRC operational budget for the year 1999 is
marginally lower than that for 1998. This decrease is no
cause for celebration, since it does not indicate that the
needs of populations in conflict zones have declined. On
the contrary, it is caused by the fact that in a number of
conflicts where our work and our principles are rejected
out of hand, as is the case in Sierra Leone, the ICRC is
finding it increasingly difficult to gain access to the
victims whom it seeks to protect and assist. What is more,
far too little political attention is being given to conflicts
in certain parts of Africa and Asia.

We must take care to avoid classifying victims as
good or bad. We must constantly bear in mind one basic
fact: irrespective of where a given conflict is taking place,
there will always be human beings who are suffering and
who require protection and assistance.

The bottom line for any action by humanitarian
organizations is that it must have received the consent of
each and every party concerned. This is why the ICRC
seeks to establish, maintain and consolidate close contacts
with all belligerents, both Government forces and others.
The purpose is to engage them in constructive dialogue as
to their duty to respect the rights of protected persons. It
is therefore very disturbing to note that there is an ever
greater tendency to demonize the enemy. This is, I
believe, dangerous and makes the work of humanitarian
organizations even more hazardous and problematic. Once
again, our activity must not be influenced by partisan
interests; we must aim to serve only those people to
whom we have an obligation, and those are the victims.

There is a need to examine potential sources of
conflict and take whatever measures are necessary before
it is too late. I am convinced that conflicts can be
prevented if full compliance with human rights

 

instruments can be guaranteed. The ICRC has neither a
mandate nor the resources to devote itself to this task, but
it is doing its humble best to promote the elementary rules
of international humanitarian law and their core underlying
principles, which are ethical principles, among those who
hold the key to the world's future: our children. The
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflicts will certainly
address this topic later on.

I cannot close without recalling again that 1999 marks
the fiftieth anniversary of the signing of the modern Geneva
Conventions, now ratified by 188 States. To mark the
occasion, the ICRC has opted for a project involving
consultation among a large number of people caught up in
conflicts. By speaking out, they should emphasize the fact
that there are rules and that even wars have limits. I have
no doubt that they will remind politicians and humanitarian
players alike of their responsibilities. The twelfth of August
of this year, which is the anniversary date, will be the ideal
time to launch a call for humanitarian law to be
strengthened. Though it may not be perfect, this law does
exist and remains entirely valid.

Finally, this autumn in Geneva, the 27th International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent will give
the whole Red Cross movement and all the States party to
the Geneva Conventions an opportunity to recommit
themselves wholeheartedly to rules which are universally
recognized.

What suffering civilians are expecting from us all is
that we provide incontrovertible proof that all our
declarations on the importance of, and compliance with,
existing law are being translated into fact. "Res non verba"
must be our motto. Let us leave to our children and our
children's children the prospect of life in a world where
greater justice prevails.

