Mr. Trujillo Garcia (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to extend my gratitude to the Peruvian presidency
for convening this meeting of the Security Council
to explore the important role of strategic transition
partnerships for peacebuilding and sustaining peace. I
would also like to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for supporting the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).

When Colombia took office as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission at the beginning ofthis year,
we identified the promotion of effective partnerships
with key peacebuilding actors as one of our priorities,
with the intention of focusing efforts on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace assistance, in particular good
governance, promoting national reconciliation and
addressing root causes of conflict.

In that regard, the scale, scope and nature of the
proposal contained in the twin resolutions of 2016 on
the review of the peacebuilding architecture (Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262) require that the United Nations not
act on its own in its efforts to support national priorities.
As the experience of my own country reflects, effective
partnerships among the United Nations, national
Governments and other key stakeholders, including
international, regional and subregional organizations,
international financial institutions, civil society and,
where relevant, the private sector, are important for
successful initiatives in that important task.

The challenge of peacebuilding and sustaining
peace is crucial in transition contexts. Once peace
operations are concluded, authorities have the
primary responsibility of preserving the gains made
in that regard upon the respective conclusion of peace
operations. Recently, peace operations have developed
joint transition plans with host Governments, as in
the case of Timor-Leste, Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia.
However, the joint planning of transitions may be more
complex in those instances where Government capacity
in post-conflict scenarios is weak.

In such cases, strong and coordinated partnerships
between the key stakeholders involved are essential to
closing political, institutional and financial capacity
gaps, as well as to preventing backsliding in progress
made towards peace after the withdrawal of those
operations. The closure of operations in cote d'Ivoire
in 2017 and Liberia in 2018 and transitions in progress
in other countries are good examples of the importance
of having consistent efforts in place to support peace
processes in their different stages.

One of the principal purposes of the Commission is
to fill the vacuum in institutional and structural capacity
and to support countries in transition in the light of the
growing risk of the resumption of conflict. In transition
contexts, financial cutbacks constitute a latent risk.
The Peacebuilding Commission has progressively
used its convening power to promote such effective
partnerships and thereby secure sustained international
support. In Liberia, for example, the Commission
advised the Security Council on developing a national
peacebuilding plan. That enabled the establishment of
a tripartite framework allowing the United Nations, the
World Bank and the European Union to coordinate their
tasks through the joint Recovery and Peacebuilding
Assessment. As a result, the Multi-Partner Trust Fund,
for which the Peacebuilding Fund was a catalyst, was
created. Liberia still needs various types of resources
to achieve its development objectives.

In recognizing the role that the Commission can
play in supporting successful transitions, the Security
Council has requested its advice in specific cases,
including prior to mandate renewals and transitions.
Presidential statement S/PRST/2018/20, of December
2018, referred to the value added of the PBC's advice
in withdrawing peace operations in Liberia and
Sierra Leone. At the same time, it encouraged the
Commission to present relevant recommendations on
national peacebuilding priorities in the context of the
formation, review and transition of mandates. The
Council has also recognized that the PBC platform
could be used to consider best practices in transitions
in respective countries. As its Chair, I hope to continue
implementing the presidential statement in the second
half of this year.

The Commission's sessions have become
opportunities to gain a better understanding of
the multidimensional challenges being faced in
peace operations. They also have a more holistic
approach to the challenges faced by countries affected
by conflict extending beyond the imperatives of peace
and security.

In Guinea Bissau, for example, the PBC has
advised the Council on the complex political, security,
development and social challenges in the context of the
upcoming transition of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea Bissau. In that regard,
the Commission has also shared with the Security
Council the perspectives of regional organizations and
international financial institutions, thereby fulfilling
its advisory role for that organ. Recently, the World
Bank and the PBC conducted a formal dialogue to
improve the partnership of both organizations in
providing assistance through their activities in the area
of peacebuilding to the countries concerned. During
that dialogue, the Commission and the Bank delegation
had the opportunity to strengthen those partnerships in
countries of shared priority. Accordingly, we appreciate
the presence of the Bank's representative at this
meeting as a sign of what we can achieve if we work in
a coordinated manner.

The Security Council can take advantage of
the capacity of the PBC as a platform for promoting
coherence between the peacebuilding efforts of the
United Nations and other organizations. That was
particularly obvious during its consideration of relevant
regional situations. It is in complex environments, such
as that of the Sahel region, where a diverse range of
stakeholders are involved, that the PBC can foster
coherent and coordinated approaches.

Moreover, I stress that women and young people
are key actors in peacebuilding processes and should
be meaningfully included in all our efforts. In the
implementation of its gender strategy, the Commission
held discussions dedicated to gender-related issues
within transition situations and to funding initiatives
focused on their aspects.

It would impossible for me not to refer to my own
country. We recently enjoyed a visit by the Security
Council in connection with the special political
mission operating there. Colombia has benefited from
the coordinated work of the various United Nations
agencies and bodies, which has permitted us to be
more effective in peacebuilding. That is why we just
requested the renewal of the mandate of the special
political mission for an additional year.

National processes must allow for the development
of capacities that enable States to address the root
causes of a given conflict in order to overcome them.
The Commission is uniquely placed to offer the Council
broad and diverse peacebuilding perspectives.

