Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I do not know how many
times we have come here and stated that the Palestinians
have the right to live like the rest of us. They have the
right to be free and secure, and they have the right to
have what is their own, yet nothing is changing. The
illegal occupation continues and the Palestinians are
deprived of their basic rights.

The protracted stalemate in the peace process
inflames tensions and gives way to new cycles of
violence. Despite continuous international calls,
Israeli violations in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, have been increasing at an
alarming rate. The dramatic escalation of settlement
activities, intended to create new realities on the ground,
remains a major obstacle to peace. The measures
aimed at altering the demographic composition and
character of Jerusalem and unilateral decisions to that
end threaten the possibility of coexistence. Jerusalem
is a holy city for all three monotheistic religions. It
is the responsibility of all humankind to preserve its
historic status.

Inaction in the face of persistent non-compliance
with international law and Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016), further emboldens
Israel's recklessness. What we have witnessed since
the start of the Great March of Return is the latest
example. We strongly condemn the disproportionate
use of force by Israeli forces and deliberate attacks on
defenceless Palestinians participating in the peaceful
demonstrations to protest the denial of their inalienable
rights and legitimate national aspirations. Israel must
comply with its obligations under international human
rights law and humanitarian law and respect the right
to peaceful protest.

The international community - the Council in
particular - cannot turn a blind eye to the blatant
disregard of international law. It needs to take action
to stop the targeting of civilians, ensure independent
and transparent investigations into the incidents, and
implement its own resolutions.

The latest developments remind us once again of the
urgency of revitalizing the peace process. A two-State
solution, with the establishment of an independent State
of Palestine along the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, remains the only way to achieve a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace that can also ensure
security for both sides. Any peace plan or initiative
should be based on the established parameters. Peace
requires Israel to show political will and refrain from
provocative and detrimental actions. It also requires the
Palestinian side to act in unity, work towards national
reconciliation and establish an inclusive Government.

The situation in Gaza, which is on the brink of
collapse after a decade of blockade, continues to be
deeply worrying. This tragedy is compounded by
the worst financial crisis in the history of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees (UNRWA). Until ajust and lasting solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is achieved, the work of
UNRWA will remain vital. It is our collective and moral
duty to support the Agency. In that understanding,
we have announced an additional $10 million for the
UNRWA programme budget and increased our in-kind
donation. We also decided to pledge €11 million to
the Gaza central desalination plant project. While our
assistance to alleviate the suffering of the Palestinians
will continue, we will spare no effort to contribute to a
lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

We shall also pursue our efforts to calm the situation
on the ground in Syria and to advance the political
process. Turkey has also been actively contributing to
the counter-terrorism and stabilization efforts in Syria.
Operations that we have carried out, namely Euphrates
Shield and Olive Branch, have cleared more than 4,000
square kilometres of terrorists. So far, 160,000 Syrians
have voluntarily returned to the Euphrates Shield area.
We expect a similar pattern of stabilization in and
return to Afrin.

In the same spirit, have we stepped up our
humanitarian efforts. From the beginning, we have been
providing continuous humanitarian aid and fundamental
health services to the region in order to prevent civilian
suffering. We also have closely cooperated with the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
on how to best respond to changing circumstances. We
are currently working on new United Nations cross-
border humanitarian assistance shipments from Turkey
to Afrin, with the first shipment having already been
delivered in early April.

The United Nations-led Geneva process remains
the main venue for finding a lasting political solution
to the Syrian conflict, in line with resolution 2254
(2015). At the same time, the Astana format has
proven to be an important international initiative to
reduce violence, give impetus to political process and
adopt confidence-building measures. This month in
Istanbul, the Presidents of the Astana guarantor States
reiterated what they underlined in their joint statement
in November 2017: that the political solution to the
conflict should be achieved through a Syrian-owned,
Syrian-led process leading to a new constitution, as
well as free and fair elections, under appropriate United
Nations supervision.

In this understanding, the Sochi congress endorsed
the 12 Living Intra-Syrian Essential Principles put
forward by United Nations Special Envoy De Mistura
and called for the establishment of a constitutional
committee. This road map still constitutes a significant
framework for efforts to achieve a political solution
through the Geneva process. In this context, the Foreign
Ministers of three guarantor States will continue their
efforts to that end and elaborate on the next steps on
28 April in Moscow.

Before I conclude, I would like to emphasize that
Turkey will continue to deploy all efforts to consolidate
de-escalation on the ground, to advance the political
process and to address the plight of the Syrian people.

