Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Just over
a month ago, our heads of State or Government stated
that one of the fundamental pillars of United Nations
reform is security, specifically, terrorism, which is one
of the most serious threats to international peace and
security, as we saw this morning with the terrorist
attack that took place in Israel and from the attack in
Bali just a few weeks ago. Such events signal that we
are facing a concrete, long-term threat.

Given the nature of that threat, no State can
protect its national security on its own. Stopping
terrorism requires international cooperation in the areas
of security, intelligence, operations and justice. In
other words, we must make resolute progress in the
multilateral arena. In that context, the work of the
Committees in combating terrorism is fundamental.

I once again express my gratitude for the
initiative of jointly introducing the reports of the 1267
Committee, the 1373 Committee and the 1540
Committee. I am grateful for the valuable information
on the efforts the Committees are conducting. These
joint briefings are a positive sign of coordination and
complementarity.

We believe that these open meetings of the
Security Council contribute to a better understanding
of the work of the Committees and create an
atmosphere of greater participation, transparency and
openness to the perspectives and comments of the
broader United Nations membership. I should mention
that on the issue of terrorism, there is still a gap that
has to be bridged between the work carried out by
Security Council on the one hand, and that of the
General Assembly on the other. We therefore feel that
promoting initiatives for greater dissemination,
collaboration and State visits must contribute to a
comprehensive strategy to combat terrorism.

As stated by our heads of State or Government in
the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/ 1), the General Assembly should develop
those elements and formulate a strategy to promote
comprehensive, coordinated and consistent responses
at all levels to counter terrorism, taking into account
the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism.

I would also like to highlight the Security
Council's adoption of resolution 1624 (2005) in
September, concerning the prevention of the incitement
of terrorist acts. The adoption of that resolution sends a
strong signal in the fight against terrorism.

I would like to refer briefly to the Al-Qaida and
Taliban Sanctions Committee. First, I congratulate
Ambassador Mayoral and his team on their outstanding
work. We believe that one of the most important
elements in recent months was the adoption of
resolution 1617 (2005), which added new elements to
the Committee's already demanding mandate and
which extended the sanctions regime for a further 17
months. Paragraph 2 of the resolution specifies with
greater clarity the criteria for deciding what constitutes
association with Al-Qaida. We consider the checklist
contained in annex II of the resolution, which States
should use to report to the Committee by 1 March
2006, to be another highly valuable element that will
improve the quality of the Consolidated List.

And I am pleased to note the tenth preambular
paragraph of that resolution, concerning cooperation
with Interpol - which I had the honour of initiating
during my chairmanship. That cooperation will provide
the Committee with better tools to fulfil its mandate, in
particular through the use of the Interpol database of
lost and stolen passports.

Visits to States by the Chairman and the
Committee are a productive way to continue keeping
abreast of the situation on the ground, increase
dialogue, clarify doubts and establish ties of trust with
States. I am pleased to see that at least four meetings
have been held with Member States this year. The
dialogue process can clearly be improved through the
participation of a growing number of countries.

Similarly, we believe it important to appeal to
States to recall international codes and norms to
combat the financing of terrorism, in particular those
of regional and institutional financial organizations
such as the Financial Action Task Force on Money
Laundering.

We consider it a positive step that individuals and
entities have been added to the Consolidated List and
that one individual has recently been removed from the
List. Of course, we must take measures to increase the
number of individuals and entities on the Consolidated
List, but I must also affirm the need to improve the
procedure of due process without diminishing that
instrument's effectiveness.

I would also like to underline the excellent
leadership of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
by Ambassador Ellen Margrethe Loj and note the
efforts made to complete the Committee's
revitalization process, in particular by making the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) fully operational. We also appreciate the work
carried out by Ambassador Javier Ruperez in that
regard.

The great amount of work accomplished by the
Committee is clear to all, as is the valuable new
methodology being used to identify and tackle the
problems that States face in implementing resolution
1373 (2001), improve the capacities of those States and
increase the number of States having acceded to and
ratified international conventions. We believe that the
work of the CTC in the area of technical assistance to
States is also very important. I was often witness to
that need for cooperation. This Committee has also
been an example to be imitated by others in using and
incorporating international, regional and subregional
organizations, contributing in this way to a
comprehensive understanding of the struggle against
terrorism.

With regard to difficulties, referred to in some
statements this morning, arising from a lack of
compliance on the part of States, I believe it advisable
to underscore the fact that we should have selective
and targeted reports in order to ensure greater
effectiveness and to avoid creating fatigue among
States as a result of excessive demands for reports.

I wish to congratulate Ambassador Motoc for his
active leadership of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We believe the
Council's decision to make obligatory national controls
to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction has been particularly important. This
Committee has responded to the demands of its
mandate. Its nature is complex and sensitive, because it
is making progress in a rather new area, but we
congratulate the Chairman on both the number of
reports received and the exhaustive review carried out.
We also believe the Committee's communications to
States, including my own, requesting further
clarification are constructive. The initiative to build a
legal database could provide a very useful source of
information for the work of the experts. Finally,
initiatives such as the seminar in Buenos Aires in
September on progress in implementing resolution
1540 (2004) are activities we must continue. We also
feel that we must pursue the efforts already begun to
identify offers of and requirements for technical
assistance.

I will conclude by mentioning the positive work
of the three Committees and the fact that success
depends on the level of cooperation of Member States
and on the level of compliance with sanctions and
mandates established by the Security Council. While
this is a certainly lengthy struggle, through collective
action and cooperation we can make progress and
defeat terrorism.

