Mrs. Cafias (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish ):
I should like at the outset to welcome you, Sir, to
congratulate you, together with Ambassador Legwaila, on
Botswana's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council, and to express my delegation's readiness to
cooperate in the discharge of your duties, which we are
certain will be crowned with success.

I should also like to extend a welcome to, and to
express appreciation for the presence of, the delegation of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU), composed of the
Foreign Ministers of your country and of Lesotho, Malawi,
Namibia, South Africa, Tunisia and Zambia, the
representatives of Guinea-Bissau and Senegal and, of
course, Foreign Minister Venancio de Moura of the
Republic of Angola, who is with us at the Security Council
table. The presence of such an important delegation, as well
as the important peace-keeping operation that the Security
Council has just established, reflects the support that the
international community has been lending to the peace
process in Angola since 1988, as well as the renewed hope
on this occasion following the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol by the Government of Angola and UNITA.

Having left behind 20 years of brutal civil war, which
began as the independence process in Angola was getting
under way, the people of that country deserve to take in
peace the path of reconciliation and reconstruction. The
United Nations has actively supported this process, and
today it is prepared to take an important further step. But
at the same time the Government of Angola and UNITA
should be aware that it is they who bear primary
responsibility for crowning this process with success. On
their continued commitment and implementation of the
agreements reached will depend to a great extent the
support that the international community is prepared to
lend. We believe that this process would be significantly
strengthened by a direct meeting between President dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi.

In this context, we should also like to highlight in a
very positive way Angola's offer, detailed in its letter
circulated as document S/1994/1451, relating to the
contribution in kind that it has committed to the
application of the Lusaka Protocol and to the third United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). We
attach special importance to this effort, in the light of the
great humanitarian crisis experienced by that country.

We should like most especially to thank the
Secretary-General for the very complete report that he has
submitted; we find especially useful the details of the
mandate and the concept of the operation. We wish to
emphasize that the information on the cease-fire and the
parties' repeated commitment to respect for and fulfilment
of the "Acordos de Paz" and the steps established by the
Lusaka Protocol were determining factors in the Council's
advances towards establishing the third phase of the
Verification Mission. This United Nations peace-keeping
operation is the most ambitious and complex to have been
created for nearly two years.

The resolution that we have just adopted provides,
through the establishment of UNAVEM. III, the necessary
framework for the Government of Angola and UNITA to
fulfil promptly and completely the provisions of the
"Acordos de Paz", the Lusaka Protocol and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. Accordingly, we hope
that the parties will take all necessary steps to avoid any
further delays, and we hope that the UNAVEM. III
planning and support elements will be deployed promptly,
thus allowing the rapid arrival of infantry units and other
components of the force, when conditions permit.

In the light of the experience gained in other peace-
keeping operations, we would particularly emphasize the
need for the rapid introduction of a broad and well
coordinated programme of mine clearance. We know that
this is a grave long-term problem that the Angolan people
will have to face, and the sooner we begin the task the
better. The support of the international community in this
regard is essential.

Aspects relating to public information also seem to
us important in this new phase of United Nations work in
Angola. We hope that concrete steps will be taken along
these lines, in close cooperation with the Government of
Angola.
The machinery for Security Council follow-up
established in this resolution are also important, since,
without depriving the Secretary-General of the flexibility

 

that he needs for the management of a peace-keeping
operation, they will enable the Security Council to manage
the political aspects properly and with the necessary
urgency.

The Argentine Republic, in addition to being another
South Atlantic coastal State and working together with
Angola in the Zone of peace and cooperation of the South
Atlantic, has close ties of friendship and cooperation with
that country. Accordingly, since it gained its independence
in 1975, we have been cooperating with it, and from the
very beginning of UNAVEM, in 1988, we have
continuously contributed military and police personnel. This
commitment by Argentina to Angola continues and will be
expanded in UNAVEM. III. The era of peace and hope that
is now beginning for Angola will undoubtedly provide
opportunities for greater cooperation between our peoples.

With the cycle that is beginning, a well-founded hope
arises for an era of peace, stability and prosperity for
southern Africa. That region of the African continent has
every potential to become an important axis of
development, whose benefits will undoubtedly extend
beyond its borders. The Argentine Republic expresses its
hope again today that this crucial opportunity will be fully
seized by the Angolan people, and is prepared to cooperate
to that end.

