Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
welcomes the presence of His Excellency President
Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo and the other high-
level officials among us, including the Foreign Minister
of Cote d'Ivoire. We wish success to the presidency of
Equatorial Guinea in guiding our work this month, and

we once again commend the Dominican Republic for its
excellent work last month. We appreciate the convening
of this debate and the important briefings delivered by
the Secretary-General, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Rwanda and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission.

We wish to underscore the relevance of the topic
that brings us together today, given the tangible impact
of the criminal activities of mercenaries and foreign
combatants on international peace and security. We
believe that the instability caused by those actors, as
well as their serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, deserve the effective
attention of the Security Council.

As was pointed out this morning, the repercussions
of this issue are particularly intense on the African
continent and affect countries such as Somalia, the
Central African Republic, the Union of the Comoros,
Equatorial Guinea and Cote d'Ivoire, among others.
The porousness of borders, the scarce presence
of the State and the occurrence of political crises
contribute to the expansion of the phenomenon. Under
those circumstances, we believe that efforts to fight
that scourge and contribute to the achievement of
sustainable peace should focus on the following areas
of action: conflict prevention, addressing root causes
and strengthening regional cooperation.

First, with regard to conflict prevention, situations
of conflict or dispute are skilfully used by mercenaries
and foreign fighters for the development of their
illicit activities, so it is essential to prevent them.
This prevention work requires strengthened local
and national capacities, specifically when it comes to
the peaceful settlement of disputes, the promotion of
dialogue and the promotion of social cohesion. The
support of the international community in these efforts,
especially that of the United Nations regional offices, is
necessary. Through their monitoring and early warning
functions, the latter contribute to the timely detection of
factors that trigger new episodes of tension and crisis,
which provides an opportunity to counteract them.

Secondly, with regard to addressing the root
causes, weak institutions, tensions generated by
regimes that restrict freedoms, the deterioration of
economic indicators, injustice and marginalization
are fertile ground for agents who promote violence
or are instruments of violence, such as mercenaries.
It is therefore critical to address these causes through
a multidimensional approach aimed at building
and strengthening capacities and institutions that
promote human rights, the rule of law and sustainable
development, in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We stress that, if institutions
are to be created in order to be effective and enjoy
legitimacy, they must be representative of their
respective societies. For that reason, their inclusiveness
must be ensured. Special emphasis must be placed on
protecting young people and children in order to prevent
their recruitment and provide them with opportunities
through quality education.

Thirdly, with regard to regional and neighbourhood
cooperation, since mercenary activities have cross-
border implications, which can be rapidly adapted to
the different geographic contexts in which mercenaries
operate, this phenomenon must be addressed from
a regional perspective. That is why we welcome the
African Union's Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative,
which promotes peace, stability and prosperity on the
African continent. We believe that, given its relevance,
the initiative should enjoy the strong and unanimous
support of the international community, and in
particular that of the Council.

We also underscore the importance of strengthening
intelligence work and border control, which are
fundamental elements in addressing the usual sources of
financing for mercenaries, such as illicit trafficking in
arms, people and natural resources. The establishment
ofjoint commissions is vital for these purposes.

In conclusion, I stress the need to promote new
accessions to and strict compliance with the International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing
and Training of Mercenaries, which includes, among
other aspects, the adoption of the national legislation
necessary to effectively address this phenomenon.

