Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): My Minister
would have liked to have been here to deliver this
intervention, but the Ministers have cantered through
their interventions, unlike the normal business of the
Council, so I am afraid that he is tied up in another
event, and I apologize for that.

I wanted to start by agreeing with what the
French, German and Polish ministers have said about
the importance of international humanitarian law
in this area and, of course, about the work of other
organizations, including, but not limited to, the
European Union, NATO and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, all of which, as
Ministers have explained, do very important work on
the agendas on prevention and protection and on the
combat against terrorism.

For its part, the United Kingdom very much
welcomes these counter-terrorism partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations. As terrorist
threats evolve, cooperation between partners is vital
to addressing the cross-border movement of many
people, ideas and materials. However, as the Secretary-
General affirmed this morning, such cooperation has
to be anchored in the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and in Security Council resolutions,
and it has to reflect a balanced and comprehensive
approach, in compliance with international law, as
outlined by both the Security Council and the General
Assembly. We fully agree with the Secretary-General
that promoting gender equality, as Ministers have also
said, is an important component of countering terrorism
and violent extremism.

The United Kingdom welcomed the Council's recent
adoption of resolutions 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019), with
their increased emphasis on the obligation to protect
humanitarian activity. It is important that regional
partnerships and interactions reflect this obligation
and that counter-terrorism measures not be used as a
justification for ignoring this obligation or for violating
the Geneva Conventions or international humanitarian
law more generally. In that respect, we were pleased
to hear that the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
has increased its attention to humanitarian assistance,
and we hope that this will include the protection of
humanitarian activities while countering terrorism.

If I can turn to Central Asia, terrorism remains a
threat in that region, which is, of course, a key area
for this discussion. The attack in Tajikistan last August
that caused the deaths of four foreign cyclists was an
awful reminder of that threat. We welcome the work
of the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia in implementing the United
Nations counter-terrorism frameworks and Security
Council recommendations. We also welcome the
engagement we have seen so far from Central Asian
Governments; we would encourage them to cooperate
more with one another, with the United Nations Regional
Centre, the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate. In that regard, it was good that the briefers
could tell us about stronger partnerships, but, at the
same time, I would like to stress the importance of a
harmonized approach, including on designations.

We have also touched on Afghanistan, which the
Council discussed recently. Like the rest of Asia, it has
great potential but faces great challenges. The United
Kingdom is pleased to see the countries of Central
Asia working together to support their neighbour
Afghanistan. Much has been said about the threat not
only of extremism but also of narcotics trafficking
emanating from the country. While we should recognize
those risks, it is important not to overstate them. It is
the Afghan people themselves who suffer most at the
hands of extremists. The international community and
regional partners must continue to work together, as
indeed we have for many years, to support peace and
stability in Afghanistan.

Turning to counter-terrorism cooperation, we hope
that we will be able to continue to work together to
prevent terrorism and violent extremism in all regions.
Military and 1aw- enforcement measures alone will
not suffice; as the German Minister said, we need to
tackle the root causes. The United Kingdom therefore
encourages all partners in the field of counter-terrorism
to strengthen their collaboration with civil society and
to ensure that gender and human rights considerations
are always integrated across the full spectrum of
counter-terrorism efforts globally.

Finally, I would like to stress the importance of
human rights. We welcome the affirmations from the
briefers today on human rights; they are absolutely vital
to this issue. The General Assembly and the Security
Council have reaffirmed many times that the promotion
and protection of human rights is a fundamental pillar
of counter-terrorism. We have seen that violations
of human rights and fundamental freedoms have in
themselves often contributed to validating terrorist
narratives and enabling recruitment. It is particularly
important in Central Asia, where progress made on
human rights is fragile and needs to be protected. It is
imperative that the countries of the region and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia cooperate with regional actors to ensure
that counter-terrorism approaches comply with human
rights obligations.

For its part, the United Kingdom is active in
Central Asia. We collaborate and coordinate with a
range of international partners, as I mentioned at the
beginning. Our priorities are regional security, good
governance, human rights and prosperity. Our projects
support those priorities and we emphasize inclusion,
participation and support for those vulnerable to
extremism ideologies. We emphasize the need for the
countries of Central Asia to cooperate on cross-border
issues and to increase engagement with the rules-based
international system. Counter-terrorism offers a good
opportunity for both.

In conclusion, I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to share our Views on this important peace
and security issue and to shine a light on a region that
is ofincreasing strategic importance.

