Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, we would like to thank the High
Representative, Mr. Petritsch, and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Klein, for
their detailed briefing today.

Since the Security Council last considered this
issue, the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
whole has continued to be stable. Some positive
developments have taken place in the implementation
of the Peace Agreement. The United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) has continued
to score achievements in restructuring law enforcement
bodies in Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly the
police. We are pleased with all these accomplishments.

At the same time, we believe that peace and
rebuilding in Bosnia and Herzegovina still face
enormous challenges. The international community still
has daunting tasks before it. First, as in grave situations
in other areas of the Balkans, the promotion of national
reconciliation is still the most urgent task in rebuilding
Bosnia and Herzegovina and restoring peace and
stability in the region. We hope that the international
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina will make further
efforts to ease social conflict and remove ethnic
distrust so as to create favourable conditions enabling
the various ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
dedicate themselves to economic reconstruction at an
early date.

Secondly, we have noted that there has been
progress in the return of refugees, particularly refugees
from minority groups. However, there is still much
work to be done. In this regard, it is our hope that the
measures referred to by Mr. Petritsch will be effective
in strengthening security and safety in areas where
ethnic minorities live, in finding a reasonable solution
to property disputes, and in guaranteeing the provision
of basic infrastructure and public services.

Thirdly, China appreciates the important and
constructive role played by the various bodies of the
international community in the peace process in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Like Mr. Klein, we believe that it is
only by further strengthening coordination and
improving the division of labour that efficiency can be
improved. We have taken note of the fact that, in
compliance with the recommendations of the High
Representative, the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board has met and decided to adopt a phased
approach to facilitating this process, in strict
accordance with the functions and mandates of various
bodies.

We expect this process to yield more results at an
early date, as a result of the joint efforts of all the
parties concerned.

