Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for presenting his
report and Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
for her assessment of the violations committed.

Kazakhstan continues to be deeply concerned
about the plight of the more than 626,000 Rohingya
refugees - more than half of the total estimated
number of Rohingyas living in Rakhine state - fleeing
to Bangladesh. Many Rohingya are also still internally
displaced. Unfortunately, it is impossible to assess their
condition owing to the restrictions on access for United
Nations humanitarian agencies to Rakhine state.
The saddest tragedy is that the vast majority of these
refugees are women and children, who are the most
vulnerable segment of the population.

The international community's growing attention
to the situation of the Rohingya was evident in the
Council's presidential statement of 6 November
(S/PRST/2017/22) as well as in the twenty-seventh
special session of the Human Rights Council, held
on 5 December, on the human rights situation of the
Rohingya Muslim population and other minorities
in Rakhine state. We join others in commending the
Government of Bangladesh for sheltering the refugees
and providing them with temporary housing, medical
care, food and other forms of assistance. We also
acknowledge the contributions that international
organizations and donors have made to mitigate the
current crisis.

My delegation welcomes Myanmar and Bangladesh's
signing last month of a memorandum of understanding
on the voluntary repatriation of refugees to Myanmar.
We are heartened to note that the two Governments
have established a joint working group to implement
the process. We hope that the group will ensure the
voluntary return of all refugees to their homes in
Myanmar in a timely, safe and dignified manner. We
also encourage the Government of Myanmar to honour
and comply with its agreement to invite the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
relevant international entities to fully engage in the
various stages of return and resettlement of the refugees.

While we welcome the efforts of the Myanmar
Government to stabilize the situation in northern
Rakhine state, it is equally essential for the authorities
to conduct a credible national investigation into the
alleged gross human rights violations against the
Rohingya Muslim community. It should focus in
particular on the allegations of serious sexual and
gender-based violence against women and girls, of
torture and detention and of the burning of houses,
schools, places of worship and other property. The
perpetrators of those heinous acts should be brought to
justice with a view to re-establishing the foundations of
basic trust between all the communities involved and
ensuring that such violence does not recur in future.

At the same time, the recommendations of the
Rakhine Advisory Commission, headed by former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, are extremely valuable.
They highlight the fact that the long and complicated
history of the Rakhine state and its numerous problems
cannot be solved hastily. It will be crucial to address
the root causes of conflict, particularly the loophole
represented by Myanmar's Citizenship Act of 1982,
which rendered the Rohingya community stateless and
deprived them of their rights. Solving the problems
of poverty and underdevelopment, while granting the
Rohingya community equal and unhindered access
to basic services, should be at the core of long-term
sustainable development. In that regard, Kazakhstan
notes Myanmar's decision to form an advisory body
that includes foreign and local experts to implement
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission.
We therefore call on the Government of Myanmar to
ensure that the funds and programmes of the United
Nations and other partners can be fully operational in
delivering emergency assistance, and to work to relieve
the acute suffering of the victimized population through
recovery and rehabilitation efforts.

Lastly, it will be crucial to support constructive
cooperation with the Government of Myanmar in
an atmosphere conducive to negotiations if we are to
promote sustainable peace, stability and prosperity for
Rakhine state.

