Mr. Al-Hosani (United Arab Emirates) (interpretation from Arabic): I have the honour of expressing to you, Sir,
on behalf of the United Arab Emirates, my warmest
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month. We are firmly convinced that your
great experience will ensure the success of our work.

The course of international events, in particular the
developments in the situation between India and Pakistan,
both of which last month conducted underground nuclear
tests, has confirmed that the challenges facing the world in
the field of disarmament are very difficult and complicated,
particularly with regard to weapons of mass destruction.
There is still competition between countries in their attempt
to produce and acquire some of these extremely dangerous
weapons, in particular nuclear weapons, especially in States
which have disputes with their neighbours, suffer from a
kind of psychosis about military imbalance or threats to the
security of their national territories, or seek to retain
illegitimate control over the territory of others through force
and in violation of international law and legitimate
international resolutions.

Despite the growing expectations in the immediate
post-cold-war period with regard to disarming all nuclear
arsenals, the objectives in this area are not easy to achieve
at a time when, as can be seen, certain countries are
endeavouring to conduct nuclear tests. It seems to us that
this is no less serious than the certain adverse consequences
of accumulating nuclear weapons. On the contrary, this
clearly sanctions the intensification of areas of tension and
increases the possibility that they will explode. In one way
or another that is the cause of the justified fears that
today's world is not one in which security prevails, as was
the case after the cold war.

The United Arab Emirates has added its voice to those
of other States and has signed the two treaties - the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty - that are an
international cornerstone, founded on world security and
peace. Despite this, we wish to state here and now that we
agree with all of those who have expressed fears about
what happened in South Asia, because that region is very
close to ours. We are afraid of this arms race and we are
also afraid of certain other countries that are trying to
acquire such weapons of mass destruction. It seems to us
that this can lead only to destruction and tragedy for all of
humanity and for our peoples, and it undermines stability
and international peace and security.
We are firmly convinced that disputes must be
resolved by peaceful means and that peace and security
must be established in the Middle East and in South Asia.
That is why we reiterate the opinion expressed in the
official communique issued last Monday by our Ministry
of Foreign Affairs. In that communique we stated that the
underground nuclear tests in India and Pakistan are not
beneficial to international peace and security but only
intensify tension in the region, which does not help to
resolve existing problems. That is why we call upon these
two States, to which we are bound by a long-standing
friendship, to show restraint and return to dialogue so as
to relieve the tension between them and thereby
strengthen confidence and arrive at a peaceful settlement
of the problems facing them so that they can create
circumstances conducive to strengthening economic and
social development and prosperity in their countries.

We appeal to the international community, which is
represented by the Security Council whose mission it is
to preserve international peace and security, to follow that
peaceful path and use its good offices as a preventive
measure so as to contain any escalation of tensions
between these countries.

In this connection, we reiterate that the policy of
double standards pursued by the Security Council, by
which it makes an exception for Israel - the only
nuclear-weapon State in the Middle East, and one that is
not subject to the international inspections regime of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) -
encourages the arms race. That is why the United Arab
Emirates is again asking the Security Council and its
members to make these treaties international and binding,
without providing an exception for any State, and to make
the region of the Middle East a zone free from weapons
of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons.

This requires international pressure on the
Government of Israel to take concrete, urgent measures to
accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and rid itself of all nuclear weapons, which
have shown their dangerous impact on security, the
environment and health in neighbouring countries and the
entire region. We believe that Israel's continued
possession of these dangerous weapons would constitute
a major obstacle to efforts to achieve a genuine, just,
lasting and peaceful resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict
and the situation in the Middle East.
 

Finally, we reaffirm that a just and lasting peace in a
given region requires the political will of Governments to
strengthen dialogue, cooperation and measures to build or
restore mutual trust, by putting an end to the arms race in
all its forms in accordance with principles of equality,
respect for sovereignty and non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States.

