Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2261 (2016) and
the establishment of a United Nations mission tasked
with monitoring the implementation of the ceasefire
that is awaited in the next few months in Colombia as
part of the peace process under way since 2012.

It has been very unusual, in the recent history of the
Council, for a country to turn to it asking for assistance
in the implementation of a negotiated peace process.
The request that was sent to us to that end a few days
ago by the President of Colombia, in keeping with
the joint request of the parties to the conflict, clearly
demonstrates the extent to which the United Nations
constitutes a central, legitimate and trustworthy player
in the maintenance of international peace and security
throughout the world.

The resolution that we have just adopted shows that
our Organization and more specifically the Council
were able to respond positively to the appeal made to
them. France welcomes this and would like to thank the
United Kingdom. We cherish the hope that the mission
whose establishment has been decided today will
constitute a positive element that will promote the early
conclusion of peace negotiations, a peace for which the
people of Colombia have waited too long.

France lends its full support to the process,
which was launched in 2012 under the auspices
of the Colombian President. Bilaterally speaking,
the French Development Agency in 2015 lent more
than $300 million to the Colombian Government to
promote the implementation of the agreement on rural
development. An additional $200 million should be
forthcoming this year. Our country has also lent its
experience to Colombia in the field of transitional
justice as well as land governance.

France also actively contributed to the creation last
January of the European Union Trust Fund in support
of the Colombian peace process. The resolution that we
have just adopted serves as the beginning ofthe process
that will lead the United Nations to play a decisive role
in ensuring the conditions necessary for lasting peace
in Colombia. France will remain resolutely mobilized
to ensure that this process is a success - for Columbia
first and foremost but also for the United Nations.
