Mr. Muselier (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me thank Minister Rafael Bielsa for having
taken the initiative to hold this public debate to address
the situation in a country that is particularly close to
me and that is linked to France by history and by
language. I also wish to commend the presence of the
Foreign Minister of Haiti, Mr. Simeon, and the
participation of ministers from Brazil, Chile, the
Dominican Republic, Barbados and the Bahamas, and
of the Under-Secretary of State of the United States.

The progress made in Haiti in a year is remarkable.
Where the State and democracy had ceased to function
according to acceptable norms, a Transitional
Government is preparing to hold democratic elections.
Where human rights have been flouted, reform of the
legal system is under way. Where arms laid down the
law, a disarmament process is under way, as attested by
the operations pursued jointly on 14 and 15 December
against the Chimeres in the Cite Soleil and against the
former military personnel in Tabarre,

Progress is due first of all to the strength, courage
and resolve of the Haitian people, who are overcoming
the difficulties in their history. That progress is also the
fruit of remarkable mobilization by the international
community. We are pleased to have taken the initiative
with the United States, Canada and Chile, with the
support of the Security Council. After the emergency,
the international community has been able to extend its
effort to establish suitable conditions for a democratic
transition. The United Nations, regional organizations
and countries of the American continent have played
and continue to play a key role in this mobilization.
That commitment must be maintained over time. We
have been called on to do that by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti, Mr.
Valdes, to whom I wish to pay a special and friendly
tribute. With our full support, he is helping to bring
about, with courage and determination and in close
cooperation with the Transitional Government of Haiti,
a sustainable and successful stabilization. I thank him
for his very useful report just presented.

To support those efforts, appropriate coordination
of all the players in the international community is
indispensable and must be maintained, in particular
through the Contact Group in Port-au-Prince, New
York or Washington. I would also like to commend the
action of the Transitional Government, which in
difficult conditions is trying to anchor its country in
this process of political and economic reconstruction. It
enjoys our full support as it carries out that task.
Together we have established a sincere dialogue on the
basis of ties of friendship that have always united us,
beyond the upsets of history.

In spite of this progress, we must not allow
ourselves to be complacent; far from it. I see the
ground that still must be covered to achieve the
objectives we all seek here - namely, a democratic,
united and stable Haiti, on track to sustainable
development. It is essential that we all remain
mobilized in support of the process we have begun.
That is why France is represented today at the
Government level at the request of the President of the
Republic, Jacques Chirac.

I would like to highlight three aspects that strike
me as particularly important for the success of the
transition. They are part of the same dynamic.

First is the preparation for and holding of
democratic elections in the fall of 2005, as scheduled.
This is a unique opportunity for the Haitian people to
take the future into their own hands. The conditions
must be met so that the voting can take place in
satisfactory conditions. The near full-strength
deployment of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) since the end of
December should help ensure a safe and stable
environment. But for that it is also important that the
disarmament process be successfully concluded. That
is a difficult question, but it must be addressed without
concession, not hesitating, if necessary, to make full
use of the possibilities allowed under MINUSTAH's
mandate. Violence and weapons must not determine
Haiti's political future.

On the political front, dialogue and national
reconciliation must be continued so that everyone can
express their choice on election day. Conditions must
be established so that no party feels excluded from the
process. All the political parties should take part in the
reconciliation, on the condition, naturally, that they
reject recourse to violence.

Secondly, reform of public institutions must
continue. Reform of the judicial system, training
Haiti's national police and promoting human rights
must not wait for the elections to be carried out.
Restructuring the judicial system and the police force
is essential for establishing the rule of law in Haiti. It
is also part of the groundwork in the fight against
impunity. Let us be clear-sighted: a race against the
clock is under way. A strong and sustainable
democracy depends not only on credible elections but
also on solid and sound institutions.

The third and last point is the establishment of a
dynamic for economic development. An interim
cooperation framework has been approved. The donors
were all present in Washington in July, and then in
December. But international support has not been
sufficiently in evidence on the ground, in spite of the
aid figures that were pledged.

Reconstruction projects must be implemented
quickly and must offer the prospect of jobs for
Haitians. The Haitian people expect tangible
improvements in their daily lives - building roads,
replanting trees, access for all to sanitation, clean
drinking water and electricity. We need to demonstrate
to the Haitian people the benefits of the transition to
democracy. They must be given the means to take in
hand the reconstruction of their own country. We are
counting on the determination of Haiti's leaders. We
must be able to count on the determination of the
international community.

At this critical juncture we must not fail in our
duty of solidarity vis-a-vis the Haitian people, nor
disappoint them in the hope for a better future that
emerged nearly a year ago. France, with its European
Union partners, together with the United Nations and
in multilateral forums, will continue to play its full part
in supporting the efforts of the Haitian people to set
their country on track to recovery. It will remain
engaged in MINUSTAH and will continue to place its
bilateral action in the interim cooperation framework,
focusing on both institutional reconstruction and on
strengthening basic services.

It is through comprehensive, coordinated action
that we will meet the challenge of attaining peace.

With the tsunami tragedy in Asia, we saw an
extraordinary outpouring of solidarity, reflecting a
globalization of feelings. Our international engagement
does not merely ebb and flow with images of disaster:
our commitment is made over the long term, wherever
needs remain pressing. And that is the case of Haiti.

