I begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her remarks, and I recognize the presence of my colleagues, the Permanent Representatives of Venezuela and Colombia. This situation is not only close to home for us in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines by means of geographic proximity, it is also an enduring feature in the hearts and minds of many across the Caribbean region as we stand in solidarity with our Venezuelan brothers and sisters. Today we reaffirm the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and call on all Member States to recommit to their obligations under international law. The recent attempted armed incursion into the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela was only the latest in a long series of unwarranted aggressions meted out against this sovereign nation over the past two decades. We maintain that the internal political dispute within the country does not constitute a threat to international peace and security. More pointedly, the situation in Venezuela does not threaten the national security, territorial integrity or political independence of any external State party, and all acts of aggression, including unilateral economic coercion, carried out under these guises are unjustifiable and illegal. These flagrant violations of international law undermine the internal political processes within the country. And now, following the $15-million bounty offered for the capture of the country's duly elected leader, new sources of instability, including mercenary activity and terrorism, have precipitated an increasingly volatile environment. These acts of solicitation serve to inflame rather than quell the challenges facing the country and its people. We maintain that the only sustainable solution to the political crisis is an inclusive national dialogue that meets the legitimate needs and aspirations of the Venezuelan people, free from any geopolitical machinations designed to interfere with the outcomes of this internal political process. We are deeply concerned about the worsening humanitarian situation in the country. The convergence of external economic and political forces to further the "regime change" agenda places unnecessary strain on the socioeconomic fabric in Venezuela and produces immense hardship and suffering for the people. Again, we reiterate our calls for an immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all unilateral punitive measures and urge all members of the international community to desist from all aggressions against the sovereign rights of the country and political freedoms of its people. During these unpredictable times, when efforts to combat the coronavirus disease pandemic should be consolidated, these geopolitical manoeuvres are both unhelpful and detrimental. At a time when our multilateral system is faced with a crisis of credibility, we cannot afford to deviate from the rules and norms of international cooperation. In defence of the bedrock principles of international law, we must not sow seeds of discord or fan the flames of provocation. The Venezuelan people deserve so much more. Before closing, my delegation wishes to support the press statement as proposed by the Russian Federation. We consider it to be factual and balanced.
