Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
preparing his very thorough report. We share his
concern over the high number of refugees and
internally displaced persons throughout the world.

According to the report, poor leadership is in
evidence in Iraq. Known events in that country have
created more than 2 million refugees and 2.2 million
internally displaced persons. Their problems must be
resolved as soon as possible. In addition to the strictly
humanitarian dimension, they loom as an onerous
burden on neighbouring countries. The scope of
internal displacement from Darfur - some 240,000
people - is also a cause for serious alarm. Prospects
for improvement in the situation will depend above all
on the peace talks and the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

The responsibility to protect civilians falls first
and foremost to the Governments of States in conflict.
We believe that such responsibility should also be
borne in mind by non-State actors. We condemn the
actions of armed groups, in particular the use of suicide
bombers and the practice of hostage-taking. Civilians
should not be deliberately attacked or killed by the
indiscriminate or excessive use of force, which is also
a violation of international humanitarian law.

The Secretary-General rightly notes the alarming
trends towards the erosion of principles related to
distinction and proportionality. In this respect, in
particular, we support his call for the multinational
forces in Iraq and Afghanistan to include concrete
information in their quarterly reports to the Council on
actions to protect civilian populations.

We are becoming more and more concerned about
the activity of private security companies which often
flagrantly violate the rights of civilian populations.
One thinks especially of the conduct of such companies
in Iraq, with the wounding and death of civilians,
including children and women. We would expect the
facts of the suffering of children to be reflected in the
UNICEF note submitted to the Council's Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflicts. We
emphasize the requirement that the staff of these types
of companies should comply scrupulously with the
norms of international law, both as they apply to times
of the armed conflict and as they apply to human
rights. We would especially note that, in cases that are
unclear from the standpoint of current international
law, responsibility for the actions of these
organizations should be borne by the States hiring
them; or, alternatively, one could consider the staff of
such security firms as mercenaries.

Like the Secretary-General, we welcome the
initiative of the Government of Switzerland and the
International Committee of the Red Cross to consider
questions at the intergovernmental level on the use of
private military and security firms in the context of
compliance with international humanitarian law. We
note the Secretary-General's balanced treatment of the
concept of responsibility to protect as the responsibility
of each State for the protection of individuals in their
jurisdiction from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity. It is the job of
the United Nations and of the Security Council to
support these national efforts.

However, here it would be premature to talk
about the functions of the so-called Special
Representative on the Prevention of Genocide and
Mass Atrocities, whose mandate is not yet agreed with
the Security Council. In our view, the Secretary-
General should provide the Council with clarifications
and specific proposals on the broadening of the Special
Representative's mandate. This would help us to clarify
what exactly is meant by the term "mass atrocities" and
how the new mandate would interface with the work of
other agencies in the United Nations system.

We should study the Secretary-General's
proposed actions on the conduct of hostilities, on
prevention of sexual violence, humanitarian access and
property rights. Consideration of such measures
should, of course, be non-selective from the standpoint
of the conflict situations involved.

With respect to Action five in the Secretary-
General's report, namely, to create a Security Council
working group on the protection of civilians, the
advisability of this very bureaucratized action step
gives us strong reservations. Not more than a month
ago, a similar proposal was introduced in the Council's
thematic discussion on women, peace and security -
which raises the question of how many working groups
the Council needs to create, bearing in mind that in the
Secretary-General's report individual chapters are also
assigned to the elderly, persons with disabilities,
journalists and many other subjects for so-called
thematic discussions.

Instead of establishing new bureaucratic
structures and discussions, the United Nations should
expeditiously and effectively react to instances of
Violence against civilians and the destruction of
civilian sites during armed conflict. It is important to
strive for scrupulous compliance by all parties with the
norms of international humanitarian law and the
relevant decisions of the Security Council. The most
direct way to resolve all problems is through the
responsible conduct of all States.

