The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of July, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Claude Heller,
Permanent Representative of Mexico to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of June 2010. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Security Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Heller for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)

Letter dated 2 July 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Serbia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2010/355)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Serbia in which he requests that the
President of the Republic of Serbia be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the President of the Republic of Serbia to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Boris Tadic', President of the Republic
of Serbia, to a seat at the Council table.

Mr. Boris Tadie, President of the Republic of
Serbia, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.


The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Boris
Tadic', President of the Republic of Serbia.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Zannier to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Yves
de Kermabon for the European Union.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. De Kermabon to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Skender Hyseni.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Hyseni to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in response to document
S/2010/355, which contains a letter dated 2 July 2010
from the Permanent Representative of Serbia to the
United Nations, addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

I shall now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Boris Tadie, President of the Republic of Serbia.


