Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We join others
in commending Morocco for convening today's
ministerial meeting dedicated to the Sahel region.
It is a timely initiative and will help maintain the
international community's focus on the challenges that
the region is confronting. We thank Mr. Saad-Eddine El
Othmani, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Morocco, for presiding over this meeting. Pakistan
enjoys close relations with all countries of the Sahel,
and therefore has an abiding interest in their continued
well-being.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
his Special Envoy, Mr. Romano Prodi, as well as the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Antonio Guterres, for their very useful briefings.
We also welcome the participation of the high-level
representatives of the various regional organizations
and United Nations entities at today's meeting.

Despite the progress made by countries in the Sahel,
they continue to face serious security, humanitarian,
and socioeconomic challenges. If those challenges are
not addressed quickly and effectively, the gains made
so far could be reversed, and there would be negative
repercussions for the region's long-term stability. The
region faces chronic problems of food insecurity,
underdevelopment and climate change. The recent rise
in organized crime has aggravated the situation.

The conflict in Libya has also added to the
region's difficulties. Consequences of that conflict
are still unfolding, with Mali being its first victim.
Refugees from Mali have placed an additional burden
on neighbouring countries that were already reeling
from the impact of the prevailing drought. Terrorists
and criminals who have filled the security vacuum in
northern Mali, pose a serious risk to the security of the
entire region.

We have previously expressed grave concern in
the Council over the rise of organized crime, including
drug and weapons trafficking, and terrorism in West
Africa and the Sahel. Drug trafficking in particular is
a serious threat to the countries of the region because
of its nexus with terrorism and its potential to fuel
corruption and undermine governance. Tackling
those threats demands greater regional cooperation in
border management as well as in the justice and law
enforcement sectors. Countries of the Sahel are all
developing countries that face lack of capacity and
resources. Therefore, the international community
must, in the short run, provide effective assistance to
the relevant countries and regional organizations. The
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime should also
play a role in providing assistance to those countries.

Evidently, to address the challenges the region
is facing, there is a need for an integrated strategy
that has the support of the international community.
Pakistan has supported the elaboration of a United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel region in
resolution 2056 (2012). We welcome the appointment of
Mr. Prodi as the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for
the Sahel and support his efforts for the development
of the strategy, as well as for mobilizing resources for
the region. We hope that with his support the United
Nations integrated strategy will soon be finalized.

The United Nations strategy should be based on
the principle of national ownership and drafted in close
consultation with concerned countries. Its aims and
objectives should be realistic and prioritized in order
to keep a balance between immediate and long-term
needs. It must focus on effective coordination among the
various United Nations presences in the region, which
would be crucial for its success. The strategy must also
identify the resources required for its implementation.
Statements made by regional representatives at today's
meeting contain some valuable suggestions, which
must be considered.

The situation in Mali poses a grave threat to regional
stability and deserves the urgent attention of the Council.
Pakistan supports efforts to restore the territorial
integrity of Mali, address the threat of terrorism and
respond to the humanitarian situation in the country
and the Sahel region through a comprehensive approach
that addresses both the political and security aspects of

the crisis. The African Union joint strategic concept of
operations provides a very useful basis for addressing
the Malian crisis.
An integrated Sahel strategy will act as a ballast,
help stem a powerful tide of extremism and spur the
social and economic development of the region. The
United Nations can be complimented for looking at
the big picture and working on a holistic approach.
We must now inject a sense of urgency to achieve our
goals. In the coming days and weeks, Pakistan will
assist in the efforts to develop an effective response by
the Security Council to address the development and
security challenges in Mali and the wider Sahel region.

