Mr. Sharma (Nepal): I wish to begin by
extending to you, Mr. President, and the other members
of the Security Council warm, although belated, wishes
for a happy new year. Let me also say how delighted
my delegation is to see you so ably presiding over the
Council.

Children, the weakest sector of a population,
suffer in many ways in situations of armed conflict.
They lose their parents and other loved ones. They lose
their homes and livelihoods. They lose basic services
such as education and health. And they even lose their
lives. Those who survive are often forced to live in
camps and or in confinement as refugees or displaced
persons and become susceptible to exploitation and
temptations.

The most horrendous crime that the parties to a
deadly conflict commit is to use child soldiers. This
robs children of their childhood and innocence and
places them in a world of murder and mayhem.
Traumatized and stigmatized, such children have
difficulty coping with normal life and blossoming to
their full potential.

We have internationally agreed safeguards for the
protection of children, but they remain ineffective in
delivering results. The Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its relevant Optional Protocol, Additional
Protocol II to the Geneva Conventions and Convention
No. 182 of the International Labour Organization (ILO)
set basic international standards for the protection of
children. They are complemented by a number of other
compacts, conventions and resolutions. The
International Criminal Court is certainly another potent
instrument to protect children in armed conflict.

Despite those provisions, children continue to
face misery, exploitation and death in conflicts. The
world community faces a daunting challenge: to
stringently enforce those provisions. Part of the
problem is due to the fact that world community has
been incoherent in its response to conflict. Political
considerations get in the way of devising a cogent and
seamless set of actions. More often than not, funding
has failed international compacts, whose vision loses
focus along the trail of implementation.

Critical is the imperative to ensure that the
perpetrators of violence against children do not go
unpunished. Crimes against children should not only be
excluded from amnesty; they should also carry heavier
punishments. Special measures, including punishment,
are essential to protect girl children. The nature of, and
potential damage from, a conflict should determine the
priority and extent of the international community's
response.

Clearing landmines should be undertaken with a
sense of urgency, and should receive adequate funding.
Resolute political will must be demonstrated to ensure
effective control of small arms, which maim and kill
most children. Collective efforts should be
strengthened to prevent fuelling conflicts with proceeds
from the exploitation of natural resources, drug
trafficking and other criminal activities.

Juvenile justice should constitute an important
part of domestic courts and of international tribunals
and courts to try child soldiers who might have
committed grave crimes. A comprehensive programme
should be put in place to demobilize child soldiers, as
well as to give them skills and to rehabilitate them and
reintegrate them into their communities.

While a tailor-made response is essential to
resolve disputes and prevent conflicts, we must also
look at the larger picture and remove the causes or
aggravating factors of conflicts. This calls for
eradicating poverty and promoting sustainable
development, as well as advancing justice and human
rights around the world.

In 9 out of 10 cases, non-State actors have been
committing the horrendous crime of recruiting and
deploying children as combatants with impunity.
Changing the culture of impunity demands a fresh
outlook as well as strengthened mechanisms and
measures from the world community. Let me share a
glaring example from my own country. As the
Secretary-General has mentioned in the report before
the Council (S/2002/1299), children are being
subjected to forced and involuntary recruitment by the
Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist). Indeed the
Maoists, who are seeking to remove the constitutional
monarchy and who are undermining democratic values
and institutions, have turned children into sacrificial
lambs in their brutal pursuit of political power.
Yesterday, the Maoists reportedly abducted 80 children
from a school. The other day they took 150 children
from school at gunpoint. These children are forced to
undergo combat training. They are often used as human
shields in attacks. This is something the rebels have
been doing on a regular basis. Young girls have
become the principal targets of abduction by the
Maoists, who are reportedly striving to induct more
women into their guerrilla force. Families that do not
consent to giving their children away face the direst
consequences.

This terror has set back the clock of progress in
Nepal, a least developed country that was taking
determined steps towards modernization. The Maoists
are destroying schools and health posts, bridges and
communication towers. They have also been killing
teachers and political workers. Consequently, children
are deprived of education and health services. The
movement of people and trade have been impaired and
tourism has dwindled. Villages have lost young men
and women, as they flee their homes to escape Maoist
atrocities and conscription. Development activities in
rural areas have ground to a halt.

Nepal has been trying its best to find a peaceful
settlement to the problem. Only recently, His Majesty
the King has appealed to all political forces to find a
peaceful solution to the country's political problems
and to engage the country's resources and energy in
promoting development and prosperity for the common
people. The Prime Minister has also called on the
Maoists to come to the negotiating table and has
promised to create the necessary environment for talks
to begin. Given their trail of deception, their attitude
towards negotiation - treating it as a tactical step to
destroy the enemy rather than as a strategic framework
for a peaceful resolution of conflict - and their
confusing and often contradictory statements, the
Maoists are yet to emerge as a credible partner for
peace. Still, the Government is willing and eager to
talk to stop the wanton bloodletting so that the nation
can pursue the path of peace and progress with total
dedication and commitment.

Nepal is committed to protecting children in
armed conflict. We have no child soldiers in our
security forces. But we are profoundly distressed by
the fact that the Maoists have been abusing our
children, stifling their development and darkening their
future. While bringing Maoists to justice for their
crimes remains our obligation, we have instituted a
programme to rehabilitate and reintegrate children who
have escaped the Maoist trap. We will need the
international community's financial and technical
support in our endeavour.

Central to that is the United Nations, whose
remarkable work we commend. Our appreciation goes
to the front-line agencies of the United Nations,
including the United Nations Children's Fund, the
United Nations Development Programme and others,
for their work to protect children and promote their
interests. We urge the Security Council to remain
seized of situations under its consideration and to
remain vigilant about others so that international peace
and security are not jeopardized.

