Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First, I thank the Secretary-General for his progress
report on the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (S/2004/888). I also welcome the
appointment of Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste, and I thank him for his briefing.

In the period under review, the situation in Timor-
Leste has remained stable, the economy has recovered
somewhat and people's lives have improved. It should
be noted that the country has made steady progress in
institution-building; important new State institutions
and security agencies have been established. The
capacity of the public administration, the judicial
system and the security system has been enhanced, and
a number of important laws have been adopted. We
note that progress with satisfaction, and we
congratulate the Government and the people of Timor-
Leste on that achievement.

We pay tribute to the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) under the
leadership of Mr. Hasegawa. At the same time, we
observe that the Secretary-General has noted in his
report that although notable progress has been made in
many areas, important challenges still lie ahead and
that Timor-Leste continues to require the assistance of
the international community. We therefore support the
renewal of UNMISET's mandate for a further six
months, maintaining its current size, composition and
tasks, so that the achievements made can be
consolidated.

We believe that we should all act with urgency
and redouble our efforts until UNMISET's mandate is
completed. UNMISET and Timor-Leste should
enhance their cooperation and prepare a satisfactory
exit strategy so that Timor-Leste can achieve self-
sufficiency at an early date. The United Nations system
and international financial institutions should maintain
their attention and support for Timor-Leste in order to
ensure the country's sustainable development.
Finally, we pay tribute to Timor-Leste for its
efforts to improve its relations with neighbouring
States. On the outstanding issues between Timor-Leste
and its neighbours, we believe that the international
community should respect the wishes of the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste and should
support Timor-Leste and its neighbours in finding
satisfactory solutions in the interest of lasting regional
stability and in the long-term interests of the people of
Timor-Leste.

We believe that through the efforts of the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste, with the
support of the international community and the United
Nations, Timor-Leste will be rejuvenated and make
steady progress in its task of nation-building.

