President Kagame: I thank the Secretary-
General for his introduction and I thank you, Mr.
President, for your invitation to me to address this
Council.

I want to start by informing the Council that
Rwanda has been trying to rebuild itself from the
devastation caused by the genocide and other problems
before that. Progress has been made in the area of the
reconstruction and rehabilitation of the country, in
matters of reconciliation, in dealing with the questions
ofjustice and in the bigger problem of socio-economic
development.

However, this progress and the efforts behind it
are being hampered by the general context in which
this is happening - the context being what is
happening in the region. This relates to the situation in
the Congo, which I am sure many members of the
Council have been following very closely. Without
peace in the Congo and the countries of the region,
development and this kind of progress definitely will
not take place.

However, there have been efforts before, and
these efforts have continued in order to try to address
these matters that would contribute to peace and
stability in the region. That is why we later on reached
the peace agreement in Lusaka, though at later stages it
became difficult to have it implemented. So, it is
true - I agree, as has been said, that there is a need to
take advantage of the change that has taken place in the
Congo, however tragic that was in its coming. I
discussed with the new President, President Kabila,
many issues relating to what we can all do in the region
to bring about this peace. That mainly focused on the
implementation of the Lusaka peace process. My
country has the desire to fulfil its obligations as
demanded by the Lusaka peace process, or even
beyond that.

There are really three core issues that must be
addressed, in my View, in order to have the Lusaka
process succeed. These are the issues on which the
process was built. One is the inter-Congolese dialogue,
which is talked about in the peace agreement.
Hopefully this inter-Congolese dialogue will lead to a
stable situation internally in the Congo so that
problems will stop originating from the Congo and
affecting the neighbouring countries.

The second core issue is how the problem of
former Rwandan Armed Forces (FAR) and
Interahamwe are addressed in this whole situation. This
problem has been going on from May 1994 until this
moment. It has been discussed in different forums, and
we have always, unfortunately, fallen short of some
practical ways of eradicating that problem. So, that is
the second core issue. I think that the Lusaka peace
process is built on it, and it needs to be taken forward.

The third core issue is the withdrawal of foreign
armies from the Congo. All three of these issues are
addressed in the formula we have in the Lusaka peace
process. If we go back to that and see what we can do
to move the peace forward, then we most likely have a
chance - with the change that has taken place in the
Congo and with the statements that the new President
has made about wanting to realize peace fl not only in
the Congo but also in the region. That is the impression
I got from him when I was speaking with him.

However, the two of us, and maybe a few others,
having discussed this issue is not enough. I think that
everybody needs to come to our assistance - the
assistance ofthe Congo, of Rwanda, of the region - in
order to support this process so that it can be
implemented. I have no doubt that the Council will
continue to play its role in finding a solution, or
solutions, to many of these problems that I have
mentioned. I continue to call upon the Council to be
helpful not only in bringing about peace but also in
supporting the region in terms of socio-economic
development.

With these few remarks, I look forward to the
support of the Council, and I will be very ready to
continue our discussion in case there are any questions.
I will make whatever clarifications that might be
required on these issues.

