Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): South Africa was
honoured to lead the Security Council mission to
Timor-Leste, comprising six delegations, namely,
China, Indonesia, the Russian Federation, Slovakia,
South Africa and the United States of America. The
mission left New York on 24 November and returned
on 1 December 2007.

The purpose of the visit was to encourage the
Government, the parliament, the political parties and
2

the people of Timor-Leste to continue to work together,
engage in political dialogue and consolidate peace,
democracy and the rule of law, security sector reform,
sustainable social and economic development and
national reconciliation in their country. It also sought
to discuss and exchange views with the Timorese
authorities on ways and means to assist the country in
developing the capacities necessary to build on security
and democratic and other gains achieved thus far and
to express the Security Council's full support for the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) in the country and the United Nations
presence in Timor-Leste, and to assess the progress
made on the ground relating to the implementation of
UNMIT's mandate.

During its visit to Timor-Leste, the mission met
with various interlocutors in Government, including
the President, the Prime Minister, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, members of the judiciary, the national
parliament and political parties, including the leader of
the main opposition party. The mission also held
interactions with non-governmental organizations and
representatives of women's, youth and church groups,
as well as representatives of UNMIT and other United
Nations agencies on the ground. The mission also
received a briefing from the International Stabilisation
Force led by Australia and New Zealand.

On 28 November, at the invitation of the
Government, the mission participated in the national
day celebrations of Timor-Leste's independence

Meanwhile, the mission conducted field visits in
the districts of Liquica and Baucau outside Dili, in
order to listen to the views and concerns of the people
on the ground. In Baucau, members of the mission
visited a United Nations-sponsored school, where the
World Food Programme and UNICEF are involved in
feeding the children. The mission also visited a camp
for internally displaced persons near Dili hospital to
hear of the challenges faced by the people in the
camps.

The general political situation in Timor-Leste
remains calm and stable, but fragile. Following the
successful conclusion of presidential and parliamentary
elections held in May and June this year, respectively,
the new Government has recently completed its first
100 days in office and new ministers and office bearers
started with their work. The mission noted that while
there are high expectations among the Timorese
07-62902
people, the new Government is also grappling with
establishing its policies and institutions. One of the
issues the Government was grappling with during our
visit was the national budget.

All the interlocutors that the mission met
indicated that Timor-Leste is experiencing stability and
peace. However, there is a collective View that the
issues of the IDPs, the so-called "petitioners" who are
former soldiers who deserted the army and the
unresolved case of Major Alfredo Reinado, who also
left the army, cause uncertainty and divisions among
the people and leadership of Timor-Leste.

In its meetings with interlocutors, the mission
emphasized the need for political dialogue,
reconciliation and political engagement among the
country's leadership. The mission observed that at the
core of those concerns there seem to be continuing
differences regarding the country's political direction
between the ruling Alliance for Parliamentary Majority
(AMP) led by Prime Minister Gusmao, and the main
opposition party, FRETILIN, led by former Prime
Minister Alkatiri. Most of the mission interlocutors
argued that those differences concern the
constitutionality and legitimacy of the current
Government and its ability to govern. The good news,
however, was that despite the political differences
among the parties, all 15 political parties, including
FRETILIN, were working together in parliament and
elsewhere, trying to address the challenges facing their
country.

The mission also recognized that the challenges
of governance and the legacy of the violent crisis of
2006 and its aftermath continue to haunt the country's
political leadership and to affect the people of Timor-
Leste. Related to these are the unresolved issues of
petitioners, the fate of 100,000 IDPs currently settled
in about 53 camps and the humanitarian and socio-
economic challenges that the country continues to face.

With regard to the capacity of State institutions,
the mission noted that Timor-Leste faces challenges
associated with weak institutions, lack of capacity and
difficulties in areas of governance.

The mission highlighted the need for collective
responsibility among Timorese people and their leaders
to find solutions to their challenges. In the short term,
it is crucial that the Government of Timor-Leste, with
the support of the United Nations and the international
community, work together to improve the living
07-62902
conditions of the IDPs. In this regard, the mission
repeatedly emphasized the need for Timorese
ownership of their fate and the need to engage in
political dialogue and reconciliation and continuous
engagement in addressing those challenges. There was
no doubt that the challenges that face Timor-Leste
could be best addressed by all Timorese people.
Despite the challenges facing the country, the mission
was encouraged by the well-functioning democracy in
Timor-Leste.

On the matters of reform of the security sector,
the mission and its Timorese interlocutors agreed that
both the security and justice sectors were in need of
strengthening. In this context, the mission recognized
from its interactions with its interlocutors that the 2006
crisis was a result of challenges within the two security
institutions, namely the national police - the PNTL -
and national defence -the F-FDTL. The mission
stressed the urgent need for reform of those institutions
and the importance of a Government strategy to
address this issue.

In the meantime, the mission noted that despite
acknowledging the important role the United Nations
and the international security forces are playing in their
country, some interlocutors expected those
international institutions to respect local culture and
institutions as well as to provide the space for
Timorese ownership of some operational activities. The
missions also expressed its hope that the role of the
United Nations police will be reviewed to ensure
maximum results. In this context, the mission
recognized the need to send a team of experts from the
United Nations Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to assess the situation and ways and means
to improve it.

Regarding the role of UNMIT, all of the
mission's interlocutors emphasized the importance of
the continued presence of the UNMIT and the United
Nations in Timor-Leste. Everyone we met called for
the UNMIT presence in the country to be continued.
The mission stressed to all its interlocutors the
importance of utilizing the United Nations presence to
achieve self-reliance and self-sustenance. The mission
commended UNMIT for its continuous work in Timor-
Leste and recalled that it was the Security Council that
would consider the extension of UNMIT's mandate
when it expires on 28 February 2008.
3
Lastly, it is worth noting that following the 2006
Violent crisis, the country has recovered very well and,
with the support of the international community, even
managed to organize, prepare and hold free and fair
presidential and parliamentary elections earlier this
year. Despite the challenges associated with the results
of the parliamentary elections, a new Government is in
place, political parties are represented in parliament
and civil society seems to be flourishing.

On the other hand, the country faces enormous
challenges associated with the political differences
among leaders in resolving critical issues facing the
country, such as socio-economic difficulties associated
with widespread unemployment and poverty. In the
humanitarian sphere, the plight of the IDPs remains a
big task facing the people and Government of Timor-
Leste.

Despite those challenges, the mission left Timor-
Leste convinced that the country is on the right path to
regaining its role as a peaceful, stable, united and
prosperous country.

In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere
gratitude to the representatives of China, Indonesia, the
Russian Federation, Slovakia and the United States of
America for their unwavering support and patience
during the mission.

On behalf of my colleagues who participated in
the mission, I would like to thank the Government and
people of Timor-Leste for their hospitality, assistance
and cooperation, as well as the entire staff of UNMIT
for providing us the necessary support during the
Security Council mission to Timor-Leste. We
particularly wish to note the invaluable support from
the Government of Indonesia in assisting the
delegation with smooth transit to Timer-Leste.

Finally, I cannot end without thanking our
support team of Ms. Norma Chan, Ms. Signe Jepsen,
Ms. Vijayalakshmi Menon, Ms. Paula Goncalves and
Mr. Troels Erichsen, all of the Security Council
Secretariat Branch and the United Nations security
personnel respectively, for their tireless efforts and
support during the preparatory stage and also during
the mission. We thank them for their professional and
tireless efforts.

