The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the Gambia.

The recent events in Kosovo, Serbia, the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia have been a great concern the
world over. These events prompted the Security Council
some weeks ago to request its President to make a
statement to the press expressing serious concern over the
situation in Kosovo and calling on the parties to exercise
utmost restraint and to enter into serious political
dialogue. The situation in Kosovo did not witness any
concrete progress after that statement was made.

 
Although progress has been made in the
implementation of the actions indicated by the Contact
Group in its statement of 9 March 1998, my delegation
believes that there is still more to be done, as the situation
still remains precarious.

In this context, my delegation welcomes and supports
the signature on 23 March 1998 of the 1996 Education
Agreement. It is imperative that this Agreement be
implemented fully and in accordance with the agreed
timetable.

My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to thank
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the Contact Group for their relentless efforts
to bring about a solution to the problem in Kosovo. We
therefore urge them to continue the good work.

The Contact Group is offering a diplomatic and
political opportunity for the solution of the problems in
Kosovo. The parties should give diplomacy a chance and
take advantage of the window of opportunity opened for
them by the OSCE.

It is my delegation's belief that the situation there
cannot be settled without meaningful dialogue between the
parties to resolve their differences. Resort to the use of
force, unprovoked violence and terrorism are no answer to
their problems. Political problems should be solved
politically. The use of force, more often than not, further
exacerbates a problem and produces compliance based on
a fragile foundation. My delegation therefore calls on the
parties to exercise utmost restraint and work out measures
to find a political solution to this problem.

My delegation notes with appreciation the claimed
commitment of the senior representatives of the Kosovar
Albanian community to non-violence. My delegation hopes
that the same can be said of the Serbian Government.

However, the availability of arms and other military
mate'riel to parties in a conflict usually leads the parties to
armed confrontation. It is noted with disapproval that such
is the case in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. My
delegation would therefore support the measures contained
in the resolution. It is our view that the lack of access by
the parties to military mate'riel would reduce their capability
to fight and, hence, the incidence of violence. In that
context, my delegation welcomes the establishment of a
Committee to monitor the implementation of the measures
contained in the resolution and urges all States to respect
them.

While the Council considers an arms embargo on the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, including Kosovo, to be
a necessary step to halt the continued degeneration of the
situation in Kosovo, this move alone is not sufficient to
change the situation. The parties to the conflict should be
genuinely committed to working out a diplomatic
solution. My delegation recognizes that the prospects for
such an achievement could be elusive if a genuine
political process acceptable to both sides is not put in
place.

Finally, my delegation wishes once more to urge the
parties to find a political compromise and also to respect
the provisions of the resolution we have adopted today. In
this way, what may appear to be an insurmountable
problem would in fact turn out to be the opposite.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I call on the representative of the United Kingdom.

