Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): Mr. President, we are very
pleased to see you presiding over this meeting. We are
confident that under your able guidance, the Security
Council will have a productive month, especially with
regard to the situation in the Middle East.

This is a moment of perplexity for the entire
international community. The facts are clear. The
Israeli authorities have just caused grave damage to
their own cause and their own credibility by refusing to
cooperate with the United Nations fact-finding mission
that they themselves had welcomed.

The international community has both a right and
an obligation to know exactly what happened in Jenin.
As long as the Israeli authorities refuse to open it to
international scrutiny, the dark clouds around this issue
will continue to haunt us. However, this obstruction
will not prevent the truth from surfacing, as it is indeed
surfacing through the efforts of independent agencies
and through the reports of international personnel
stationed in the region. In these reports, there seems to
be compelling evidence that violations of human rights
and breaches of international humanitarian law were, in
fact, committed in the raids on Jenin.

While expressing our full support for Secretary-
General Kofi Annan and our understanding for his
decision to call off the mission, we cannot but regret it
in the strongest possible terms. We deplore attempts to
tamper with well-established practices in the conduct
of fact-finding missions and cannot condone the fact
that the respectability and impartiality of the team,
which was to be led by the former President of Finland,
Mr. Ahtisaari, has been put into question.

Beyond the immediate consequences of the Israeli
decision not to cooperate with the United Nations, we
must also ask ourselves about the impact of this course
of events on the credibility and authority of the
Security Council itself. The Security Council cannot be
perceived to be a secondary player in the search for
peace in the Middle East. Nor can its decisions be
blatantly dismissed or disregarded by any party.
We fully appreciate the need for initiatives aimed
at building up pressure on the parties to take resolute
steps towards a peaceful solution of the conflict in the
Middle East. In this respect, we welcome the active
engagement of, and the leadership role played by, the
members of the "quartet" especially and by the many
leaders of the region in a position to act as real brokers
in the dispute between Israelis and Palestinians.

We are pleased that recent efforts have allowed
the siege of the Palestinian Authority compound in

Ramallah to be finally lifted, thus restoring - we
hope- President Arafat's required freedom of
movement.

We are encouraged to learn that the "quartet" is
prepared to push ahead with proposals for a ministerial
conference to deal in a comprehensive manner with the
security, humanitarian, economic and political aspects
of the crisis. This proposal nevertheless needs to be
fleshed out, as its terms are still extremely vague.

The central issue to be resolved in the Middle
East has to do with the illegal foreign occupation and
the denial of self-determination. The Council needs to
be clear and unequivocal on that point.

While renewing our call for a cessation of all acts
of violence, terrorism and the killing of innocent
civilians, provocation, incitement and destruction, we
appeal once again for a total withdrawal of Israeli
armed forces from the occupied Palestinian territories,
for an end to illegal settlements, for a resumption of
political talks with the Palestinian Authority and for an
end to the military siege of the Church of the Nativity.
We also renew our call on both parties to show a
genuine willingness to work for peace.

We remain convinced that an effective
international presence is required immediately. It is
indeed overdue, and we support in every possible way
the call made by Secretary-General Kofi Annan in this
respect.

Finally, let me restate my country's willingness to
cooperate actively in any action the Council and the
international community deem appropriate in our
collective pursuit of a better life and future for both
Israelis and Palestinians.

