Ms. Loj: I thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to present the latest report of the Secretary-
General on South Sudan (S/2015/296), published on
29 April. I will focus my briefing on developments
since then and on some of the major challenges facing
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
at this time.

The security situation further deteriorated during
late April and May, with significant military action
in Unity, Jonglei and Upper Nile states, in complete
disregard of the cessation of hostilities agreement. That
is very worrying, as it has had a devastating effect on
the civilian population in those areas. Furthermore,
an increasing number of reports indicate widespread
human rights abuses, including murder, rape and the
harassment of civilians, including women, children
and the elderly, as well as the destruction of civilian
property and livelihoods.

Unity state currently constitutes the most serious
situation, where we have reports of Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA) advances and fighting as they
push into southern Unity state towards Koch, Leer and
Adok. That has necessitated that most humanitarian
agencies and non-governmental organizations evacuate
their staff, further aggravating the suffering of a large
number of civilians. The flow of internally displaced
persons (IDP) into the UNMISS camp in Bentiu - some
2,400 so far in May - and the general displacement of
innocent civilians has continued.

I have issued a statement expressing concerns
about the reports of serious human rights Violations and
reminding the parties of their obligations to abide by
international human rights and humanitarian law, and
to take all measures to ensure the safety of civilians and
guarantee the safety of international aid organizations,
United Nations personnel and assets.

In addition to the continuing clashes between
Government and Opposition forces, fighting between
Dinka and Shilluk militias, both affiliated with the
SPLA, occurred in Malakal, Fashoda and Akoka,
in Upper Nile state. The origins of the tension lie in
a historic land dispute, but this has developed into a
situation that has gotten out of hand. That has also led
to the reversal of the trend in Malakal, which until
recently saw the return of people to the town and the
re-opening of local markets. UNMISS assisted the
Government in sending a senior delegation led by the
Shilluk King from Juba to Malakal to mediate and
contain the conflict. Consultations between the two
parties are still ongoing, but the situation remains
tense, with potential for further clashes.

The fighting and tribal tensions in Upper Nile,
Unity and Jonglei states are being felt inside the
civilian sites protected by UNMISS. Not only are more
IDPs arriving, but incidents of ethnic, political and
tribal clashes have grown during the past two months.
The most recent incident occurred in Juba from
10 to 12 May, when widespread fighting between Nuer
Mayom and Nuer Mayendit IDPs led to two deaths and
over 60 people injured. The UNMISS force and formed
police units were able to restore order; however, tensions
continue to grow. Although many of the Mayom IDPs
left the camp, citing their inability to live with the rest
of the IDP, UNMISS has since been able to promote
reconciliation, which has led to the return of some of
the IDPs.

Outside of the traditional conflict zone of
the greater Upper Nile region, UNMISS is also
paying close attention to repeated occurrences of
intercommunal violence in other states involving
cattle-raiding incidents and revenge attacks in which
women and children are often targeted. Lakes state in
particular needs our attention, as the level of violence
and casualties in the first three months of this year
surpassed that associated with the fighting between
the SPLA and the Opposition. UNMISS continues to
explore ways to support efforts to end the violence and
foster intercommunal reconciliation.

Against the backdrop of the prevailing insecurity
and the significant increase in violence, the
humanitarian situation is one of deepest concern.
Over 2 million people remain displaced, with over
1.5 million internally in South Sudan and over 500,000
in neighbouring countries. Over 2.5 million people
face severe food insecurity, especially in the greater
Upper Nile region, and this figure will most likely
increase significantly. UNMISS continues to provide
support to humanitarian agencies to enable them to
meet the primary needs of those at risk. UNMISS has
provided force protection to relief convoys being used
to preposition humanitarian and relief supplies ahead of
the onset of the rainy season.

As of 6 May, UNMISS had provided protection
to nearly 120,000 displaced persons in seven sites,
including about 53,000 in Bentiu and 34,000 in Juba,
and now nearly 29,000 in Malakal following the latest
fighting in the area. UNMISS and humanitarian
partners have invested substantial resources to improve
living conditions in Bentiu and Malakal ahead of
the rainy season. In Bentiu, despite severe physical
constraints and limited financial and engineering
resources, UNMISS and the International Organization
for Migration have almost completed the construction
of a new site with the necessary drainage to prevent
flooding.

However, I should also highlight the unsustainability
of those protection sites in the longer term. As recent
events in Juba have shown, the longer the camps exist
in their current form, tensions within the camps will
increase. We are therefore experiencing a multitude
of challenges at the sites, including crime, gang-
related violence and disturbances based on ethnicity.
Furthermore, it is critical that all humanitarian actors
do their utmost to provide services to people in need
all over the country, and not only in the UNMISS
protection-of-civilian sites. Attention must also be
given to ensuring that those sites do not become
magnets that attract people looking to avail themselves
of the services available in the camps, rather than those
needing physical protection.

The arrival of additional troops has permitted
UNMISS to expand its reach, including through the
establishment of forward operating bases, proactive
patrolling and providing protection and reassurance
to vulnerable civilians beyond UNMISS premises.
Capacity and resource constraints, as well as deliberate
obstruction by the parties, however, limit protection
activities by UNMISS military personnel, in particular
in hard-to-reach areas.

With regard to human rights, I continue to be
shocked by the low level of respect for human life in
South Sudan. UNMISS continues to receive reports
of gross Violations of human rights, indicating the
unsafe conditions faced by civilians in many parts of
the country. In the greater Upper Nile area, UNMISS
investigated allegations of civilians killed in hostilities
in Malakal, Akoka and Fashoda during April. We are
also closely monitoring the aggressive posture of the
SPLA towards internally displaced persons sheltering
in the UNMISS protection site in Bentiu, where
several people have been killed or injured. We will of
course also do our utmost to investigate what has been
happening in Unity state during the recent fighting.

On a more positive note, to date 1,757 children
linked to the Cobra Faction have been demobilized.
During my meeting with him on 28 April, the Chief
Administrator and former Commander of the South
Sudan Democratic Movement/Army Cobra Faction,
David Yau Yau, assured me of his continued support to
secure the release of the remaining child soldiers in his
area. But as important as the release of child soldiers
is, it is equally important to support vocational training
and livelihood-related efforts to ensure that they do not
relapse into joining another armed group. That effort
will need donor support.

Despite assurances of cooperation and support at
higher levels, we continue to experience restrictions
and obstruction on the ground. I therefore urge
the Government and the Opposition to renew their
commitment to facilitate the work of the United Nations
in South Sudan. In that respect, I am seriously concerned
by the continued incidence of unlawful arrests,
detentions and abductions, including the targeting of
United Nations and humanitarian personnel. As stated
in the Secretary-General's report, three World Food
Programme national staff went missing on 1 April in
Upper Nile state and have still not been found. The
situation of the five United Nations staff I referred to
in my statement in October (see S/PV.7282), including
two missing persons and three in detention, remains
unchanged.

UNMISS continues to provide support and
assistance to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism through the Joint Technical Committee,
both in Juba and in the field locations. Five IGAD teams
have deployed to the states, and UNMISS is providing
logistical and force protection support to facilitate their
work. On 7 May, UNMISS uniformed strength stood
at 11,302 military personnel, 1,103 police officers,
including 492 formed police unit personnel. I wish to
thank the troop- and police-contributing countries for
their continued support. I urge them and other Member
States to help equip and accelerate the deployment of
UNMISS personnel and resources.

While the Mission has no mandate to facilitate the
peace process, we are directly affected by the lack of
progress in reaching a peace agreement. We had high
hopes for a breakthrough earlier this year, and we are
extremely disappointed by the parties' inability to reach
a compromise. There is no alternative to silencing the
guns and concluding a comprehensive peace agreement
in order to turn South Sudan towards the path of peace
and stability. I have consistently conveyed that message
to all interlocutors in South Sudan, including President
Kiir and Opposition leader Mr. Riek Machar. The untold
suffering of the people of South Sudan must stop. Every
day without a political agreement contributes to further
deterioration of the situation on the ground, leading to
greater displacement and human misery and risking
regional peace and security.

The economic situation in South Sudan is
deteriorating, particularly in View of the decrease in
oil revenues, heavy expenditure on defence and the
inability of the Government to secure external financial
support. The gap between the official and unofficial
exchange rates of the United States dollar to the South
Sudanese pound has widened and inflation is rising.

The situation will continue to worsen if conflict
continues and external assistance is not forthcoming.
The international community must find ways to support
the South Sudanese people to create an environment
that eliminates the drivers of conflict and permits
development. Enhanced support in critical areas such
as health, education and food production will be
essential to curtail the worsening economic situation
in South Sudan - not only to prevent the collapse of
the country's social fabric but also to prevent insecurity
from spreading to areas not directly affected by the
overall conflict. We cannot wait for a comprehensive
agreement before focusing on those long-term
development imperatives.

In my recent meeting with the Women's
parliamentary caucus, I was greatly encouraged by the
women's yearning for peace and by their demand for
South Sudanese leaders to rise above personal political
ambition for the sake of future generations and to create
a more cohesive nation. As they said, "Please help us
dry the tears of the women of South Sudan." I therefore
call on the Council, regional leaders and all friends of
this young nation to remain fully engaged to encourage
the necessary compromise that will turn public
statements of commitment to peace into action on the
ground. UNMISS, together with its partners, remains
committed to facilitating peace and security, delivering
humanitarian assistance and laying the foundations
for long-term development. The girls and boys and the
women and men of South Sudan deserve no less.

