Mr. Shah (India): Mr. President, let me join previous
speakers in conveying our happiness at seeing you in the
Chair this month.

It is now a year since the United Nations withdrew its
peace-keeping operation from Somalia. That particular
operation marked a watershed in the post-cold-war history
of United Nations activities. Along with another major
peace-keeping operation, the peace-keeping operation in
Somalia has had a lasting impact on the international
community and has clearly exposed the limits of
multilateral activism while emphasizing that dealing with
human relations is a complex task that requires patience
and perseverance and is not susceptible to mechanical
solutions.

There was a time when the international media could
not get enough on the events in Somalia. Now, if media
coverage is any guide, it seems that the problem had never
arisen. Prophets of doom had warned that when the
United Nations withdrew from Somalia this so-called
failed State would collapse and an unthinkable disaster
might follow. The Secretary-General in his January 1996
report to the Council noted that while there had been no
major progress towards national reconciliation, an all-out
civil war had been averted; new political trends were
visible, including the emergence of regional
administrations.

The Secretary-General has expressed the hope that
further progress in establishing regional authorities would
have a beneficial effect on efforts to establish a central
authority in the near future. We sincerely hope that this
will happen sooner than later and that a durable peace
will return to Somalia to enable its people to rebuild their
battered lives and once again set out on the path of social
and economic development. In this context, we appreciate
the efforts being made by the United Nations political
office. We support the continued extension of
humanitarian and relief assistance to the people of
Somalia. We pay a tribute to all those who, in spite of the
hardship and danger, have persevered in this noble task.

The United Nations operation in Somalia has
provided important lessons for future peace-keeping
operations which the international community would do
well to recognize. It has led the Secretary-General to
underscore in his "Supplement to An Agenda for Peace"
the reality that

"International problems cannot be solved
quickly or within a limited time. Conflicts the
United Nations is asked to resolve usually have deep
roots and [their] resolution requires patient
diplomacy over a period of time It is necessary
to resist the temptation to use military power to
speed them up. Peace-keeping and the use of force
should be seen as alternative techniques and not
as adjacent points on a continuum, permitting easy
transition from one to the other". (S/1995/l, para. 36)

India has for decades contributed consistently and
regularly to United Nations peace-keeping operations in
Africa. I am proud to recall that Indian peace-keeping
troops distinguished themselves in the United Nations
peace-keeping operation in Somalia. Our troops took the
opportunity of this difficult mission to interact on a daily
basis with the ordinary people of Somalia. As has been
the practice of Indian peace-keeping forces in several
operations in different parts of the world, Indian armed

 

forces took the opportunity of this difficult operation to
interact with local people and participate in community
affairs and developmental activities, and were thus able to
contribute in some measure to restoring peace, tranquillity
and normalcy in the areas in which they were deployed.
The lives we lost in Somalia were not in vain. It was
demonstrated that the people of Somalia desire peace and
are committed to it. And we must signal to the people that
we are fully behind them in this endeavour, that we have
not forgotten them simply because some of the objectives
of the United Nations operation were not fulfilled.

We are happy to note that the Secretary-General
believes that even in a worst-case scenario the United
Nations agencies can, through their continued operation,
play an important role in preventing a major humanitarian
crisis from taking place in Somalia. The international
community must commit itself to providing the minimum
level of supplies that are necessary. For their part, the
Somali faction leaders must ensure the safety and security
of all personnel of humanitarian and United Nations
agencies. We also concur with the Security Council in its
request to all Somali parties and faction leaders to reopen
the Mogadishu main seaport and other transportation
facilities to enable emergency humanitarian supplies to
reach those most in need.

The message that we would like this meeting of the
Council to convey to the people and political leaders of
Somalia is that the international community has not
abandoned them. The international community continues to
look for ways and means to assist them in their ongoing
endeavours towards a national political reconciliation and
economic rehabilitation. However, they have a
responsibility to create appropriate conditions to enable the
international community to effectively assist them in this
process.

