Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Mr. President, allow me to begin by expressing my
appreciation to you and the French presidency for
convening this meeting on the multifaceted challenges
that we face in combating violence and extremism in
the Middle East and beyond.

The Islamic Republic of Iran strongly condemns
the widespread targeting and killing of ethnic and
religious minorities by Daesh terrorists and all other
extremist groups. We also condemn the destruction of
mosques, holy shrines, churches and temples, as well
as of artefacts and archeological treasures representing
the rich cultural heritage of humanity.

Violent extremism has emerged as an unprecedented
composite of narcissistic, dogmatic and Violent
entities with a global agenda and with the following
characteristics. It is a unique global terror network,
actively recruiting in as many as 90 countries, all united
in pursuing a policy of terror and destruction. They
mobilize individuals, add new members, spread their
influence and threaten places near and far. As such, this
phenomenon is reminiscent of the Arab-Afghans of the

19805 and could be dubbed European-Arabs. Thus, it is
indicative of failing to learn from history.

These like-minded extremists have consolidated
their networks by sharing terror tactics and
romanticizing violence and bloodshed. They continue
to use the most advanced social media to reach out
to young people and recruit many fighters from all
around the world, some starting as tourists and ending
up in terrorism. Violent extremists have committed
unparalleled brutality as they set fire to houses and
schools, enslave the free, oppress the vulnerable and
kill the innocent with astonishing cruelty. Beheading,
burning and enslaving women and children, shamefully
advertised by the groups on social media, all of this
exposes the extent of the threat they pose to the global
community.

These terrorist groups falsely call themselves
Muslims, but they have killed thousands upon
thousands of Muslims, which is unprecedented in
human history. Killing around 140 innocent Yemeni
people in two recent suicide bombings in Sana'a was
one of the latest example in their savagery. Acting in a
true Takfiri manner, they call whoever is not with them
non-believers, condemning them to death. They have
established an ever expanding list of enemies, including
Shiites, Christians, Yazidis, Kurds, Turkmen, as well as
the vast majority of moderate Sunnis, subjecting them
to slavery and death.

Until the terrorist and extremist groups are
dismantled, these extremists will continue to pose
the gravest threat to the world. The international
community's inconsistent and incoherent policy and
strategy in combating extremist groups has not only
fundamentally undermined the effort to confront
them, but has also resulted in emboldening them. A
genuine commitment by the international community
to a serious and comprehensive approach to challenging
extremism is imperative. Any failure in this field will
doom efforts to rid the region of this malicious force. A
comprehensive strategy against Daesh must address the
ideological, social, political and economic dimensions
of violent extremism.

If there is a genuine resolve to combat extremism,
it must be translated into specific and effective actions.
It is imperative to adopt a united front, with a clear
message and a coordinated strategy. The disruption
of financial and logistical support and the sharing
of relevant information and intelligence, as well as
enforcing effective and coordinated border control, are
crucial to the success of such a campaign. The failure
to take the necessary actions to disrupt support for
terrorists and destroy their networks will only lead to
more bloodshed and destruction.

At the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session,
the President of Iran called for a world against Violence
and extremism, which Iran would support in all its
aspects. We have been steadfast in our fight against
extremism and have in practice demonstrated that Iran
will be a true partner in an ardent international fight
against extremist groups.

