Miss Durrant (Jamaica): First of all, let me
express my delegation's appreciation to you for the
excellent manner in which you have guided our work
during the month of December. Although it has been a
short month, we certainly have been able to accomplish
a great deal. We will remember the open debate that we
had on 18 December on West Africa, which certainly
brought together all the issues relating to West Africa
that we have dealt with over the last two years. We also
had an extremely useful open debate on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo panel report, which was very
useful in amplifying issues related to the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, an issue which also
affects other conflict situations in Africa.

Mr. President, I also really wish to thank you for
agreeing to our utilizing this wrap-up session as an
opportunity to provide a brief perspective on our two-
year term, which began on 1 January 2000. We share
with previous speakers - Bangladesh, Tunisia,
Ukraine and yourself - the fact that over the last two
years we have seen an extremely activist Security
Council. In part, this was due to the proliferation of
conflict situations around the world, but it was also
fuelled by the need for the Council to address those
issues which are the direct causes and consequences of
conflict.

Looking back over the last two years, we have
noted that in 2000 the Council adopted some 50
resolutions and 40 presidential statements in more than
160 formal meetings and 120 consultations of the
whole. By the end of November 2001, the Council had
adopted 48 resolutions and issued 37 presidential
statements, and we had had nearly 200 formal meetings
and over 170 consultations of the whole. As our
colleagues on the Council note, these statistics provide
a mere indication of the Council's workload, as much
of the work takes place in expert groups, sanctions
committees, working groups and informal meetings and
behind-the-scenes consultations.

I might note that while the proliferation of formal
meetings is due to the considerable increase in the
Council's workload, many of our open meetings are
due in large measure to the efforts by Council
members, particularly the elected members, to promote
openness and transparency in the Council's work.

Over the past two years, Jamaica has, with our
colleagues on the Council, advocated ways to increase
and improve transparency in the work. There has been
a considerable degree of success in this regard. I
therefore wish to repeat the challenge we posed for the
wrap-up session at the end of our presidency last
month, that the Council should continue to seek ways
to improve on the transparency of its work and to
continue to engage non-members of the Council more
closely in a meaningful way.

We wish to express appreciation for the
demonstrated willingness of all members of the
Council to show flexibility in the use of Arria formula
and private meetings, including those with the troop-
contributing countries. This has certainly added
another dimension to the work of the Council.

Before the joining the Council, our delegation
prepared for the task ahead, but we could not have
anticipated with any degree of accuracy the complexity
and intractable nature of many of the conflict situations
of which the Council is seized. Neither could we have
anticipated the many difficulties faced in trying to
bring peace and, thereby, an end to the human suffering
brought about by these conflicts. We used every
opportunity to focus the Council's attention on the
humanitarian suffering directly caused by many
conflict situations on the civilian populations,
particularly on the most vulnerable: women and
children. We promoted justice for those who were
deprived of their basic human rights. We emphasized
conflict prevention, post-conflict peace-building and
the reforming of the relationship between the Council
and the troop-contributing countries.

The stark realities of man's inhumanity to our
fellow human beings and the injustice visited upon
people ravaged by war became clearer to us as we dealt
with many of the issues before the Council. The added
knowledge we gained by our direct involvement served
to further our determination to use our short presence
on the Council to seek changes in the way it dealt with
many of these conflict situations. We came to the
conclusion that even small countries such as Jamaica
could and do play a meaningful role in the Security
Council.

Many of the problems faced by the Council
during the last two years existed before we joined the
Council, and some have been around for as long as the
history of the United Nations itself. As we leave the
Council, we can reflect on the progress made on a
number of these issues and urge renewed efforts to
resolve those on which not much progress has been
made.

In light of the limited time we have available, I
wish to focus on just a few of the issues.

When Jamaica came to the Council, it was our
intention to focus attention on many of the conflict
situations in Africa, because it was our belief that the
Council was not paying sufficient attention to Africa.
We found among several of our colleagues a
willingness to deal with African issues and respond in
a meaningful way in trying to help to bring peace to the
parts of the continent.

While there still remain many conflict situations,
we have seen in the past two years an evolution of
concentrated efforts. We have seen the Africans
helping to resolve their own problems. We have seen
increased support for regional and subregional
initiatives in Africa, particularly in dealing with the
situations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region, including in Burundi, in Sierra
Leone and the Mano River Union region of West
Africa, and in Ethiopia and Eritrea. While much
remains unresolved on these particular issues, we can
leave the Council with the understanding that there is a
commitment to fully supporting the peace processes in
these and other areas.

To cite but a few examples, in January of last
year, the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was far from encouraging. While there was a
ceasefire agreement in place, which called for a United
Nations observer force, the conditions on the ground,
including the position of the host Government, made it
impossible to deploy. Today the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has fully deployed phase II of its mandate
and is in the process of deploying phase III. The parties
to the conflict are engaged in a dialogue aimed at
achieving lasting peace.

An interim Government was installed in Burundi
on 1 November, and there are almost 40,000 ex-
combatants in Sierra Leone in the programme of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. A year
ago, the whole peace process in Sierra Leone was in
jeopardy of total collapse. Today, the ceasefire between
Ethiopia and Eritrea is holding. One area in which we
regret little progress has been made is Western Sahara.
We do hope that conditions will be put in place to
enable that longstanding situation to be resolved.

In Europe and Asia, we have also seen significant
progress in the Balkans regions as a whole. Elections
have been successfully held at the municipal level and
at the provincial level in Kosovo. The United Nations
mandate in Bosnia and Herzegovina is on track to a
successful conclusion by the end of 2002. East Timor, a
nation racked by severe violence in August 1999, will
gain its independence in May of next year. The conflict
situations in the Middle East remain unresolved, and
the Security Council has not been able to make any
lasting contribution to the search for peace between the
Israelis and the Palestinians. The unresolved issues
with Iraq continue to pose a danger to the peace and
security of the region and the international community.

But we also place emphasis on the thematic
debates which the Council held, and we believe that it
is time for us seriously to mainstream the outcomes of
those thematic debates: debates on issues such as
children and armed conflict, women and peace and
security, the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel, conflict prevention, sanctions, the
humanitarian aspects of conflicts, and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. We now have a body
of work which the Council should seek to ensure is
reflected in the reports of the Secretariat and in the
resolutions adopted by the Council on specific
situations.

Some progress has been made, most recently in
the resolutions adopted on women and peace and
security and on children and armed conflict. We have
begun to see some of this progress reflected in the
monthly reports on various conflict situations, but a lot
more needs to be done.

We also wish to emphasize the increasing role of
civil society, women's groups and other organizations,
which have been instrumental in peacemaking, conflict
resolution and peace-building. It is important that the
Council seek to establish closer contacts with such
organizations and to seek to ensure that their
contribution is reflected in our work.

I have just a few more comments. On
Afghanistan, the United Nations is now entering a new
phase. The emerging crisis has reinforced two main
points. First, the international community, if united in
its resolve, can rid the world of the scourge of
terrorism. We also wish to underscore the instrumental
and pivotal role that the United Nations must play in
furthering the cause of peace and security in
Afghanistan.

I wish to make a brief comment on relations with
troop-contributing countries. During Jamaica's tenure
on the Security Council, we have underscored the need
for closer collaboration among the Council, troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat. Throughout
the period, we have engaged in intensive discussions,
through the Security Council Working Group on
peacekeeping operations, aimed at bringing that about.
When we leave the Council we will continue to press
those concerns; we believe that the reform of United
Nations peacekeeping, and its success, largely hinge on
those factors.

As we leave the Security Council, we remain
disappointed that insufficient attention has been paid to
peace-building. While we are aware that that is not
entirely the domain of the Security Council, we believe
that an effective mechanism must be established for
cooperation among the organs of the United Nations
system - the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council - in ensuring
that an effective transfer is made from peacekeeping to
peace-building.

In conclusion, I wish again, as I did at the end of
November, to express our deep appreciation for the
cooperation we have received from all members of the
Council. Without their cooperation and collaboration,
the work of the Council over the past two years would
not have reached the level of effectiveness it attained
during the most recent period. I also wish to say that,
as an elected member, Jamaica has continued to
maintain that in the Council we should seek to reflect
the views of the United Nations Members that are
outside the Council. Jamaica, for its part, does not have
a direct interest in any of the conflict situations before
the Council. We have therefore sought to take a
principled and objective approach; we hope that this
has met with the approbation of the other members of
the Council.

