Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): Mr. President,
I would also like to defer to your wish to save some time
for the Security Council, but before expressing my views
as Permanent Representative of Mali, I must ask you to
allow me to read aloud a message from Mr. Alpha
Konare, President of the Republic of Mali and current
Chairman of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), addressed to you on the occasion of
this meeting. I quote:

"In my capacity as Chairman of ECOWAS, it
is my pleasure to address to you, Mr. President, my
warmest congratulations on behalf of the
Governments and peoples of our subregion on the
excellent initiative that you have taken in devoting
a meeting of the Security Council to the
consideration of the impact of AIDS on peace and
security in Africa. This initiative, there can be no

 

doubt, makes it possible to break the complicitous and
unacceptable silence that allows AIDS to develop
today. This silence is aggravated by the well-known
insufficiency of the resources applied until now to
eradicate this scourge, the impact of which needs no
evidence beyond the following figures.

"Of the 33 million people affected by the AIDS
virus, 22 million, in other words 70 per cent, are in
Africa south of the Sahara. Today, AIDS orphans
number 8 million, and every minute five more people
become infected. This pandemic is a tragic threat to
the future of our countries and in some regions is even
a factor of economic and social destabilization which
is a threat to peace and security in Africa.

"In the face of this distressing situation, we must
organize ourselves as of now and to wage a crusade
against AIDS in which African leaders must bear their
share of responsibility. I appeal for a significant
increase in the international community's commitment
in the framework of this crusade in order to step up
research throughout the world on AIDS, to increase
prevention and to provide the necessary support to the
millions of persons who are affected by HIV/AIDS, in
particular the men, women and children of Africa
infected by the pandemic.

"In expressing the wish that, above and beyond
this historic step taken now by the Security Council to
increase the awareness of the pandemic, there will be
concrete measures as a result of this meeting that will
give hope to all humankind, the hope of fair treatment
for all, I wish your work every success."

The message is signed by Alpha Konare, President of
the Republic of Mali and current Chairman of ECOWAS,

I shall now speak in my capacity as Permanent
Representative of Mali. I would like first of all to associate
myself with those who have congratulated your country,
Mr. President, and you personally, for having organized this
meeting. As a prelude to other meetings also devoted to
Africa during the course of this month, today's meeting
bears witness to your own personal commitment and to
your country's interest in Africa. The presence at this
meeting of Vice-President Al Gore offers further evidence
of this, and I should like to thank him for his important
statement.

Our thanks also go to the Secretary-General for his
enlightening statement on a subject of fundamental
importance to Africa. Today's meeting has also enabled us
to hear Mr. James Wolfensohn, President of the World
Bank; Mr. Mark Malloch Brown, the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP); and
Dr. Peter Piot, the Executive Director of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), who all
made detailed and instructive statements which make
clear the enormous extent of the challenge before us.

I will not refer to the absolutely horrifying statistics
on the consequences of the AIDS epidemic in Africa.
They have been described at length since this morning.
For my part, I would like to draw attention to a very clear
fact: peace and security do not consist merely in the
absence of military conflict; they also depend on the
socio-economic realities of nations. In that respect, the
AIDS pandemic today undoubtedly constitutes a factor for
upheaval in the economic and institutional order,
especially in Africa. In fact, many studies indicate that the
direct cost of AIDS will be 15 to 20 times higher for
national budgets in Africa than for those in Western
countries. As for the indirect costs, as the productive
sector in particular and the population in general are
affected directly, there will be a drastic decline in skilled
and unskilled labour. The foreseeable economic
consequence will be a decline in the competitiveness of
the African economy, which in the short term is already
seriously ailing at the international level. It seems,
therefore, that the AIDS epidemic is the most serious
threat to the development of the continent.

Therefore, we cannot evade the question of how to
explain the humanitarian disaster and the threat to the
development of Africa that the AIDS pandemic
constitutes. We know that AIDS has appeared against a
backdrop of crises, first and foremost and economic and
social crisis. Indeed, the growing impoverishment of
African societies related to global recession has led to a
disintegration of the social fabric and the progressive
disappearance of the familial and social controls that
govern the lives of communities and individuals.
Secondly, there is an identity crisis. This results
from the economic and social crisis and also from the fact
that individuals lose their bearings and reference points,
as well as from the fact that the continent is increasingly
open to the outside, even to aggression. In fact, powerful
media influences, with which local resources cannot
compete, flood Africa with overwhelming sounds and
images of violence that are not always positive.
Stabilizing indigenous cultures are collapsing a daily
basis.

 

Lastly, there is a political crisis, characterized by
crumbling State health systems that manage to cover barely
20 per cent of the health-care needs of the population,
almost 30 years after independence.

My delegation believes that the solution to the
problem of AIDS involves, at least in part, the search for
answers to each of the crises that affect the continent.
Dr. Piot made a similar comment this morning. It is clear
that to conquer AIDS, the international community must
implement a global and coordinated strategy. In this
respect, our thinking could focus on three questions. First,
how do we organize health services in order to deal with
the AIDS epidemic, especially the explosion in health-care
costs? Secondly, how do we manage the ethical problems
relating to people who are HIV-positive or who have
AIDS? Thirdly, what communications policies can be
adopted to encourage the individual to adopt new sexual
behaviour?

African countries are already tackling the AIDS
problem. Useful experience has been gained in different
areas. In Mali, the Government has implemented a short-
term plan, covering the period 1997-1999, and two
medium-term plans covering the period 1989-1998, and a
10-year health development plan, covering the years 1998-
2007. These plans, like other experiences and experiments
in different parts of the continent, involve innovative
measures to take the problem of AIDS out of the realm of
medicine and to socialize it. It is essential that such efforts
be stepped up.

In this context, we can identify three main areas for
action. The first relates to the decentralization of the
struggle against AIDS. More or less everywhere throughout
the continent non-governmental associations and
organizations have shown proof of their dynamism and
commitment to the fight against AIDS. They have begun to
use new methods of social mobilization that address
different age categories and initiation rights. The second
area relates to the definition of an institutional framework
to resolve legal and ethical problems related to AIDS. This
is also essential if we are to maintain a society that is
united in the struggle against the pandemic. The third area
involves identifying new channels of communication so as
to prompt individuals to change their patterns of behaviour.

Because of its extraordinary complexity, AIDS
requires the commitment of individuals and of society, of
the elite and of communities in general. The challenge that
it poses to humankind is an incentive for commitment
which must be unwavering, because the very survival of
humankind is at stake. Africa, burdened by its many
handicaps, is facing a tragic situation. That is why it
needs international solidarity in order for it to make full
use of its own fighting capacities. In that respect, my
delegation fully supports the initiative of the UNAIDS
programme, which is intending to implement an
international partnership against HIV/AIDS in Africa.
That partnership will need the international community to
mobilize with the main objective of dealing with the
disease so as to reduce significantly its human, social and
economic cost in Africa.

