Mr. Orneus: I have the honour to deliver the
following statement on behalf of Ambassador Anders
Liden, Chair of the country-specific configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission on Burundi.

"I would like to thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to participate in today's meeting on
Burundi in my capacity as Chair of the Burundi
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. As I noted back in December, the
close collaboration between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission on Burundi is
essential, not least as peace and stability in Burundi
are a key building block for peace and stability in
the Great Lakes region as a whole.
"I undertook a Visit to Burundi just a few
weeks ago, from 25 to 27 May. The purpose of the
visit was to assess progress in the peacebuilding
process and to identify key priorities for further
engagement by the Peacebuilding Commission,
including in the elections in 2010. I met with
national and international stakeholders, including
the President of the Republic, the Independent
National Electoral Commission and the South
African Facilitator, as well as representatives from
civil society, political parties and international
partners.

"Peacebuilding in Burundi has clearly entered
a new phase. There has been impressive progress in
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process. All children formerly associated
with the Forces nationales de liberation (FNL) have
been released and reunited with their families, and
the FNL will participate in the upcoming elections
as a political party. I congratulate the Government
of Burundi and the FNL on these achievements.

"At the same time, there are remaining
challenges related to the peace process, in
particular the completion of the DDR process. I
welcome the Partnership for Peace in Burundi
and I encourage continued leadership by South
Africa, the Regional Initiative and the African
Union in order to sustain achievements made and
to ensure a successful peace process.

"In view of Burundi's entering a new chapter
in its peacebuilding process, the Peacebuilding
Commission can now start to shift its attention
towards support to longer-term socio-economic
reintegration and to the challenges related to the
elections in 2010. Many ex-combatants and other
demobilized people will need assistance for their
long-term socio-economic reintegration. Such
efforts should also target other groups affected by
the war, including returnees and internally displaced
people. The Peacebuilding Commission will help to
mobilize support once the comprehensive strategy
for durable socio-economic reintegration has been
finalized by the Government, in consultation with
partners.

"During my visit, I witnessed a firm
commitment by the Government and all national
stakeholders to free and fair elections in 2010. At
the same time, concern was raised about insecurity
5
in the electoral process. There are recent reports of
politically motivated violence. In this regard, there
is a pressing need for support to further
professionalize the police and to strengthen the
justice sector.

"The Independent National Electoral
Commission enjoys broad support and trust among
Burundians, but it urgently needs basic equipment,
as well as firrther political, technical and financial
support. Other national partners, such as the media,
civil society, women's organizations and national
observers, are also in acute need of support.

"There is broad agreement in Burundi that
the international community needs to support and
accompany the electoral process. In this regard, I
particularly welcome the request of the Government
of Burundi to the United Nations for support before,
during and after the elections. The Peacebuilding
Commission can help set the agenda for
international support to the elections, contribute to
the coordination of international efforts and ensure
that support is demand-driven, as well as mobilize
additional resources when gaps emerge. A thematic
meeting of the Peacebuilding Commission will soon
be organized to discuss the support required and the
conditions necessary for free and fair elections, as
well as to further identify the role of the
Commission in support of the elections.

"Sustained international attention and support
are crucial to consolidating peace and to
contributing to long-term development in Burundi.
In order to further enhance the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission, I have encouraged
relevant stakeholders in Bujumbura to activate a
local platform of the Commission. A stronger link
between the processes at the country level and here
in New York will further improve the effectiveness
and relevance of our support.

"Finally, allow me to commend the
Government of Burundi and all national
stakeholders for their constructive engagement in
the peacebuilding process. Let me also use this
occasion to recognize the important role of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi in
support of the peace process and of the broader
peacebuilding agenda. The integrated United
Nations presence in Burundi, together with the
strategic leadership of the Executive Representative
of the Secretary-General, will continue to be vital to
effective support for peacebuilding."

