Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): My colleagues informed me that in my absence
Mr. Heusgen, our colleague from Germany, asked me
some questions. I do not see him in the Chamber, but I
hope that my responses will be conveyed to him. I will
be very brief. By the way, Mr. President, this may be
the result of the interaction that you have promoted here
in the Chamber, but in my understanding, interactivity
still implies making it clear that I should be asked
questions when I am in the Chamber, not when I am
at another event with the Secretary-General. That is,
unless it is just from a desire to put one's interlocutor
in an uncomfortable position. I have definitely been
put in a somewhat uncomfortable position, considering
that on the eve of the seventy-fifth anniversary of our
Organization it now falls to the representative of Russia
to explain to the representative of Germany what the
Nuremberg trials were and why they were a good thing.
However, I will try to do it as briefly as possible.

I want to affirm that we consider the Nuremberg
trials to be a model ofinternationaljustice in punishing
war criminals who had unleashed an aggressive,
predatory war, especially on the territory of the Soviet
Union. To be honest, it is true that I did not think that
the purpose of our meeting was making an excursion
into recent history. However, if we are talking about the

present day, then everything that has happened in the
past few years post-Nuremberg seems more by way of
reprisals against various regimes or political opponents
that someone does not care for. For example, the
conclusion of the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) was an attempt to alter reality based
on previously established verdicts. Suffice it to point
out how the ICTY prosecuted the Kosovo-Albanians'
case. We promise to explain the whole thing to the
Permanent Representative of Germany, Mr. Heusgen,
at December's upcoming briefing on the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. At the
same time we can go into detail about the project
for the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and Specialist
Prosecutor's Office sponsored by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, which for a ninth year
has been unable to begin investigating the facts of the
large-scale removal of vital organs and other crimes
committed by Kosovo militants.

As for the International Criminal Court, one
shameful decision about the refusal to investigate the
coalition's crimes in Afghanistan, ostensibly in the
interests of justice, is sufficient to show that it has
forever parted company with its reputation.

I am sure that our German colleagues are perfectly
familiar with all of these facts. Frankly, therefore, their
almost masochistic desire to hear them again and again
is astounding. And it definitely does not strengthen the
approaches they advocate.

