Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): Let me begin by
expressing my condolences to the Government and
people of Somalia and to the families of the victims of
this morning's terrible terrorist attack.

I would also like to align myself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union (EU).

In 2025, two-thirds of the world's population will
face water scarcity, and 2.4 billion will face absolute
water scarcity, to the extent that it may impede, or
even reverse, economic and social progress. There
are numerous examples where transboundary waters
have proved to be a source of cooperation rather than
conflict, as is the case in my own country, for instance.
However, greater scarcity in the future, owing to
economic and population growth, combined with cross-
border pollution and climate change, may well alter that
dynamic.

The increasing scarcity of water is just one aspect
of the relationship between conflict prevention and
natural resources. I would therefore like to thank the
United Kingdom for putting the relationship between
conflict prevention and natural resources on today's
agenda. Let me start by briefly reviewing three events
of the past week, which I believe are all relevant to our
debate today.

Last Monday, the International Energy Agency
presented its latest report, entitled "Redrawing the
Energy-Climate Map", which shows that the path we are
currently on is likely to result in a temperature increase
of between 3.6 and 53°C, far above the maximum of
2°C we had agreed on.

The second relevant event was last Wednesday. The
European Parliament approved the new EU Accounting

and Transparency Obligations Directives, which include
financial transparency requirements for the extractive
and forestry sector.

Thirdly, Friday saw the publication of the United
Nations report World Population Prospects, the 2012
Revision. The report projects that the current world
population of 7.2 billion will reach 9.6 billion by 2050.
The resulting increase in consumption will put even
greater pressure on natural resources.

In October, the World Resources Forum organized
a conference in Beijing that focused on the need for
better international resource governance, which leads
to greater stability and lower prices. The Netherlands
was among those countries that proposed considering
the establishment of a neutral international forum on
resources, particularly metals and minerals, comparable
to the already existing International Energy Forum.
Such a forum should involve countries that produce,
trade or consume resources.

In March, the Netherlands hosted the annual
meeting of the participants in the Voluntary Principles
on Security and Human Rights initiative in the
extractive industries. In that multi-stakeholder initiative
we engaged in a dialogue on security and human
rights. Together we have developed a set of voluntary
principles to guide companies in maintaining the safety
and security of their operations within an operating
framework that ensures respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms. As stated by the United
Kingdom in its concept note for this debate (S/20l3/334, annex), the Ruggie Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights have provided a common framework
since their endorsement by the Human Rights Council
in 2011. The Netherlands is fully committed to their
integral implementation.

Let me end by citing a practical example of a
contribution the Netherlands has made to preventing
conflicts related to natural resources. The armed
conflicts in the mineral-rich eastern provinces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have often been
described in their relation to income from the illicit
trade in minerals. To contribute to the shared goal of
regulating the flow of conflict minerals, with the aim
of preventing further armed conflict, the Netherlands
has created a conflict-free tin-supply chain. That pilot
initiative was launched in October and has already
resulted in the first exports of conflict-free tin. The
Netherlands Development Cooperation financed a local
non-governmental organization (NGO), Pact, which
tags and traces the tin ore. Dutch diplomats served
as neutral brokers to bring the whole international
supply chain together, from mining cooperatives in a
validated conflict-free mine in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to exporters, to a
Malaysian smelter - because there are no tin smelters
in Africa - and to companies such as Philips, Tata
Steel, Motorola Solutions, Nokia and FairPhone. Those
exports have led to the first certified conflict-free
earnings from tin exports in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

That initiative builds on the expertise and skills
of many organizations. It involves a multi-stakeholder
approach in which the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, NGOs, the Tin Research
Institute in London, Germany's Geological Service
and the United States Agency for International
Development were also involved. It is just one example
of what is possible, and more is needed. The debate
here today will help us to build on such initiatives. It
should promote further cooperation, resulting in an
all-inclusive process at all stages of the value chain of
natural resources, thereby contributing to preventing
conflicts and improving livelihoods in resource-rich
countries.

