Mr. Jagne (Gambia): Let me at the outset express my
delegation's gratitude to the delegation of the United
Kingdom for the timely initiative taken to come up with the
draft resolution before us, geared towards the establishment
of a United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL). Such a mission, in our View, will complement
the efforts of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). It will
be seen as a mutually reinforcing partnership in the
implementation of the plan for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration.

While not wishing to blow our own trumpet, we have
to admit that ECOMOG has been playing its peacekeeping
role in a manner that deserves not only praise but also our
continued support in the form of logistics and material
supplies. In this context, we would like to thank the United
States and all other countries which have been helping
ECOMOG in one way or another. This is all the more
necessary as there is still some resistance in certain parts of
the country by elements of the misguided erstwhile junta
and the notorious Revolutionary United Front (RUF) rebels
in their unholy alliance to continue to wreak maximum
havoc.

Against this background, and considering that
UNOMSIL will not have a force of its own, the success
of the Mission will depend to a large extent on the
strength of ECOMOG both quantitatively and
qualitatively. In fact, UNOMSIL will be deployed to
secure areas only and it is ECOMOG which will provide
the much-needed security.

That said, the fact remains that the establishment of
UNOMSIL is a welcome development that should serve
as a moral boost for the Government of Ahmad Tejan
Kabbah and the people of Sierra Leone. We note with
appreciation the efforts being made by the Government of
Sierra Leone to consolidate its authority throughout the
country to the extent possible, at the same time pursuing
the important and difficult task of national reconciliation,
reconstruction and rehabilitation.

It is our fervent hope that the convening of a high-
level conference to mobilize assistance for Sierra Leone
will send the right signals to all Sierra Leoneans to speed
up the process of national reconciliation. This does not
exclude either the RUF rebels or the remnants of the
ousted junta, who should now seize the opportunity
offered to them to lay down their arms honourably, and
to contribute constructively to the rebirth of their nation.

My delegation would also like to hail, as another
moral boost, the mini-summit held recently in Abuja at
the initiative of the Secretary-General, bringing together
President Taylor and President Kabbah. We would like to
commend the Secretary-General and the new Nigerian
leadership for convening such an important meeting,
which will no doubt strengthen confidence-building
measures between the two neighbouring countries. It is
gratifying to note that the non-aggression pact within the
framework of the Mano River Union was evoked during
the Abuja meeting.

All these developments augur well for the Observer
Mission that we are about to establish in Sierra Leone.
My delegation will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us.

