Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on Peru's
assumption of the presidency of the Council this month,
and to wish you every success. I thank you for giving
me the opportunity to address the Council, and I would
also like to sincerely thank the Secretary-General for
his direct engagement in the quest for a settlement
of the situation in Yemen. I commend the direct role
that he has played in guaranteeing the success of the
conference held in Geneva at the beginning of this
month in order to finance the United Nations plan to
meet the humanitarian needs in Yemen.

I also thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, for his first briefing to the
Council, as he begins his efforts to resolve the now
nearly four-year-long crisis in Yemen. The crisis
resulted from a coup led by Houthi militias against the
legitimate Government in Yemen, which at the time was
leading a transition in line with the noble and legitimate
aspirations of the entire Yemeni people of all political
stripes, under the auspices of the United Nations and
the Council. My Government supports the efforts
of Mr. Griffiths. He can count on our collaborative,
constructive and flexible cooperation in the efforts to
achieve a lasting peace in Yemen and to put an end to
the current chaos and the war that the Houthis launched
against our people in September 2014.

There are specific terms of reference for a settlement
in Yemen, unlike some other crises in the world, and,
as the Special Envoy said, they are clear. Through their
allies and friends, the Houthi Iranian militias have tried
to undermine those terms of reference. They thought
they had seized power that they would never let go.
They thought they could attack the Yemeni people
and our neighbours and use the chaos and violence to
impose Iran's expansionist agenda. Any acceptance of
those Houthi militias as the guarantors of security in
Yemen and stability in the region is a clear example of
the politics of despair. Neither Yemen nor any country
represented here can accept the possibility that our
political life might be managed by an armed militia
that, like the terrorist militia Hizbullah, is supported
financially and logistically by another country.

That is why the Yemeni Government has always
expressed its readiness to cooperate with the Special
Envoy, in accordance with the terms of reference agreed
on by the Yemeni people and with the legal backing of
the international community. That includes the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and implementation
mechanism; the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference sponsored by the United Nations in 2013,
resulting in a reconciliatory document that reflected the
aspirations of Yemeni society; and, lastly, the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, particularly
resolution 2216 (2015), which constitutes the main basis
for a resolution of the crisis in Yemen and shows that
the Security Council understands the essence of the
problem in Yemen. This solution remains the only way
to establish lasting peace in the country.

We met in Kuwait in the first half of 2016. At the
time, the Yemeni Government was genuinely ready to
implement resolution 2216 (2015). We demonstrated
a spirit of conciliation and signed accords aimed
at reaching an eventual comprehensive political
agreement. However the Houthis were not willing to
sign the accords, as Mr. Ould Sheikh Ahmed said during
his most recent briefing of the Council in February
(see S/PV.8191). Previously, we had met in Biel,
Switzerland. Back then, the Yemeni Government called
for the adoption of confidence-building measures, but
the Houthis rejected them. Those measures are again in
the spotlight.

Today, as has been said, the ports, the airports,
salaries and the release of prisoners are all priority
issues. If the perpetrators of the coup were aware of the
gravity of the humanitarian situation which they caused
for Yemen and its people, then we could work together
under the auspices of the Special Envoy to discuss many
issues, some of which were already discussed in Biel,
such as the release of all prisoners and taking immediate
action to improve the humanitarian situation by lifting
restrictions on humanitarian access and ending attacks
on humanitarian workers so as to allow them safe
and unimpeded access to all areas. Other issues that
we discussed in Biel could also be discussed. Those
include steps towards economic recovery to alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people, help the central
bank to stabilize the Yemeni riyal, pay salaries, improve
the financial, economic and investment situation and
facilitate food imports. That is our focus today.

The Yemeni Government welcomes the proposal
made by Martin Griffiths during his meeting with
the President last week to open Sana'a airport for
humanitarian cases. He called for the opening of the
airport under the supervision of the United Nations and
for the withdrawal of the militias from it. That issue
has been brought up previously by the Government.
However, we still believe that the situation cannot
be normalized without an end to the coup and the
restoration of State institutions.

The Security Council has shown unity since the
beginning of the Yemeni crisis in 2011. We call on the
Council and on Mr. Martin Griffiths to focus above all
on the Houthis' compliance with the Security Council
resolutions. The Houthis must not benefit from their
crimes against humanity. That would only embolden
other militias around the world and lead to the spread
of terrorism and chaos. In order to achieve peace in
Yemen, the Houthi militias must first withdraw from the
cities and the State institutions that they have occupied
and pillaged. They must return the weaponry that they
stole from the military and State security institutions,
as well as and especially the ballistic missiles that
were provided to them by Iran. They must end their
aggression against the territories of Saudi Arabia and
stop carrying out the functions of the State. They
must stop committing one of the gravest violations of
international law, namely, the recruitment of children.
That is the only way to ensure lasting peace.

The Iranian regime continues its flagrant
interference in the internal affairs of Yemen and other
countries ofthe region. The Yemeni Government and the
Saudi Arabia-led coalition have sent a number of letters
to the Security Council and the Secretary-General with
regard to the attacks by Iranian-made ballistic missiles.
Some 119 missiles have been launched by the Houthi
militias against Saudi Arabia to date. That is clear proof
that Iran is a State that sponsors terrorism and seeks to
destabilize all the countries of the region.

On 11 April, the Yemeni Government also issued
a statement concerning the Iranian Embassy in Sana'a,
which continues to operate. Today it functions as a
command centre for the Iranian regime to hold meetings
between Iranian military experts and the coup forces.
That is happening despite the fact that the Yemeni
Government and Iran ceased diplomatic relations on
2 October 2015, and despite the letter sent by the Yemeni
Government on 6 January 2016, after having verified
that Iran had not closed its Embassy in Yemen. In that
letter, the Yemeni Government informed the Iranian
regime that it had not complied with the decision to
end relations between the two Governments. We gave
the Iranian regime 72 hours to leave Yemen. However,
despite all those communications, the terrorist Iranian
elements of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps
continue to use the Embassy to cover up their military
and training activities in order to support the Houthis in
clear violation of international law.

The Security Council has failed to put pressure on
Iran to end its interference in Yemeni affairs and its
threat to regional security and stability. It has failed to
compel Iran to stop smuggling missiles and threatening
international navigation south of the Red Sea and Bab
Al-Mandab.

The humanitarian situation in Yemen continues to
deteriorate into a humanitarian crisis unprecedented in
the twenty-first century. The areas of Yemen controlled
by the Houthis have been systematically destroyed,
which has ledto horrific levels of humanitarian suffering.
Today, as we discuss international efforts to address
the humanitarian crisis in Yemen, we commend the
outcome of the Geneva conference convened on 3 April
by the Secretary-General, together with Switzerland
and Sweden. At the conference, $2.1 billion was pledged
for the humanitarian response plan for Yemen for 2018,
which will require $3 billion. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Governments of Switzerland
and Sweden for organizing the conference. I would also
like to thank Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates
and Kuwait, as well as all the other countries that made
generous contributions to assist the Yemeni people.

I cannot but commend the efforts of Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, to transform the work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and to improve
the performance of the humanitarian agencies in
Yemen and all the relevant parties in order to ensure
the delivery of humanitarian assistance throughout
Yemen. The Yemeni Government has sent letters to
the Secretary-General regarding the obstacles facing
humanitarian workers created by the Houthi militias.
The letters describe the looting of humanitarian
assistance. The latest such letter was sent from the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
to the Secretary-General regarding the complaint by the
Federation of International Civil Servants' Associations
to the assistant of the Under-Secretary-General about
the blackmailing and attacks by the Houthis against
United Nations staff.

The Houthi militias are taking advantage of the
humanitarian crisis in Yemen as an excuse to portray
themselves as victims. Yesterday, I met the Special
Envoy. We talked about the garbage accumulating
in the streets of Sana'a, which could lead to another
cholera outbreak. It seems that this practice is being
undertaken systematically in order to unleash an
outbreak of cholera. We hold the Houthis accountable
for that. As the Under-Secretary-General said, another
outbreak of cholera in Yemen would pose yet another
challenge for the international community.

I have warned more than once against focusing
on the humanitarian aspect of the situation in Yemen
in the absence of a political solution and the failure of
the international community to pressure the Houthis
to come to the negotiating table and to implement the
provisions of resolution 2216 (2015). Following the
success of the Geneva conference, we cannot expect
the international community to continue to provide
such generous contributions in the coming years in the
absence of a political resolution. I call on the Council
to put pressure on the coup party, which continues to
reject the peace initiatives. It must be criminalized
before the world.

In conclusion, the Yemeni people beseech the
members of the Council to stand by them at this critical
historic moment, as has been their hope since the
beginning of the political crisis in Yemen in 2011. The
Yemeni people will never forget the noble positions that
Council members have taken on ending the war and the
coup, with a view to enabling Yemen to become a new
democratic and federal State that can embrace all its
people, provide assistance on the humanitarian front
and work towards regional and international stability
and security.

The meeting rose at 12.10p.m.
