Mr. Juppe (France) (spoke in French): We meet
today so that the Security Council can shoulder its
responsibility towards a people that is suffering, in a
region where peace is threatened by the bloody
downward spiral of a regime gasping its last. The
months-long silence of the Council is no longer
acceptable. To its credit, the League of Arab States is
here today to urge the Council to return to its
responsibilities. France solemnly calls on the Council
to live up to the mission entrusted to it by the United
Nations Charter, by coming to the aid of a people and a
region that want nothing more than peace and respect
for their dignity.

The Arab League has taken action and done all it
can to meet the demands of the situation by suspending
Syria from the League, sending an observer mission
and proposing a plan for political transition. I
commend the League's courageous engagement in the
Syrian conflict. I welcome the presence here today of
its Secretary-General, Mr. Nabil Elaraby, and of the
Prime Minister of Qatar, Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin
J abr Al-Thani, and I thank them for the briefings they
just gave us. I also commend the Kingdom of
Morocco's decision to place a draft resolution before
us, which France fully supports. I commend the
collective efforts of all the States of the Arab League. I
am well aware that decisions on the Syrian situation
are particularly difficult to make and to put into action
for some of them, if only because of their proximity to
Damascus.

Today, I repeat, we meet to put an end to the
scandalous silence of the Security Council. Indeed, I
call it scandalous, and I will try to explain what I mean
by that.
What is the current situation in Syria? A people
has risen up to defend its liberty. Words are inadequate
to describe the horror of the brutal repression. To say
that it is worsening or that it is tragic does not come
close to the reality. According to the United Nations,
5,400 are dead. According to UNICEF, 384 children
have been murdered. There are 15,000 prisoners,
15,000 refugees and daily torture.

I have long called some of the regime's actions
crimes against humanity. The international commission
of inquiry of the Human Rights Council corroborates
that view. Beyond the statistics, the faces of children
tortured, the bodies of women violated and the
thousands of human victims of repression should guide
our actions. The humanitarian situation is deteriorating
day by day. What level of horror must be reached for
the Council to enforce a stop to human rights violations
and ensure free access to humanitarian assistance?

Every State has the responsibility to protect its
civilian population. Not content with not protecting its
civilians, the Syrian regime shamefully massacres them
without restraint. That behaviour has direct
consequences on international peace and security.
Thousands of refugees are fleeing the violence; the
sovereignty of neighbouring States is being violated;
inter-community tensions are on the rise - all of
which has a direct impact on the stability of an already
fragile region. Even without reference to the
responsibility to protect, those regional consequences
are enough to establish the Council's responsibility.

How can this even be up for discussion? France
has not stopped calling for the Council to work towards
decisions and to put them to the vote. Those calls have
been unsuccessful, with the exception of presidential
statement S/PRST/2011/16 of 3 August 2011. Is that
acceptable? I do not think so. Is it scandalous? I am
certain of it.

Of course, we have continued our efforts despite
the Council's silence. The European Union has 11 times
increased the sanctions on the regime and its leaders.
France has worked a great deal on that. We have
established relations with the peaceful opposition. I
have met many times with the Syrian National Council,
a legitimate entity whose efforts to unify the opposition
I commend.

However, the actions of the European Union or
the Arab League, no matter how resolute, cannot
replace action by the Council. By virtue of the
legitimacy conferred on it by the United Nations
Charter, it is the Council that can express
authoritatively the will of the international community.

The Security Council is the keystone of international
peace and security. If it is to remain so, it has the
responsibility to pronounce cases as serious as Syria's.

How can it do so? It can do so by promptly and
with broad support adopting the draft resolution
introduced by Morocco. That text delivers the Council's
support to the Arab League, which, strengthened by the
crucial involvement of regional actors, is currently the
only body to offer a realistic approach to a political
resolution.

There are two essential elements to the draft
resolution. First, it unequivocally condemns the
repression carried out by the regime, without falling
into the trap of a false comparison between that
repression and the actions of the opposition on the
ground. If a minority resorts to violence, the vast
majority of Syrians who demonstrate do so barehanded
in the streets, as compared with the indiscriminate
violence of the regime. We respectfully pay tribute to
those Syrian men and women who every day march for
their freedom, knowing that the repression's bullets
could kill them at any moment.

Because it was mentioned, I want to honour the
memory of Gilles J acquier, the French journalist killed
as he carried out his work. I will not allow his death to
be exploited. The Syrian authorities had the duty to
provide him all necessary protection; clearly, they did
not do so. The report of the observer mission before us
(S/2012/71, enclosure 4) does not go into the exchange
of fire that caused the death of my countryman. Yes,
the report says that the journalist was killed by lethal
fire from the opposition, but that idea is not endorsed
by the Arab League and we are still waiting for the
Syrian authorities to shed every possible light on the
incident.

The second essential element of the Arab League's
proposal is that it offers the Council's support to the
Arab League's initiative in all three of its main aspects:
the demand for an end to violence, the call for free
access for the observers, and, especially, for the first
time, the articulation of a credible political transition
process. It will be up to the Arab League to implement
it. Our responsibility is to help it by sending the clear
message to the Syrian regime that the international
community is united in support of the Arab efforts.
Of course, we would have liked to see the
Council go further, but we need a rapid response to
finally open the way to a resolution to this horrifying
crisis. We are therefore prepared to vote now on the
text proposed by Morocco.

Some have drawn an analogy with the conflict in
Libya. That is a pretext. It is alleged that there is a plan
for a military intervention in Syria. That is a myth.
Absolutely nothing in the draft resolution distributed to
Council members by the Permanent Representative of
Morocco can be construed as an authorization of the
use of force. The draft does not fall under Chapter VII.
We are not preparing any military operation.

The tragedy of the Syrian people is sufficient
justification for our action. Our goal is simple - to
find a peaceful way out of the crisis that would allow
the Syrian people to freely express their aspirations.
Syrian society and its various components - and no
one else - must freely determine the future. We have
no intention of imposing a political regime from the
outside. The Arab League offers the only viable
prospect for achieving that goal. Let us grasp it. Let us
rise above our differences and support the plan
submitted today. Let us live up to our responsibilities
and to the political and moral duty that falls to us from
the peaceful uprising of the Syrian people inspired by
the momentum of the Arab Spring.

There is no time to lose. In less than a year, more
than 5,000 lives have been lost to the repression. Each
week squandered means hundreds more deaths - each
day, dozens more. In the memory of all the victims, I
urge the members of the Council to vote immediately
in favour of the text so that a political process can
begin to put an end to the Syrian nightmare.

