I would like to take this opportunity to express my deepest condolences on the passing away of Mr. Saeb Erekat, Secretary General of the Executive Committee of the Palestinian Liberation Organization, and my heartfelt sympathies to the Palestinian Government and people and Mr. Erekat's family. Mr. Erekat's lifelong devotion to Palestinian national liberation and the settlement of the Palestinian issue through peaceful negotiations won him great respect throughout the world. As a long-time friend of the Chinese people, he was actively engaged in promoting China- Palestine friendship. I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. The question of Palestine is at the root of Middle East instability. Many people like Mr. Erekat have dedicated their entire lives to the pursuit of a solution. As Secretary-General Guterres said, the international community should continue its crucial work, push to end the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East. We must stay the course of taking forward the political settlement based on the two-State solution. The relevant resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the two-State solution, epitomizing the wisdom and efforts of many generations, remain an important foundation for resolving the Palestinian issue. However the international situation evolves, they must be observed and implemented, and there should be no turning back. Resolution 2334 (2016) unequivocally defined settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territories as violations of international law that undermine the prospects for a two-State solution. China supports resolving the issue of the occupied territories in the West Bank in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions and defining the final border between Palestine and Israel through peaceful negotiations. We call on all the parties concerned to refrain from unilateral actions that might aggravate the conflict. In particular, there is a need to abandon annexation plans and stop settlement activities in the occupied territories. The relevant parties should abide by the understanding reached in late August, cease fire, stop violence and avoid an escalation of tensions in the Gaza Strip. We need to further coordinate and facilitate international peace efforts. During the recent general debate of the Fourth Committee, Member States expressed their views on the situation the Middle East and the Palestinian question and once again set out their expectations for the realization of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East. The international community, especially countries with influence on Palestine and Israel, should adopt an objective and impartial, position, actively promote peace and dialogue and make genuine efforts conducive to the Middle East peace process. Any initiative or plan concerning the Palestinian issue must take into account the voices of regional countries and organizations, especially Palestine, and heed the concerns of all the parties. No plan that deviates from the path of peace in the Middle East will succeed in bringing about lasting peace. Imposed solutions simply will not work. We have noted that President Abbas' proposal for an international peace conference to be held early next year has received positive responses from parties. The international community should strengthen coordination to forge synergy for multilateral peace efforts. We should put people first and improve the economic and humanitarian situation in Palestine. According to United Nations statistics, since the beginning of this year, 689 Palestinian structures have been demolished, reaching a record high. At the beginning of this month, 76 Palestinian structures were demolished in the West Bank, leaving more than 70 people homeless, over half of them children. China is deeply concerned about this and calls for the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) and ending the demolition of Palestinian homes, the destruction of Palestinian property and violence against civilians. The coronavirus disease pandemic has dealt a heavy blow to the economic and social development of Palestine. We encourage Palestine and Israel to address the problem of tax revenues through consultations and urge the lifting of the blockade of the Gaza Strip. We welcome the Palestinian Authority's decision to resume security and civilian cooperation with Israel. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) provides education, medical and other essential services to more than 5 million Palestinian refugees, while making important contributions to improving the humanitarian situation in Palestine. The Agency now faces massive financial strains. We are deeply worried and echo the Secretary-General's call for the international community to honour its commitments and scale up support for the Agency. China has actively supported the Agency's work and has increased its annual contributions to the Agency several times. Last month, the health kits donated by China to refugees, both inside and outside Palestine, arrived in the relevant countries. These health kits, containing personal protective equipment, will be distributed through UNRWA to Palestinian refugees in Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. The consignments of anti-pandemic supplies donated by China to UNRWA medical facilities have left port. These are concrete efforts attesting to China's support for Palestine and other Arab countries in fighting the coronavirus disease pandemic, as well as support for United Nations agencies. As a sincere friend of the Palestinian people, China firmly supports their just cause and aspirations to establish a fully sovereign and independent State of Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We will continue to do all we can to assist Palestine in fighting the pandemic, developing its economy and improving its people's livelihoods. We will continue to make positive contributions to achieve an early, comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Palestinian question.
