Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Shearer, Assistant Secretary-
General Gilmour and Ms. Minagano for their briefings.

Although the implementation of the 2018
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution ofthe Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan remains slow, the
United States acknowledges that the parties continue
to respect the ceasefire in most parts of the country.
We also note the consensus approach to extending the
pre-transition phase.

Nevertheless, the potential for peace remains
unfulfilled. Gross human rights violations and abuses
persist, particularly in the Equatorias. Violent clashes
continue to break out across the country. And by the
end of July, nearly 7 million South Sudanese - more
than 60 per cent of the population 4 will face severe
levels of acute food insecurity, or worse, because of a
human-made crisis.

With the reduction in violence, humanitarian
workers are better able to prepare for, and take on, the
hunger season, as they have increased access to South
Sudanese in need. However, there remain ongoing
obstacles to the international community's ability to
assist with that effort and support the peace process
overall. The Government must adhere to its obligations
under the status-of-forces agreement to allow full
and unrestricted freedom of movement for the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).

We are also concerned that, while there is increasing
stability around the country, the Government continues
to restrict key political and civic freedoms. In fact,
that seems to have escalated since the signing of the
agreement. There can be no real implementation of
the agreement without true respect for the liberties
guaranteed in South Sudan's own Constitution. We
stress the need for face-to-face meetings between
Salva Kiir and Rick Machar, keeping in mind the
12 November date for the establishment of the
transitional Government.

We are deeply disappointed by the verdict in the
case of Peter Biar Ajak and five other men, just days
after the Government of South Sudan took an important
step by ratifying the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights. The Government must guarantee
citizens' freedom of expression, as stipulated in the
Covenant, and abide by fair-trial guarantees.

The flow of weapons into South Sudan is another
area of concern. We look forward to a day when peace
in South Sudan negates the need for an arms embargo.
But in the meantime, we welcome its renewal and call
on the international community, and on the region in
particular, to uphold the South Sudan sanctions regime
and help make peace more profitable than war in
South Sudan.

The Revitalized Agreement is central to the shift
from war to peace. As a first step, the signatories will
have to move beyond quarrels over procedure and
instead use the remaining time during the extension
period to make real progress. That means first coming
to an agreement on security arrangements, including
protection for opposition members of the transitional
Government. It means ensuring the work of the
Independent Boundaries Commission does not become
a flashpoint for more violence. It means allowing
UNMISS to fulfil its mandate to protect civilians.

It also means the Government of South Sudan's
delivering on its $100 million pledge to expedite the
implementation of pre-transition tasks in a timely
and transparent fashion. It means implementing
the transitional justice provisions of the agreement,
including engaging with the African Union to establish
the hybrid court. And it means the opposition's pressing
ahead with overdue tasks, such as moving its forces into
cantonment and proceeding with combined training.
The United States calls on the South Sudanese
parties who did not sign the agreement to renounce
violence, adhere to cessation of hostilities agreements
and seek political resolution to concerns about the peace
agreement. We also call on the signatories to engage with
such parties in a non-violent and constructive manner.

The efforts described are not simple, but there is
evidence, particularly at the local level, that the parties
can compromise and accomplish important results
when they choose to work together. The alternative - a
return to conflict and the loss of more South Sudanese
lives - is intolerable. The South Sudanese people
have already paid a devastating price for the war their
leaders imposed on them.

We are convinced that the continued engagement
of the region is key to building sustainable peace.
We appeal to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development to stay engaged and appoint a permanent
chair to the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission. We call on the region and the
signatories to ensure the crisis in the Sudan does not
impede the South Sudanese peace process. And we call
on neighbouring countries to crack down on the illicit
flow of financing from South Sudan into their banking
systems and real estate markets.

We urge all parties to follow the positive examples

of collaboration at the local level to fulfil South Sudan's

potential and bring lasting peace and security to the
people of South Sudan.

