Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We are pleased
to see you, Honorable Foreign Minister Aminu Wali,
preside over today's debate on security sector reform
(SSR), which is a testament to Nigeria's consistent and
strong leadership on that important issue. We commend
Ambassador Joy ngu's effective and elegant
stewardship of the Security Council this month.

The Secretary-General's seminal report (S/20l3/480),
the draft resolution to be adopted today and Nigeria's
compact concept note (S/2014/238, annex) all steer
us from policy-making towards implementation,
monitoring and review. As a leading troop-contributing
country, Pakistan has actively supported security sector
reform in various theatres or peacekeeping operations,
including in Sierra Leone, Liberia, Cote d'Ivoire and
Timor-Leste. We, too, can testify that United Nations-
led efforts have dramatically transformed the security
landscape in those countries.

We know from experience that, when security
sector institutions collapse, conflicts erupt or societies
descend into anarchy or strife, the best way to reverse
the Vicious cycle is to restore and strengthen public
security institutions.

Security sector reform has become a core
component of United Nations engagement across
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. SSR rightly targets
institutions dealing with transitional justice, security
and police forces, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, the extension of State authority, arms
control and management and organized crime. That,
in turn, helps in addressing some of the root causes of
conflict.

A professional, effective and accountable security
sector lays the foundation for durable peace, conflict
resolution, development and a prevention of a relapse
into conflict.

We believe that United Nations system-wide
institutionalization and responsibility for the security
sector should be strengthened. We should build on
capacities both in the field and at Headquarters to fully
exploit the United Nations comparative advantages.

SSR should be conceived and implemented in
the overall framework of the rule of law, a viable
and transformative security sector that enjoys the
confidence of the populations and is responsive to their
needs is key to successful transition and exit strategies.

The United Nations peacebuilding architecture
has an important complementary role in promoting
SSR objectives. The General Assembly and its Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations directly
contribute to policy formulation and guidance for
implementation.

The United Nations needs strong partnerships
across the spectrum to enhance the performance of
security sectors. In that context, Pakistan welcomes
the growing consultation and cooperation among the
Security Council, the African Union and subregional
organizations. The United Nations should also deepen
its partnerships with international and regional
financial institutions to make SSR more resilient and
self-sustaining.

There is also the political imperative to have an
inclusive SSR process that establishes the legitimacy
and acceptability of State institutions. Conscious efforts
should be made for early engagement of the national
stakeholders to promote national ownership of security
sector reform and its internalization. The United
Nations and international support must correspond to
the host country's priorities.

Our debate's focus today is better implementation
of SSR mandates and objectives. Implementation
suffers due to a lack of timely and adequate resources.
Pakistan supports the call to prioritize SSR processes in
the missions so that they get the strategic and political
attention as well as adequate and predictable resources
for sustainable SSR. Along with infrastructure, training
and equipment for SSR, attention should also be given
to institutional oversight and governance.

Today's debate complements the thematic debate
organized last week by the President of the General
Assembly on ensuring stable and peaceful societies. Last
week's debate of the intergovernmental negotiations
process, on the relationship between the General
Assembly and the Security Council also underscored
the importance of synergy and coordination between
the two bodies. The crux of those debates was that the
Security Council and the General Assembly must work
in tandem. We fully endorse that view.

