Mr. Antonio: I would like to start by thanking Spain
for inviting the African Union to this very important
debate, and also Minister Alfonso Dastis Quecedo for
making the journey to New York. I would also like to
thank all the ministers and high-level representatives
who have come to the Security Council to debate on
a very important item for the African continent. I
thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his
briefing, and I welcome all the other briefings made
this morning, which were very insightful.

The regional dimension is certainly a very
important one if we are really to tackle this question
and achieve tangible results. As the Council knows,
with the entry into force of the Pelindaba Treaty, Africa
is a nuclear-weapon-free region. The African Union
has always been committed to global disarmament and
non-proliferation efforts. As early as 1964, the first
Summit of the Organization of African Unity adopted
the landmark Cairo Declaration on the Denuclearization
of Africa. That Declaration formed the basis for and
origin of subsequent efforts that culminated in the
adoption of the Treaty of Pelindaba, which established
the continent as a nuclear-weapon-free zone.

It is indeed our view that nuclear-weapon-free zones
remain an instrumental approach to strengthen global
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament norms and
consolidate international efforts towards achieving the
objectives of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT).

I wish to take this opportunity to underscore that
the African Union remains strongly committed to
the three pillars of the NPT, namely, disarmament,
non-proliferation and peaceful applications of nuclear
science and technology, which are all mutually
reinforcing and equally fundamental for the authority
and effectiveness of the regime.

The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) added a
critical and important tool to the global disarmament

and non-proliferation framework. That tool responds
to the changing challenges in the international security
environment and the growing range of actors within it.
With the evolving threat of terrorism and transnational
organized crime, the need to have a robust, effective
and transparent approach to prevent non-State actors
from acquiring, proliferating or using weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery becomes a
necessity and requires collective responsibility.

The threats and risks that resolution 1540 (2004)
aimed to address more than 10 years ago remain
omnipresent. The increasing terrorist attacks in
different regions and intelligence reports from various
States indicate that terrorist groups continue to seek
the material and the technology to construct and deploy
weapons of mass destruction. For those reasons, the
resolution continues to enjoy international consensus
and support, especially in Africa.

In that regard, following the adoption of resolution
1977 (2011) - which extended the mandate of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) - the twentieth ordinary session of the
Assembly of the African Union, held in January 2013,
adopted a decision calling for the full and effective
implementation of the resolution. It also requested the
Commission of the African Union, in collaboration
with the 1540 Committee and the relevant regional
and international partners, to support Member States'
efforts to that end.

The AU Commission has undertaken a number
of activities to give political and practical support to
the implementation of the resolution. Those activities,
combined with the indispensable technical support
provided by the 1540 Committee and partner States and
organizations, have contributed to achieving significant
progress in implementing the resolution. Such a
statement cannot be made without duly recognizing
the strong commitment of Member States themselves
and the leading role they have taken in achieving
that progress. Indeed, without national ownership
and leadership, no effort will produce a long-term,
sustainable impact.

Assistance is a key component in the implementation

of resolution 1540 (2004). Many African countries
continue to face challenges that impact their ability to
dedicate the human and financial resources required
to implement the regional and global disarmament and
security frameworks, including resolution 1540 (2004).
Therefore, we believe that we need to capitalize on the
mandate of the 1540 Committee and resolution 2325
(2016), adopted today, and on the expertise and resources
of partner States and specialized agencies in order
to ensure that gaps and challenges faced by Member
States are well provided for through a consolidated,
well-structured and mutually agreed process.

In conclusion, allow me to state that the African
Union Commission reaffirms its commitment to
collaborate with the African Commission on Nuclear
Energy, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty Organization and the 1540 Committee in
order to enhance the capacities of its member States to
prevent, counter and respond to the global agenda to
stop the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors.

