Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me, at the outset, to welcome to the
Council the representative of Pakistan, who has just
been appointed as an Ambassador to the United Nations.
I would also like to associate myself with the statement
to be made by the Ambassador of the Islamic Repblic
of Iran, who will speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

More than 60 years have passed since Israel
occupied the Palestinian territories. That occupation
has caused more than 5 million Palestinian refugees,
who were chased from their land and had their houses
and property stolen from them. There are those who
want to control their present and their future. As I said,
there have been more than six decades of systematic
settlement activities and grave violations committed by
Israel on a huge scale, including violations of the human
rights of those who are living and those who have
passed away. Violations of our land, of international
humanitarian law and of every existing international
legal standard and code of ethical conduct have been
carried out in the occupied Arab territories.

For more than six decades, the Palestinian people
have awaited the opportunity to exercise their most basic
right, namely, the establishment of a free, independent
sovereign State on the land of their ancestors.
For more than six decades, Israel has defied
international legitimacy, arrogantly carrying out its
aggressive policies in order to impede any opportunity
for achieving peace in the region. That situation has
continued due to the direct assistance provided to it by
a number of powerful countries that can be found here
in the Council, as well as others, of course, outside of
the Council.

Despite all of that, some are still in an inquiring
mode, posing naive questions to the international
community in an attempt to determine the parameters
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the Palestinian
issue. Their naivety is quite similar to the attempts
during the Middle Ages to determine the gender of
angels.

My questions for the Council, therefore, are the
following. How many more decades will Arab lands
have to spend under Israeli occupation until some
States finally admit that there is a need for serious
action to end that reprehensible occupation? How
many more innocent Palestinian, Syrian, Lebanese
and other victims will have to die before those States
finally become convinced that this genuine tragedy
must come an end? How many more settlements in
occupied Arab lands will have to be built? How many
separation apartheid walls will have to be erected in our
occupied lands? And how many Islamic and Christian
holy sites will have to be desecrated before those
same States finally wake up and put an end to Israel's
crimes? Were all the reports submitted after dozens
of investigative committees, fact-finding missions
and panels of wise men to the Security Council, the
General Assembly, the Human Rights Council and the
specialized agencies of the United Nations during the
decades-long Israeli occupation not enough to make the
world aware of the scale of the aggression and terror
wrought by Israel upon the States and peoples of the
region? More than 1,000 resolutions have been adopted
by the Organization and its specialized agencies calling
for an end to Israel's occupation and condemning its
serious and systematic violations of human rights. Was
all that not sufficient to make those States feel some
unease about their provision of unlimited military,
economic and political support or to make them put an
end to their illegal assistance to Israel, enabling it to
continue its crimes against the occupied Arab lands?
All of those questions are levelled at those States that
back Israel and claim night and day that they wish to
see international law implemented and that they wish
to fight against terrorism and maintain the credibility
of the United Nations and the inviolability of human
rights.

During the meeting this morning, we have heard
a number of representatives of States backing Israel,
explaining to us their countries' position concerning
human rights laws, international law and peace in our
region. Some of them did so to such an extent that they
simply seemed to forget the agenda item that we are
discussing here today.

The very bitter truth is that part of our land in the
Syrian Golan, which we hold dear to our hearts, has
been under occupation for 45 years now, despite the
fact that the Security Council adopted by majority vote
resolution 497 (1981), declaring Israel's annexation of
the Syrian Golan, occupied in 1967, to be null and void
and without legal basis. The Security Council must live
up to its responsibility, embrace reality in a serious way
and implement resolution 497 (1981) and other relevant
resolutions it has adopted. We say that because not to
do so and to have failed to do so for decades simply
confirms the existence of selective and exceptional
interpretations among some members of the Council
when it comes to the implementation of resolutions
concerning Israel.

The representatives of the Secretariat are first
and foremost tasked with discharging their mandates
by informing the Council in a regular, updated,
transparent and fair way of violations committed by the
occupying Power, Israel, in the occupied Syrian Arab
Golan. We systematically provide information on such
violations to the Secretary-General, most recently when
we presented information to him on the kidnapping of
Syrian citizens from the Syrian side of the ceasefire
line. In addition to that, Israel has conducted large-scale
aggressive and offensive military manoeuvres in the
Syrian Golan, similar to those that have taken place
against Syria before.

The Council has just heard a clear threat by the
representative of Israel that his country was preparing
actively for war in the region. Those who claim
hypocritically that they are concerned about the rights
of the Syrian people during these difficult times cannot
simply ignore that the Syrian people have a right to
recover their occupied lands. They cannot pass over in
silence the tragedy or the suffering of Syrians under the
Israeli occupation of the Golan. Those who claim that
they want to protect the Syrian people cannot pass over
in silence the ongoing construction of settlements in the
Syrian Golan or the erection of an apartheid wall to the
east of the occupied city of Majdal Shams.

Israel's refusal to make maps of minefields available
to international organizations is inexcusable because
cluster munitions and mines that were laid by Israel
in the Golan have claimed 726 Syrian lives, including
those of 227 children. The last such death took place on
4 October, when two Syrian children, both under the
age of 10, died as a result of injuries resulting from the
explosion of a disused Israeli land mine in the Syrian
Golan.

It is quite astonishing to see those who seek security
and stability in the region simply disregard Israel's
threat to regional and international peace and security
by farming the flames of war against countries of the
region and its unbridled attempts to involve its allies
in that war. How can some States simply remain silent
in the light of Israel's acquisition of nuclear weapons
and its decision to remain outside the framework of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons?

Aware that Israel continues to refuse to participate
in the international conference to be held next month
to rid the Middle East of all types of weapons of mass
destruction, we remind the Council that Syria continues
to back the creation of such a nuclear-weapon-free zone.
That support is a reflection of my country's initiative
in 2003 4 when we were members of the Security
Council 4 to free the region of all types of weapons of
mass destruction, first and foremost nuclear weapons.
As the Council knows, those who prevented that
initiative from succeeding are the very same countries
that today refer with such hypocrisy to the dangers of
weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.

Finally, I am forced again to warn against the

frenzied attempts of some delegations that back the
continuation of Israeli occupation of Arab lands to
weaken the well-known historic references of the
agenda item on the Middle East by introducing other
topics into the debate in order to move Security
Coucil deliberations away from the main objective for
which the item was created, namely, to put an end to
Israeli occupation of Arab land, pursuant to Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981). Based
on that, I am not going to respond to the false claims and
allegations levelled at my country by some delegations
during this meeting. I am not going to respond to the
undiplomatic language used, which is not appropriate
to use in this forum.

We must put an end to the implementation of
agendas that we have warned Arabs and non-Arabs
against and ensure that the Council does not get bogged
down in manoeuvres that will reduce to nought the
very essence of the the item under discussion. All of
this would only serve the designs of Israel and those
who protect it. We are aware that we have a great deal
that we could say to refute those allegations, levelled
by the same countries that have spared no effort to
intensify the Syrian crisis and to thwart any peaceful
resolution of it. In brazen violation of international law
and of the Charter of the United Nations, and through
the interference in Syrian domestic affairs, they have
attempted to kidnap the rights of the Syrian people, to
deprive them of their right to freely choose their future
and their political system, and to put an end to all
attempts at comprehensive national dialogue.

Flagrant foreign intervention in Syria's internal
affairs prevents us from achieving national dialogue
and reconciliation, which would enable us to build a
Syria by all Syrians for all Syrians. Furthermore, the
same countries undermine my country's sovereignty by
encouraging terrorism and by supplying and providing
all types of logistical, financial and political support
to armed groups in Syria by providing them with arms
and by recruiting terrorists, foreign terrorists, and
facilitating their transit to Syria.

The greatest paradox here is that the Security
Council has faced the situation in Mali in an appropriate
way 4 and we thank the Security Council for that. All
Council members agreed to confront the terrorism and
extremism that rage in northern Mali today. However,
some members of the Council have decided to deal with
the same kind of terrorism 4 I am referring to that in
Mali 4 in a very different way from that in my country,
Syria, which is introduced through neighbouring
countries. That is a policy of double standards. I urge
the members ofthe Council to ponder that.

