Mr. Osman (Somalia): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council this month.
We are confident in your leadership and wish you
every success in fulfilling your duties. I would also
like to commend your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
for his excellent leadership in guiding the work of the
Council last month.

We warmly congratulate the people of Eritrea for
withstanding the hardship endured under the sanctions
regime. We welcome the lifting of the sanctions on
Eritrea, while acknowledging the efforts spearheaded
by President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo
with regard to the normalization of the relationship
between Eritrea and Djibouti. We hope that the two
Governments will engage in good faith to settle all
outstanding issues in accordance with international law.

Forty-six years ago, my country, Somalia, and
its leaders were uncompromising in their hard work
to achieve sustainable peace, particularly in Africa.
My country successfully promoted and ensured the
peace negotiations during the crisis between Tanzania
and Uganda.

That having been said, the Federal Government of
Somalia looks forward to the beginning ofa new chapter
of cooperation and partnership with all the countries in
the Horn of Africa. Together we will strengthen the ties
that have been forged among the peoples of the region.
Since 1992, the Federal Government of Somalia has
been publicly seeking the lifting of sanctions imposed
on our country. Accordingly, I would like to raise the
following points.

First, the outdated sanctions against Somalia
constitute one of the longest-standing United Nations
sanctions regimes ever imposed and one with the
broadest mandate as well. Not only did the sanctions
violate Somalia's national unity, but it also thwarted the
Federal Government's policy goal ofbuilding a standing
Somali national army. For example, sub-paragraph (a)
of paragraph 11 and sub-paragraph (c) of paragraph
10 of the sanctions regime allow countries to provide
weapons and ammunition to Somali regional authorities
without the Federal Government being notified, thereby
circumventing our approval of these weapons transfers
and impeding the management of end users of such
weapons and ammunition.

Despite our belief that sanctions are flawed in
principle, they continued to be imposed on Somalia
without proper assessment of their effectiveness for the
attainment of the Council's desired end goal. We once
again stress the importance of having clearly defined
benchmarks to monitor the complete lifting of sanctions
on Somalia. If no specific, clear and verifiable steps
are set forth, the incentives to comply with Council's
demands will be undercut and the effectiveness of the
ending the sanctions regime will drastically diminish.

Secondly, terrorist groups like Al-Shabaab and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant remain a serious
threat to Somalia's peace and stability. A year ago,
on 14 October 2017, we witnessed one of the largest
and deadliest attack ever to take place in Somalia.
Yet, sadly, the Somali people are receiving messages
of condolences and sympathy anew from our friends
and partners, following the deadly attack on Mogadishu
on 9 November, which claimed the lives of more than
50 people and injured more than 100. We believe that
Security Council sanctions should target such terrorist
groups as Al-Shabaab, which continue to receive
weapons and resources from abroad. In its report, the
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea concluded
that, with regard to the 14 October attack,

"While there is no evidence to suggest that
the improvised explosive device contained
home-made explosives, constructing a 1,200
kg bomb by traditional harvesting of explosive
remnants of war would entail a major logistical
operation; for example, Al-Shabaab would have
had to harvest approximately 6,000 60-mm mortars
or 190 TM-57 anti-tank mines" (S/2018/1002, para. 74).

Terrorists groups like Al-Shabaab do not go through
the official import channels. Consequently, our fight
against terrorism is all the more challenging since large
quantities of weapons and resources continue to flow
into Somalia despite the embargo. Terrorist groups in
Somalia have made use of the existing trade networks
and the short distance to Somalia from across the Gulf
of Aden. The impact on Somalia of the war in Yemen
has been particularly acute, since we are incapable of
securing remote areas along our coastline and borders.
The flow of illegal weapons and resources into the
country can only be curbed by targeting and destroying
the networks that provide them. We ask our partners
to help us improve our capacity in air surveillance,
borders, customs, and law enforcement to control land
borders and other sea and air access points. It is the
responsibility of the Federal Government of Somalia to
monitor and safeguard its borders.

Thirdly, the construction of the military base in
Berbera clearly defies Council resolutions, and serves to
undermine Somalia's unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity. Two years in a row, the Monitoring Group on
Somalia and Eritrea has noted that the establishment
of the military base in Berbera is a clear violation of
the arms embargo imposed on Somalia. However, the
foreign base continues to be built, with a reported
completion date of 2019, and military equipment
continues to be transferred. We ask Council members
what the purpose of a sanctions regime is if violations
of that regime by Member States are ignored by the
Security Council. We wonder what the value of Council
resolutions is if Somalia's sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity are continually and openly violated.
Over the last quarter century, the Council has issued
a large number of statements on the issue, but that it
is time now to back up those words with appropriate
action pursuant to its primary responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security.

Fourthly, subject-matter expertise and
evidence-based reporting are the best practices to
be used in the monitoring of a United Nations arms
embargo. However, those practices seem not to be
worthy of consideration today. Since the adoption of
its mandate, the Monitoring Group, unlike most Panels
of Experts on sanctions, which are present on the
ground in the countries they monitor, has been based
in Nairobi, Kenya, far from Somalia. As a result, the
Group devotes only 20 per cent of its time to being
present in Somalia to monitor, analyse and investigate
events in the country. Although the number of experts
makes the Somalia group one of the largest United
Nations sanctions regimes, the quality ofits reports has
been mixed owing to the Group's minimal time spent
on site, as well as to the questionable level of technical
and regional expertise.

Furthermore, the Monitoring Group identifies
those working for reform as the primary targets of
the investigation. False accusations, claims based on
weak evidence, gossip and political grievances have
all been used to undermine Somali efforts. The Federal
Government of Somalia will not tolerate Somali
individuals, institutions and organizations being named
in the report with little or no evidence to back up the
reports' assertions. Many individuals and entities
trying to invest in and rebuild Somalia have seen their
reputations irresponsibly damaged or at least called
into question before the international community based
solely on rumour and speculation.

Accordingly, we welcome the name change of the
Panel of Experts. We also recommend that the Panel
be relocated to better perform its mandated tasks.
Moreover, we recommend drawing experts from a
pool of individuals with a higher level of technical
and regional expertise than previously when the Panel
undertakes future investigations in Somalia.

In conclusion, we thank the Security Council for
its continued support of Somalia's unity and progress.
Terrorism is not only a Somali fight; it is also a
regional and a global fight, in which we are all united
so as to be able to counter its ever-changing threat. We
encourage the Council to look beyond the borders of
Somalia and support us in our regional approach to the
threats we are facing. That is the only way that we can
comprehensively defeat terrorism and build a lasting
peace in Somalia and throughout the world.

