Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My thanks go to the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
for his presentation. The varied support of Mr.
Guehenno's department, including the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2001/565), made a most significant contribution to
the success of the Security Council's mission to the
region.

We share the voiced in the report of the
Secretary-General that effective law and order is a high
priority in UNMIK's work. We are pleased to see that
the police and justice pillar of the Mission has been
erected. With the cooperation of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), this will enhance UNMIK's effectiveness. We
endorse the planned appointment of a deputy special
representative of the Secretary-General to head that
structure.

Open meetings on Security Council missions are
very useful for us, enabling us to join with all other
States Members of the United Nations in assessing the
fulfilment of mandates and in hearing first-hand views
of the consequences of conflict.
I thank Ambassador Chowdhury and congratulate
him on the excellent way in which he led the mission.
Thanks to his dedication, the mission attained its goals
in record time. The 15 members of the Security
Council reviewed compliance with resolution 1244
(1999) and, with the various actors, assessed at close
hand UNMIK's achievements and the challenges facing
it, including through meetings with President Putin and
with President Kostunica. The breadth of our meetings
enhanced our understanding of the conflict and gave us
a better perspective for taking the decisions that the
Council will have to adopt in the future.

Let me make a few specific comments about the
mission. I want to highlight the work of UNMIK and to
acknowledge KFOR's valuable contribution. The
responsibility and commitment shown by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, and his team as they work to implement
resolution 1244 (1999) are admirable and deserve our
full support. UNMIK's achievements over the past two
years are obvious, and constitute a realistic option for
attaining the coexistence that is necessary in a multi-
ethnic society.

Considerable challenges face UNMIK and the
international community. It is necessary, first of all, to
guarantee the participation of all communities in the 17
November elections. We understand the concerns
voiced by Kosovo Serbs, both those remaining in
Kosovo and those who have taken refuge abroad, and
we consider that a priority for UNMIK and KFOR in
the coming months is to put in place security
guarantees that will provide that community with
freedom of movement within Kosovo and that will
permit the return of refugees and displaced persons. In
any event, they must be afforded full participation in
the electoral process.

We believe that the problem of detainees and of
individuals who have disappeared demands priority
attention. Its resolution is among the key elements in
building trust among the parties.

Another of the greatest challenges for the future
is the problem of the city of Mitrovica. Here we need
full cooperation from the Belgrade Government.
Necessary prudence must not stop us from resolving
the present social fragmentation and hostility. That city
is a mirror of all the problems of Kosovo. What
happens there will send a clear signal about the
possible future of the rest of Kosovo. UNMIK must
continuously work with KFOR to ensure that decisions
are coordinated and that they do not yield conflicting
effects. We call on the Belgrade Government to take a
more active and constructive position in finding
solutions for Mitrovica.

It is urgent that the population of Kosovo
speedily and fully understand the key role they must
play in their own present and future. In other words,
"kosovarization" must take place, to use a neologism
spawned by this conflict. As the findings ofthe mission
make clear, "the status quo is unacceptable"
(S/2001/600, para. 30). The responsibility of the
international community is limited, but it will be even
more limited without the support and cooperation of
the population. We therefore appeal to all Kosovars to
participate in the activities of the international
community, to reject all violence, and to participate in
the democratic process, especially the forthcoming
elections, which will help create the conditions
necessary for reconciliation, stability and progress in
the region.

The attainment of those objectives will be
enhanced by improved relations and dialogue between
UNMIK and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which
the Security Council must continue to promote.

