Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I would like to thank the
delegation of Kazakhstan for convening today's
important debate.

At this time of increased tensions in the Middle
East, Brazil would like to once again express its full
support to the implementation of a two-State solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, with Palestine and
Israel living side by side in peace and security, within
internationally recognized and mutually agreed-on
borders based on the 1967 lines, in accordance with
international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the established guidelines of the peace process.
At the heart of that formula is the goal of working
towards the establishment of a Palestinian State that is
fully sovereign, economically viable and territorially
contiguous, with East Jerusalem as its capital. In that
regard, the expansion ofillegal settlements in Palestine
continues to undermine the possibility of achieving a
lasting peace in the region. The Brazilian Government
would like to reaffirm its understanding that the final
status of the city of Jerusalem should be defined in
negotiations between Israel and Palestine, on the basis
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolutions 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016).

Recent developments related to the crisis in Syria
continue to demand the attention of the Security
Council. Brazil believes that the moment has arrived
to launch a political process that will put an end to
the war. We therefore reaffirm our full support for the
efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. It is time
for the entire international community to send a unified
message in support of an inclusive political solution
to the Syrian crisis, based on the parameters outlined
in resolution 2254 (2015). Such political transition
benefits from the mediation by the United Nations but
must be led by and for the Syrian people, and safeguard

the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the country.
Brazil is concerned about the dire situation in
eastern Ghouta, where increased fighting and the lack
of humanitarian access make life unbearable for an
estimated 400,000 people. We call on all parties to halt
attacks and to allow immediate humanitarian assistance
to the enclave. We are also deeply concerned about the
situation in northern Syria and the violence in Afrin.
We call on the relevant parties to abide by international
law. We also hope that the military victory achieved
against extremism last year in Iraq will be followed
by a successful process of reconstruction, economic
recovery and national reconciliation. Many challenges
remain in ensuring a safe and dignified return of
displaced persons and extending the State's authority
and rule of law to the liberated areas.

We regret the renewed hostilities in Yemen. As the
Secretary-General stated in December,

"The latest outbreak of violence could not
come at a worse time for the Yemeni people,
who are already caught up in the world's largest
humanitarian crisis" (SG/SM/18807).

We wish to reiterate that a viable path for the future
of Yemen demands a negotiated settlement under the
auspices of the United Nations.

In conclusion, Brazil reiterates its steadfast support
to the efforts of the Government and people of Lebanon
towards stability and development. In that regard, we
emphasize the vital role played by the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and its Maritime Task Force in
stabilizing the highly volatile situation. Brazil is proud
to lead the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force, providing its
flagship vessel since 2011.

