Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): I would like to welcome
the Chairpersons of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
and the 1540 Committee, as well as to express my
appreciation for their briefings.

First of all, my delegation would like to express
its sincere condolences to the families of the victims of
the simultaneous terrorist bombings that took place in
London on 7 July. We also express our hope for the
early recovery of those who suffered injuries. As in the
case of the Madrid train bombings and the sarin gas
attacks on the Tokyo subway network, innocent lives
were taken by the targeting of mass transit systems for
terror attacks, which is surely the most reprehensible
act imaginable.

As is evident from the London terrorist
bombings, terrorism continues to pose an immediate
threat to all of us, as does the risk of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery falling into
terrorist hands. The Security Council has been working
in earnest to cope with such threats. Following the
Council's meeting on this subject in April (see S/PV.5168), it is extremely meaningful that the
Chairpersons of the three Committees have today
provided clear explanations of the work done by their
respective committees and experts and have described
the programmes of the Security Council as a whole that
are devoted to the common task of fighting terrorism.
Deepening the cooperation among those committees
will ensure the development of an effective counter-
terrorism policy.

I would like to emphasize four points that may
help to further advance the work of the three
committees.

First, it has become clear once again from the
London terrorist bombings that it is of the utmost
importance to urgently establish preventive measures
to counter terrorism. Enhancing information-sharing
and cooperation is one such measure. In addition to
bilateral arrangements, it is important that the Security
Council encourage Member States to utilize the
information and experience accumulated by bodies
such as the International Criminal Police Organization
(Interpol), the International Civil Aviation
Organization and the Financial Action Task Force.
Such efforts will enable States to deny entry to
terrorists by sharing information on lost or stolen
passports, as well as to suppress terrorist financing.

Secondly, it is of course also crucial to build the
capacity of Member States in this regard. The CTC has
finished its first round of country visits, which began
in March this year. Japan regards such visits as useful
in building the capacity of the States Visited. My
Government expects that the CTC will encourage the
efforts of the States visited and will identify the areas
where assistance from the international community is
needed, thereby facilitating the actual provision of
assistance and effectively achieving the intended
objectives. In that connection, we will closely observe
the progress made by the end of this year. Information
regarding the assistance needs of Member States
provided to the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
Committee and the 1540 Committee must be shared
with the CTC. Japan will continue to provide bilateral
assistance for capacity-building.

Thirdly, in order to prevent the proliferation of
terrorists and terrorist acts, improving and
strengthening sanctions measures continues to be
necessary. In that connection, as a result of the
discussion currently taking place with regard to the
new draft resolution on the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions Committee, my Government expects that we
will soon be able to decide on ways to improve and
strengthen sanction measures - for example, by
establishing clearer procedures so that the Committee's
consolidated list will be easier for Member States to
use, strengthening cooperation between the Committee
and Interpol and setting up a system to effectively
implement asset-freezing measures. In that connection,
Japan appreciates the reports prepared by the 1267
Committee's Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team. We are certain that, in conjunction
with today's discussion, the reports will contribute
greatly to improving and strengthening sanctions
measures.

Fourthly, in the fight against terrorism, the full
cooperation of Member States in the efforts of the
United Nations is, after all, indispensable. As
underscored on various other occasions, Japan would
like to urge Member States to join and implement the
12 counter-terrorism-related international conventions
and protocols as a matter of urgency and to sign the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism in its early stage. At the same
time, it is essential for the international community to
clearly state that the targeting and deliberate killing of
civilians and non-combatants cannot be justified or
legitimized by any cause or grievance, and to cooperate
in concluding the negotiation of the draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
by June 2006.

Although it takes time and is a difficult task to
prepare domestic legislation and measures to
implement resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004) and other relevant resolutions, the sound
way to counter terrorism is to continue to make steady
progress in such preparations. The Security Council
will continue to strive to make provision for an
effective mechanism for counter-terrorism policy and
to ensure that necessary assistance be provided to those
Member States requiring and requesting it. To facilitate
that, cooperation, such as the submission of reports
without delay and the provision of information to each
Committee, is essential.

No State, whether developed or developing, is
exempt from the threat of terrorism. Every State is
constantly studying ways to enable its people to live in
a safe world, and the United Nations is at the forefront
of gathering and sharing the accumulated knowledge
and experience of Member States in that regard.

Japan supports Secretary-General Annan's
recommendation to implement a comprehensive
strategy for counter-terrorism. My Government expects
that all heads of State will accept the Secretary-
General's recommendation at the summit meeting in
September. In addition, in order to further strengthen
the actions taken by the Security Council, my
Government will continue to extend its full cooperation
to the work of the three Committees.

