Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): India has
consistently supported all efforts to resolve the Syrian
crisis through an inclusive, Syrian-led political process
that meets the legitimate aspirations of all sections of
Syrian society. To that end, we have given our full
support to the mission of Joint Special Envoy Kofi
Annan. Earlier this morning, our Minister of External
12-29516
Affairs spoke to Mr. Annan and underscored India's
support for his mission.

It is a matter of satisfaction that Mr. Annan's
efforts over the past six weeks have resulted in a
cessation of violence. We welcome that development
and the commitment of the Government of Syria to the
six-point plan that Mr. Arman has proposed. We expect
that the Syrian opposition will also adhere to the
relevant parts of the plan, renounce violence and
cooperate fully with Mr. Annan.

We voted in favour of resolution 2042 (2012)
today so that an advance team of the United Nations
supervision mission may be deployed expeditiously to
monitor the cessation of Violence. We hope that all
parties, including the opposition, will implement their
commitments and cooperate with the mission. It is also
necessary that the mission carry out its work
impartially, fairly and independently, with due respect
for Syria's sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity.

For the success of the Annan plan and the
observer mission, it is necessary that they be
accompanied by an inclusive Syrian-led political
process. The cessation of violence should create a
conducive environment for such a process to start as
early as possible. We have noted the commitment of
the Government of Syria to such a process. We expect
that the opposition will also engage seriously in the
process, so that the crisis is resolved without any
further bloodshed; peace, stability and security are
re-established; and the people of Syria are able to focus
their energies on socio-economic development.

For the success of the Annan mission, it is also
necessary that all countries in Syria's neighbourhood
and beyond facilitate and extend their support for a
political resolution of the Syrian crisis under the
auspices of the Joint Special Envoy. India, for its part,
will continue to extend full support for the impartial
implementation of Mr. Annan's six-point plan.

