Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Sudan today is
better than South Sudan at the end of 2018.

We would like to express our appreciation to you,
Madam President, for convening and presiding over
today's meeting. We would like to thank your great
country for allowing you to be our boss on International
Women's Day. It is a great tribute to France.

We would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General David Shearer for his
comprehensive briefing and for all the efforts of United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) on the
ground. We ask Mr. Shearer to convey our greetings
and appreciation to all the women serving in UNMISS
for the service that they are providing to the South
Sudanese people in ensuring peace in the Sudan. We
value the service of the women of UNMISS and all
those serving in the United Nations in all the regions of
the world in different circumstances.

We thank Ms. Angelina Nyajima Simon Jial,
Founder and Executive Director of Hope Restoration
South Sudan, for her enlightened contribution. We
also ask her to convey our thanks to the thousands of
ordinary women in grass-roots organizations for their
tireless efforts and contributions to make South Sudan
safer for everyone.

I would also like to welcome my colleague and
friend the Permanent Representative of South Sudan to
the Council. I look forward to his statement later on,
in amity.

South Africa pays tribute to the sustained role
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) in the Sudanese peace process. The leaders of
that region have done everything possible to bring about
the current improved environment in South Sudan. As
Mr. Shearer said earlier, political parties are moving
freely throughout South Sudan, visiting communities,
talking to their supporters and familiarizing themselves
with the aspirations of the South Sudanese people. As
he also said earlier, the South Sudanese people are
gathering peacefully across communities in the country
to dialogue about the peace in the Sudan that they want.
We are beginning to see the steady return of internally
displaced persons and refugees. Thejourney to go home
has begun. The role of the Council is to work to ensure
that that journey continues and the Sudanese return to
their land to live a normal life. The Council needs to
harness those positive developments and encourage the
IGAD leaders to continue their efforts to ensure that
the peace process in South Sudan is irreversible. The
Council should continue to support David Shearer and
his team in continuing their good work and to tackle
the outstanding issues that he talked about. There is
a base. I think that they can now move to deal with
those issues.

The Council should address the issues highlighted
by our sister Ms. Angelina Jial, who said that we need
to take into account the local and grass-roots concerns,
participation and resources in the peace process in
South Sudan. She also said that grass-roots efforts had
the capacity to anchor the peace process solidly around
and across communities and clans in South Sudan. For
our part, South Africa thinks that the Council should
take to heart what the grass roots can do. That is a very
compelling argument by Ms. Jial on behalf ofthe grass-
roots communities in South Sudan.

South Africa welcomes the signing of the final
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan by the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement/Army-In Government, the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement/Army-In Opposition,
the Former Detainees and the South Sudan Opposition
Alliance in September last year. We recognize the
importance of the Revitalized Agreement as a positive
step towards creating a conducive environment for
engaging in the constructive dialogue and democratic
processes necessary for working towards sustainable
peace and development in South Sudan.

My delegation welcomes the shuttle diplomacy
and efforts undertaken by the President of Eritrea,
Isaias Afwerki, and the Prime Minister of Ethiopia,
Abiy Ahmed, recently in trying to provide support and
lifeblood in order to maintain the momentum of the
implementation of the peace agreement in South Sudan.
It seems that the discussions with President Salva Kiir
were very positive.

The visit by the two leaders was very important,
as it highlighted the leadership undertaken by African
Leaders in making peace in a very volatile region
through African solutions and engagement. It is our
hope that the rapprochement between Ethiopia and
Eritrea will permeate through the region and move the
peace processes towards resolution.

In that regard, we encourage the Government
of South Sudan, my brother, and other parties to do
everything in their power to complete the establishment
of the mechanisms and committees provided for in the
Agreement, particularly during the pre-transitional
period. The return of Vice-President Riek Machar to
South Sudan before May is crucial to ensuring the
implementation of the Agreement.

For our part, South Africa will continue to play
a key role in supporting the peace process in South
Sudan through the mediation efforts of President
Ramaphosa as Chair of the African Union (AU)
High-level Ad Hoc Committee for South Sudan and
Deputy President Mabuza as our President's special
envoy to South Sudan. Such efforts have always been
geared towards complementing the African Union
and Intergovernmental Authority on Development
processes, not to replace them. South Africa notes with
concern that the peace landscape in South Sudan still
remains a little fragile in some areas given the lack of
resources in other areas.

On the humanitarian front, South Africa urges
international stakeholders to make meaningful
contributions to post-conflict reconstruction and
development, in particular as people are returning to
their communities. We further appeal for funds for the
repatriation and resettlement of internally displaced
people and other returnees.

South Africa further wishes to call on all
international partners to mobilize and make available
resources and relevant expertise in support of the
implementation of the Agreement. We support the
renewal of the UNMISS mandate in line with the
recommendation of the Secretary-General. We
maintain that the continued presence of the Mission
is critical to ensuring the impartial implementation of
the Revitalized Agreement and to provide support for
the protection of innocent civilians from the scourge of
armed conflict, as colleagues have said.

Lastly, on sexual violence, which impacts women
and girls, as many, including Ms, Angelina Jial, said,
we are encouraged by the work being done by the
Government and UNMISS through the special courts
and in building the capacity of the justice system to
combat sexual violence in all conflict areas. That
issue is particularly important today as we celebrate
International Women's Day. It should also remind us
of the importance of ensuring the inclusivity of women
in peacemaking.

With the United Nations, working closely with the
AU, subregional organizations such as IGAD, partners
and local communities, change for the better in South
Sudan is possible. As I said at the beginning, South
Sudan today is better than South Sudan at the end of
2018. I would like to wish all women, all over the world,
a happy International Women's Day.

