Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
Mexican delegation wants first of all to express thanks
for the information given to us by Mr. Jacob Zuma,
facilitator of the peace process in Burundi, and to put
on record our appreciation for the important work that
he has accomplished in the process of reconciliation in
that country.

Mexico feels encouraged by the positive events
that have occurred in Burundi, particularly in the
political sphere. We welcome the Agreement reached
between the Transitional Government and the
Nkurunziza faction of the National Council for the
Defence of Democracy-Forces for the Defence of
Democracy (CNDD-FDD) which has made it possible
to incorporate that rebel group into political life in the
framework of the Transitional Government.

Undoubtedly, the decision of the National
Liberation Forces (FNL) headed by Agathon Rwasa not
to participate in negotiations with the Transitional
Government has a negative impact on the peace
process. We emphasize the need for progress in this
regard. We recognize the valuable decision of the FNL
to meet for the first time with representatives of the
Transitional Government, and we invite the members
of that group to continue to work in this direction.

In spite of the progress achieved in the peace
process, security conditions remain fragile. The
humanitarian situation has worsened, with continuous
confrontations. As a result, thousands of persons have
been displaced from their homes. We reiterate our
condemnation of all acts of violence, and we appeal for
an immediate end to the hostilities. We also appeal for
unrestricted access - under safe conditions - by
humanitarian organizations to the civilian population,
especially the most vulnerable populations.

Considering the agreement that was reached, and
with a view to consolidating the peace process, the
Transitional Government will have to implement
programmes for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants.

In conclusion, I thank the President of the
Economic and Social Council for his briefing and
comments on the assistance to be given to Burundi in
the post-conflict situation. Once again, I stress that we
listened most attentively to the statements of the
facilitator, Mr. Zuma. Mexico intends to participate
constructively in the consolidation of the process.

