Mr. Field (United Kingdom): I commend you,
Mr. President, for your leadership, your foresight and
diplomacy in convening this important and timely
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
insightful briefing. As many have observed during
the course of this debate, regional partnerships are
crucial to achieving long-term peace and security. That
is particularly important when we consider the future
prosperity of Afghanistan.

Afghanistan is making genuine sustainable progress
in overcoming its many challenges. I saw that myself
when I visited Kabul only three months ago. The
international community has a crucial role to play in
encouraging and promoting that progress, as do the
regional partnerships and the initiatives that have been
discussed here today. We warmly welcome the efforts
under way to improve the links between Afghanistan
and its regional partners in South and Central Asia. I
believe that is critical to achieving greater economic
development in Afghanistan, which of course is
an essential factor for long-term stability. Such
cooperation will help find common economic interests
to reduce frictions and provide further avenues for
resolving disputes.

The Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission
and Trade Project is a great example of the benefits
of this type of regional cooperation. Afghanistan and
its neighbours have worked together and alongside
the international community to overcome significant
challenges, bringing that important endeavour to the
point of implementation. We are confident that much
more regional cooperation will now follow. There is a
clear appetite for it within some of the most important
regional groups, such as in the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan and the Heart
of Asia Ministerial Conference. I believe that today's
meeting is an important opportunity to demonstrate
the Council's wholehearted support for that type
of cooperation.

However, there is still a long way to go before
Afghanistan's Government and people achieve their
goal of building a more stable and prosperous country.
The United Kingdom will continue to play our part
within the international community in supporting
that goal. We have committed up to £750 million for
the four years up to 2020 to help support the Afghan
Government's work to improve security, reduce poverty
and increase broad access to health and education. We
are also working closely with in NATO to support
Afghanistan. Our non-combat troops have played a
crucial role in supporting the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces. Through the National Army
Officer Academy, we have helped to train over 3,000
cadets - Afghanistan's military leaders of the future.

But ultimately, I am sure that, as others have done,
or will do, during the course of this debate, the solution
to long-term peace and stability lies not within the
military but in a peace process that is Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned. That is why the forthcoming meeting of
the Kabul Process for Peace and Security Cooperation
is so very important. We encourage all of Afghanistan's
regional partners to fully support those efforts towards
peace. It takes vision, courage and leadership to begin a
conversation with your adversary after years of violence
and bloodshed. However, the time is now surely ripe
for that conversation. The people of Afghanistan
deserve peace. We therefore urge President Ghani and
the Government to use the meeting to reach out to the
insurgents and to try to launch a credible peace process.
All of us here today should collectively and individually
express our full support for this peace process, which is
vital to Afghanistan's long-term stability.

Credible, inclusive and timely elections are also
essential. We commend the work of various United
Nations bodies in helping the Government to prepare
for parliamentary and presidential elections this year
and next.

In conclusion, Afghanistan continues to face a
number of significant challenges in 2018, but this is also
a year of real opportunity. With timely elections and the
launch of a credible political and peace process, this
year has the potential to be the one that Afghanistan
finally and irreversible turns a corner. However, as
the United States Deputy Secretary of State so rightly
pointed out, the commitment to this must be conditions-
based, and not driven by timelines. We need, at times,
to be patient. That is in everyone's interests - most
of all that of the Afghan people, who have waited so
very long peace. Let us therefore all pledge today to
do everything we can within the Security Council and
beyond to support the efforts to bring about that peace
and stability.
