Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia is honoured to have
you here with us, Mr. President, and as the last speaker
in today's debate, I thank you for remaining with us
until every speaker has taken the floor. My delegation
would like to congratulate the Permanent Mission of
Kuwait, and, in particular, you, Sir, as First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kuwait, for taking the initiative to convene the debate
on this issue. We would like to thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for his statement and to welcome and
thank former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
statement also.

We believe that today's debate on the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations is
a timely one, because multilateralism is under attack.
The international order, based on the sovereign equality
of States, our joint participation in our Organization
and governance of its system and on our development
of common strategies and rules, is under threat. We
believe that the effectiveness of our Organization's
efforts to protect and maintain international peace and
security depends on the level of adherence to, respect
for and compliance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, as well as respect
for the sovereign equality of States, on the part of each
and every Member State. Bolivia reiterates that as a
country that respects international law and promotes
a culture of peace, it has always advocated for the
peaceful settlement of disputes, preventive diplomacy,
mediation, the obligation to negotiate, reconciliation,
arbitration and judicial settlement as measures that are
universally recognized by the international community
as effective tools for preventing hostilities, the escalation
of Violence, war and its terrible repercussions.

The provisions of Chapters VI and VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations are crucial to a
comprehensive discussion of conflicts and their
distinctive features, while respecting multilateralism,
the sovereign equality of States and non-interference
in their domestic affairs. The role of regional and
subregional organizations is also vital to strengthening
such efforts. Bolivia categorically rejects the use or
threat ofuse of force under any circumstances. It should
be considered as a last resort only when all peaceful
means of dispute settlement have been exhausted, in
accordance with Chapter VII and in strict compliance
with the system of multilateralism that underpins our
Organization. However, all of our efforts to prevent and
resolve conflicts at the highest level, which are based
on the Charter, will fall short if we do not address the
root causes of those conflicts, such as colonialism,
expansionism, attempts to control natural resources
and policies aimed at creating zones of influence or
as some call them, one's backyards. It is important to
make it clear that interventionist policies and efforts to
accomplish regime change exacerbate conflicts.

When a Power claims that its interests prevail
over those of the rest of the world and is willing to
use its military might to protect those interests, it is
clear that we are talking about imperialism, which is
at antithetical to international law and the concept of a
multipolar world. Unilateral actions in flagrant breach
of the purposes and principles of the Charter do not
occur only through acts and campaigns for intervention
but also with the threat of the use of force. We saw
that in our own region not years but just a few days
ago, when one Power actually called for a coup d'etat,
in disregard not only for the equality, sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of States, but for
every fundamental principle of international law.

With regard to implementation of Chapter VII of
the Charter, we firmly believe that sanctions cannot be
viewed as an end in themselves but must be temporary
and preventive. Such measures should not be used
as a tool to promote double standards and unilateral
political objectives. They should be designed and
developed with fair and transparent procedures that
clearly establish the conditions to which the States or
parties must adhere. Periodic evaluations should also
be carried out to take stock of their effects and make
the necessary adjustments to modify or lift them based
on changes in a situation. We must always seek to have
the least possible humanitarian impact on civilian
populations, to safeguard their rights and guarantee
their well-being. Needless to say, we firmly oppose the
implementation of unilateral sanctions.

An additional fundamental element in terms of
respecting the purposes and principles of the Charter
is maintaining a focus on the specific powers and
mandates of each entity of the United Nations, in
order to avoid duplication of effort or encroachment
on a body's specific mandate. We must also avoid any
accumulation of power and the exploitation of any of the
Organization's organs, including the Security Council,
for political purposes. When we speak of the United
Nations, of course, we speak of it in its entirety, and not
just of the various bodies that are explicitly discussed

in the Charter but also those that arise from it. When
we say, for example, that the Security Council can lay
claim to the right to address issues that fall within the
purview of the Human Rights Council, we are seeing a
very clear example of the manipulation of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

As a State that promotes the principles of
multilateralism and operates according to them,
Bolivia welcomes and appreciates the important work
of the International Court of Justice as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations, whose probity
and independence are indispensable for guaranteeing
peace and security for the international community.
The work of the Court must be supported by all States
so as to consolidate and strengthen the pre-eminence of
international law. Justice exists above all to promote the
fraternal coexistence of peoples by emphasizing peace
and dialogue rather than the use of force, aggression,
invasion or unilateral action.

Bolivia reiterates that the joint work of the
Organization and the unity of its Member States are
vital to guaranteeing and maintaining international
peace and security. The success of our work is measured
in terms of the conflicts that we manage to prevent, the
dialogues or negotiations that we are able to establish,
and the confidence-building measures that we can
strengthen. Our failure, on the other hand, will be
measured in the unresolved conflicts and interventions
by its Member States in pursuit of their own interests
at the cost of the lives of millions of innocent people.

In conclusion, the great challenge proposed by the
Charter of the United Nations is as valid today as it was
more than 70 years ago. The primacy of politics, of the
use of peaceful means for resolving disputes, and of
international law are intimately and indissolubly linked
to respect for the Charter of the United Nations.

