Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I commend the
delegation of Peru for highlighting the important and
positive role of youth in maintaining international
peace and security. I also thank Ms. Wickramanayake,
the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth; Mr. Simpson,
lead author of the progress study on youth, peace
and security; and civil society representatives
Ms. Pierre-Antoine and Ms. Ekomo-Soignet for their
comprehensive briefings on the progress made in the
implementation of resolution 2250 (2015), on youth,
peace and security.

Today's youth comprise 1.8 billion people, nearly
500 million of whom live in conflict-affected areas.
Resolution 2250 (2015) is the first effort of its kind
and the only global policy instrument to go beyond the
traditional approaches defined by the involvement of
youth in peace and security as a securitization measure
and to recognize and promote the potential of youth
inclusion in issues of peace and security.

The resolution serves as a critical step forward.
However, in itself it cannot ensure that youth are
continuously and meaningfully engaged in issues of
peace and security. While there are many youth-led
initiatives operating around the world to bring about
sustainable peace, there is a lack of support from the
national authorities. It is the responsibility of Member
States to implement resolution 2250 (2015) and to
set up mechanisms that would ensure the inclusion
and meaningful participation of youth in meeting
today's challenges.

We therefore endorse the findings and recommendations
of the progress study, which outlines a three-fold
strategy to shift to a new paradigm of youth, peace
and security. We also support the initiative of Peru and
Sweden to adopt a new draft resolution on youth, peace
and security that will contribute to the implementation
of resolution 2250 (2015) across the world, as well
as broadening youth participation in the work of the
United Nations.

Youth do not play one, single role in conflict
situations. As a vulnerable sector of society, they
require mechanisms that are able to protect them from
violent conflict and to prevent their radicalization.
Beyond that, young people are positive agents ofchange,
building sustainable peace in their societies. We believe
that they should play an important role in fulfilling the
new agenda for peace, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and other global processes.

To utilize the tremendous potential of youth in
creating and maintaining peaceful environments, they
must be provided the opportunities to be involved in
decision-making at all levels, in mechanisms for the
prevention, management and resolution of conflict
and in peace negotiations. It is particularly important
to engage youth in constructive activities to assist
processes of democratization, elections, building
State institutions, enforcing the rule of law, fighting
corruption, and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. Of equal importance are sustainable and
predictable investments in youth-centred development.
We therefore support the recommendation of the
progress study to allocate $1.8 billion by 2025 for the
tenth anniversary of resolution 2250 (2015).

We believe that the international community needs
to work together in order to develop a comprehensive
global framework related to youth with a whole-of-pillar
approach, which above all will ensure the security-
development nexus and promote the vision of a more
effective, transparent and accountable United Nations,
at Headquarters and on the ground, delivering as One
United Nations. We therefore call for coordinated
and comprehensive efforts at the grassroots, national,
regional and global levels.

I wish to share the experience of my country.
Kazakhstan has made considerable progress across
all five main components of resolution 2250 (2015),
with a focus on participation, partnership and
prevention measures. First of all, we are constantly
increasing inclusive representation for youth at all
levels of decision-making. We also support our youth
by creating an atmosphere conducive to inclusion
and social cohesion, including through establishing
and strengthening partnerships with relevant youth
organizations. As far back as 2002, we created the Youth
Congress, which is made up of active youth movements
and organizations that shape youth policy directives.

Kazakhstan also strongly focuses on prevention
by eradicating poverty, creating employment and
educating youth - women in particular - as well as by
supporting their dynamic ideas and aspirations. That is
perhaps the kind of support that young men and women
need the most. Our country has adopted a comprehensive
set of policies to provide free education, vocational
training, intensive job creation and entrepreneurship.
Kazakhstan's Bolashak Scholarship - meaning Future
Generation Scholarship - was launched in 1993 and
gives more than 4,000 Kazakh young men and women
an opportunity annually to study in leading foreign
higher education institutions. It has been recognized
among the best academic mobility programmes in the
world. Those who finished the scholarship programme
today occupy ministerial and other influential positions
in society.

We also dissuade youth from using violence that
serves extremist causes by implementing comprehensive
development programmes. In particular, we have
successfully completed the national programme on
countering religious extremism and terrorism for the
period 2013-2017, having allocated approximately
$600 million for preventive measures for the entire
youth population. As a nation of 130 ethnic groups
and 16 major religions, Kazakhstan enjoys peace and
stability since our thrust has been to make tolerance
and respect our guiding principles. Youth vulnerability
and their strengths will be the focus of the sixth
triennial Congress of Leaders of World and Traditional
Religions, to be held in Astana in October.

Last month, the President of Kazakhstan addressed
the nation with his message ofthe Five Social Initiatives.
They include a significant increase in educational grants
and teachers' salaries, a reduction of tax to 1 per cent
for low-paid workers, new opportunities to purchase
housing and the construction of student hostels. Those
visionary measures are aimed at implementing our

Kazakhstan 2050 national strategy, by which we strive
to be ranked among the top 30 developed countries
of the world, and wherein youth will be our richest
national resource.

We are focusing on prevention measures in
Afghanistan as part of our efforts to advance a
revamped regional approach. Since 2010, we have been
implementing a $50 million scholarship programme
with a view to educating 1,000 Afghan students in
Kazakhstan's educational institutions.

Of course, we could do more, and we need to
do more. Today's briefers made a very passionate
and convincing case for all of us to act swiftly and
meaningfully to empower youth. In conclusion, I would
like to assure the Council of Kazakhstan's readiness
to join the multilateral action to transform the lives
of our youth globally with a view to their becoming
responsible leaders in the promotion of peace, stability
and prosperity.

