Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia): Mr. President, allow
me to begin by extending my delegation's
congratulations to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of July. We are
convinced that with your commitment and diplomatic
skill, our deliberations will result in a positive
outcome. I should also like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to your distinguished
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic, Mr. Mikhail Wehbe, for his
excellent leadership in presiding over the work of the
Council last month.

Our meeting today is occasioned by another in a
series of acts of aggression by Israel, this time the air
attack that took place in the Gaza Strip. Fifteen people,
including nine children, have reportedly been killed,
and more than 100 others wounded. We condemn this
brazen act which, from the perspective of international
norms and values, represents a crime against humanity.
The attack was also an obvious violation of
international law and a betrayal of the ongoing peace
process. Such a selfish attitude, again, represents the
arrogant behaviour of the Israeli Government.

As the Secretary-General has pointed out, it is the
legal and moral responsibility of Israel to take
measures to avoid the loss of civilian lives. On the
contrary, when using a missile in an indiscriminate
assault against a civilian facility, loss of life might be
the inevitable result, and indeed it was. Each of these
attacks further exacerbates the grave humanitarian
problems of the Palestinian people, and the latest attack
is certain to make things much worse.

We call on Israel once again not to be blinded by
its military might. There can be no military solution to
this situation. We emphasize the need for the
implementation of Council resolutions 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2002) in bringing this intolerable situation to an
end. We further reiterate that only the realization of
two States, Palestine and Israel, living side by side
within secure, internationally recognized borders, as
provided for in resolution 1397 (2002), can end the
perpetual violence in the occupied territories. We also
support the ongoing international peace process based
on Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and
on the principle of land for peace.

Finally, we once again stress the urgent need to
deploy an international security force to protect
innocent civilians in the conflict-ridden areas. We call
on the Security Council to discharge its responsibility
and to put an end to both Israeli aggression and its
illegal occupation.

