I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs; Ambassador Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations, and Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve, Permanent Representative of Belgium and Security Council Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for their detailed briefings. I would also like to welcome the presence of the Secretary-General and of Secretary of State Michael Pompeo to this meeting, as well as the participation of the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran. Tunisia shares the view that the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is an important addition to the global non-proliferation architecture and reiterates its call for the full and effective implementation of this agreement and of resolution 2231 (2015) by all parties. We believe that the ability to continue to guarantee Iran's status as a non-nuclear-weapon State is crucial for the security and stability of the Middle East. In that regard, we note that Iran has emphasized on various occasions that all non-compliance measures it has taken are reversible and that it will continue to be subject to the monitoring and verification of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We call on Iran to fully cooperate with the [AEA and to continue to implement the Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement on a voluntary basis, pending its ratification. Tunisia takes note of the continuing differences of interpretation regarding the implementation of the provisions of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015), in particular with regard to ballistic missile related activities. We understand that those provisions were designed to improve transparency and create an atmosphere conducive to the full implementation of the JCPOA, and we urge all concerned parties to engage in constructive dialogue to resolve those differences. In the meantime, we encourage Iran to refrain from any activities that can deepen mistrust and exacerbate tensions in the region, which have already reached an extremely dangerous level. In that regard, we are particularly concerned by the conclusions in the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/531) on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) - that the cruise missiles and/or their parts used in the attacks perpetrated against Saudi Arabia in 2019 are of Iranian origin. We reiterate our condemnation of those attacks and call on all parties to avoid any action that could further aggravate the situation. Lastly, I would like to recall the Conference on the Establishment of a Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction, which held its first session in November 2019 and in which all Arab countries and Iran participated constructively. Established by the General Assembly, the Conference should convene every year at United Nations Headquarters - at a cost of more than $1 million per year for all Member States - until it concludes the elaboration of a legally binding treaty establishing the Middle East zone. Notwithstanding the difference of views expressed during the process that led to the decision to convene the Conference, we believe that it can become a very useful platform for regular dialogue and confidence-building between the countries concerned on all issues of non-proliferation, disarmament and regional security, and help reduce significantly the tensions in the region. We therefore hope that all invited parties will be in a position to participate in upcoming sessions. *
