I, too, would like to thank South Africa for organizing this debate on the issue of security sector reform. These reforms are a fundamental part of the mandates of peace operations - well managed, they lay the foundations for sustainable peace. Three key elements should underpin our actions in this core area of reconstruction following a period of conflict or deep crisis. The first is a holistic approach. Our efforts in security sector reform will unfortunately be in vain if they are not based on such an approach. Respect for human rights and the rule of law is indeed a sine qua non for sustainable economic and political development. Successful security sector reform is reform that leads to an army, police and judiciary that respect democratic principles and are aware of their responsibilities towards the population. It is also important to integrate the Sustainable Development Goals into such an approach. My second point concerns inclusiveness. Too often security sector reform mandates do not sufficiently take into account all sectors of society. Too often security sector reform processes fall within the sole competence of the executive branch. We need to fill that gap. All actors in society should be consulted on security governance - civil society, women and young people. As such, we must maintain a high level of ambition with regard to the draft resolution contained in document S/2020/1158, which we will adopt shortly, in line with resolution 2151 (2014). Thirdly, I would like to commend the African Union's role as a mediator and facilitator of security sector reform provisions in several peace processes. The European Union and Belgium are also shouldering their responsibilities, and our efforts are closely linked to those of the African Union and the United Nations. Belgium supports the efforts of the international community in this area in various ways. In the Sahel, in the Great Lakes region, the Belgian army, the Federal Police, the Belgian Development Agency, our Department of Justice and, of course, my department are working in synergy to support such reforms. Belgium is also actively participating in the European Union's efforts in support of those processes. That experience in the field informs our thinking. In that regard, I would like to put forward two approaches by way of conclusion. Today more than ever, we must ensure that we strengthen coordination among organizations involved in security sector reform. The African Union already has a partnership with both the European Union and the United Nations. We should also ensure that we involve other organizations in our work as soon as possible, in particular those at the subregional level and, on the European continent, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Secondly, United Nations peace missions on the ground have a unique role in identifying strategic priorities and in coordinating efforts. Belgium calls for the strengthening of that coordination role and for the genuine commitment of missions as a whole to mandates in support of reform.
