Mr. Toure (Mali) (interpretation from French):
Allow me, on behalf of Ambassador Ouane, to
welcome to the Security Council the new
representative of Tunisia, a country with which Mali
has fraternal relations. I would also like to welcome the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As previous speakers have done, I too would like
to thank Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his very
detailed statement on developments in the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. My delegation would like to
take advantage of today's opportunity to commend, and
express its support for, the commendable efforts made
by the High Representative in the area of implementing
the peace agreements on Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
believe that the results that have been achieved in
implementing the Dayton/Paris Agreement are
encouraging despite the plethora of difficulties
encountered along the way.

On the political level, my delegation welcomes
the formation of the new State Administrations and
entities after the holding of general elections on 11
November 2000. The people who have been entrusted
with leading the Administrations should always bear in
mind that they have a responsibility to work for the
strengthening of the common institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina by promoting good governance and
democracy, as well as by transcending ethnic and
partisan considerations. The sharing of power and
responsibilities should inspire everyone as they carry
out their functions. We believe that effective use of the
new Administrations will contribute to strengthening
the still fragile foundations of the democratic process
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and will make it possible
to restore the integrity of its multicultural past.

The conclusion of an agreement on a privileged
relationship between the Republika Srpska and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is in itself a good
thing, as long as the agreement shows respect for the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of all of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

On the economic front, my delegation believes
that institutional reform must be accompanied by
economic restructuring that allows Bosnia and
Herzegovina to rely on itself by tapping its domestic
resources. Along those lines, we would appeal urgently
to the authorities to discharge their obligations to their
communities, if they indeed wish to provide a better
future for their country.

Economic development is the best guarantee of
peace, and therefore my delegation urges the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to persevere in
the path of macroeconomic reforms already undertaken
and to cooperate with international financial
organizations to integrate the country into Euro-
Atlantic structures.

The establishment of an efficient judiciary system
that can provide sound justice to citizens is a cause of
concern for my delegation. We welcome and encourage
the efforts made in the reform of justice and
institutions for the defence of human rights.

In the humanitarian field, my delegation notes
with great interest the return of refugees, who are
returning to their pre-war homes. This trend should be
encouraged. All useful measures should be taken to
assist those who are returning home and whose living
conditions are precarious.

In conclusion, Mali reaffirms its support for the
outstanding efforts made by the High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch. For
us, the stabilizing role played by the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina is essential for
peace-building in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

