Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, Madam President, I would like to extend
my sincere congratulations on Argentina's assumption
of the Security Council presidency for this month, and
to thank you for the invitation to take part in this open
debate on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. I would also like to
give special thanks to Her Excellency the President of
the Republic of Argentina for presiding over the first
part of the meeting.

We all agree about the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. The Charter of the United
Nations emphasizes the importance of urging regional
organizations to work towards the peaceful resolution
of local disputes. It also encourages the Security
Council to try to resolve such disputes through
regional institutions. The growing importance of such
cooperation is demonstrated by current trends, some of
the most important being, first, the escalation in the
number of conflicts and the places where such conflicts
occur around the world. In the past the Security Council
had a limited number of issues to deal with during its
regular meetings, but today its agenda is loaded with
issues, most of them regional conflicts, making it
difficult for the Council to perform its role alone.

Secondly, such local conflicts are displaying
increasing levels of difficulty and complexity, owing
to the intense influence exerted on them by ethnic,
religious, cultural and economic factors, as well
as other issues linked to foreign interventions and
special interests. That complexity makes it harder
to comprehend the nature and complications of the
conflicts, the circumstances in which they are created
and how they can be overcome, and makes a better
understanding of the intricacies and details of local
circumstances imperative.

Thirdly, regional organizations, by virtue of their
geographic proximity and direct involvement at the
local level are in a better position to understand and
address local issues.

Fourthly, regional organizations have special
capabilities in the areas of preventive diplomacy, early-
warning systems, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
although that should not exempt the international
community from fulfilling its responsibilities by
participating in such tasks.

In that context, the Security Council retains the
primary responsibility for ensuring international
peace and security. In addition, general humanitarian
principles - such as the right of peoples to self-
determination; the importance of protecting civilians
when their authorities are unwilling or incapable of
doing so or, as in the case of Syria, when they seek
to exterminate them; the preservation of human
rights; the refusal to overlook war crimes and crimes
against humanity, and the willingness to hold violators
committing these crimes accountable - are basic
responsibilities that the Council cannot and should
not abandon. Cooperation with regional organizations
should be based on shouldering those responsibilities
and on upholding the principle of the maintenance of
peace and security.

My country has played an active role in resolving
a number of regional conflicts in cooperation with
relevant regional and subregional organizations, chief
among them the leadership role taken by the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC) in sparing its brother State
of Yemen the dangers of a grinding civil war, and to
help the people of Yemen find positive and creative
solutions to the political crisis in their country. Saudi
Arabia will continue to provide economic and political
support to our Yemeni brothers until they achieve their
aspirations. The supportive role played by the United
Nations has had an effective impact and demonstrated
the international community's solidarity with the plans
and initiatives of the GCC. Furthermore, the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and the sisterly countries of the Gulf
Cooperation Council were the first to call for the
imposition of a no-fly zone aimed at preventing the
perpetration of massacres against the brotherly Libyan
people, a call subsequently reiterated by the League of
Arab States and the Security Council.

Concerning Syria, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
was the first Arab country to break the wall of silence
about the suffering of peaceful demonstrators exposed
to bullets, arrests and torture. Saudi Arabia joined
its sister countries in the League of Arab States in
developing initiatives aimed at saving the Syrian
people from bloodshed and enabling them to achieve
their legitimate aspirations of freedom, dignity and
prosperity.

Unfortunately, the Security Council's failure to
adopt the positions of the relevant regional organization,
the League of Arab States, has contributed to the
escalation of the crisis in Syria and the continuing
tragedy there, manifested in the death of tens of
thousands of victims and millions of displaced citizens.
Thus, while the example of Yemen is one of positive
cooperation, that of Syria is a negative example of
what can happen when such cooperation is absent. The
positions held by some members of the Council not only
defy the regional consensus but also contradict the will
of the international community, as expressed in several
consecutive General Assembly resolutions on Syria.

My delegation stresses the importance of
establishing effective mechanisms to coordinate the
efforts of the United Nations and those of regional
and subregional organizations, in order to enable such
organizations to play a more effective role under the
umbrella of the United Nations. Such a role would
be in harmony with their capabilities, initiatives and
expertise and would enable areas affected by conflict
to avoid the internationalization of local conflicts,
especially when an international body loses its ability
to act effectively.
In conclusion, I wish to note that the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence, and Transparency group - a cross-
regional group of 22 States seeking to improve the
working methods of the Security Council - stands for
those very principles. Saudi Arabia values the efforts
of Council members to engage with the wider United
Nations membership in open debates and, accordingly,
welcomes today's open debate organized by Argentina.

