Ms. Lnj (Denmark): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the European Union. The
countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated
countries of Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the
European Free Trade Association (EFTA) country of
the European Economic Area, Iceland, align
themselves with this statement.

Let me begin by stating that the European Union
and the peoples of its member States bear no grudge
against the people of Iraq. The European Union
respects the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Iraq. In 1990, the Iraqi
regime chose to invade its small and defenceless
neighbour Kuwait. A broad coalition of countries from
all over the world stood up against this aggression.

After the international community had liberated
Kuwait, Iraq accepted, inter alia, to give up all its
weapons of mass destruction and its long-range
ballistic missiles as a condition for lifting the sanctions
imposed on Iraq by the Security Council.

For nearly 12 years, the Government of Iraq has
failed to cooperate fully on the elimination of its
weapons of mass destruction and on the dismantling of
its capability for producing such weapons.

In 1991, the Security Council established the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) to
implement the disarmament process. The Commission
was, however, several times faced with unacceptable
conditions imposed by the Iraqi regime, which came to
a head in 1998, when further access on the part of the
weapons inspectors to Iraqi territory was denied.

In 1999, the Security Council, in its resolution
1284 (1999), established the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) to pick up where UNSCOM. had left off.
As we all know, UNMOVIC has never been allowed to
carry out its mandate in Iraq. As a result, no
inspections have taken place in Iraq for more than four
years, giving rise to serious concerns on the part of the
international community as to the intentions of the
Government of Iraq to respect binding obligations
under international law.

The Secretary-General of the United Nations has
worked incessantly to persuade the Iraqi regime to
honour its obligations and to let the weapon inspectors
from UNMOVIC and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) return to Iraq. Only under strong
pressure from the international community has Iraq
recently indicated its preparedness to receive the
weapons inspectors without any conditions. This newly
found position by the Iraqi regime should now be put
to the test, and complete disarmament in respect of
weapons of mass destruction achieved. UNMOVIC and
IAEA should resume inspections as soon as possible on
the basis of a reinforced mandate incorporating the
practical arrangements set out in the joint letter of
UNMOVIC and IAEA to Iraq dated 8 October.

The existing Security Council resolutions, the
results of the Vienna talks as contained in the joint
letter of the heads of UNMOVIC and IAEA, as well as
any new rules the Security Council may deem
necessary, should constitute the new governing
standard for compliance by the Government of Iraq.
This governing standard for inspections should be put
to a real test as soon as possible. The Government of
Iraq should make no mistake about the fact that non-
compliance with this inspection regime would have
serious consequences.

The European Union reiterates its demand that
Iraq must adhere fully to all the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council, in particular it must let the
United Nations weapons inspectors return to Iraq
without any preconditions and fully cooperate with the
inspection teams in all aspects, including the granting
of immediate and unhindered access to all sites and
facilities in Iraq that the inspectors might wish to
investigate. The European Union supports a new
Security Council resolution strengthening the rights of
inspectors so as to ensure that they can, as effectively
as possible, carry out the disarmament required by the
relevant resolutions. An effective inspection process in
Iraq is a necessary tool for securing the dismantling of
all weapons of mass destruction and long-range
ballistic missiles, which is our common goal. Iraq must
let the inspectors in and fully cooperate in allowing
them to carry out their mandate, or be held accountable
for its failure to do so.

The European Union reiterates its full support for
the efforts ofthe Security Council and ofthe Secretary-
General in finding a solution to the Iraq question. The
European Union emphasizes the vital importance of
safeguarding and respecting the crucial role of the
Security Council - present and future - in
maintaining international peace and security in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and in the
solution of international conflicts.

We encourage all members of the Security
Council to take a speedy decision that maintains strong
pressure on Iraq and gathers the widest possible
support within the Council.

