Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, from the bottom of my heart for
your comments at the opening of today's meetings,
which really moved me. When I play them later for my
children, it will move them too.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman,
Ambassador Cardi, Ambassador Vale de Almeida for
their briefings and for all their work on this important
topic. I know that the United States Mission looks
forward to working with Ambassador Cardi in his new
role as the Council's facilitator for the implementation
ofresolution 2231 (2015). I agree with the sentiment that
he expressed in Italian in terms of saying "Goodbye,
but we will see you soon".

This will be my final meeting in the Security
Council, I think, so I would like to start by saying
"thank you". First, above all, I want to give thanks to
President Obama for giving me this opportunity and I
want to thank my fellow diplomats in the Chamber for
their friendship, their camaraderie and their dedication,
all of which they have shown in spades over the past
three and a half years towards me and towards the
subjects that we work on together. Of course, we may
not always agree. Indeed, we have at times disagreed
quite pointedly, but it has been the privilege of my life
to be able to work with each of them.

We have not achieved nearly as much as I would
have liked. The failures of the Council to respond
to the mass atrocities in Syria and South Sudan are
glaring and indeed haunting, but I know from working
with every single individual at this table that we have
achieved much more than we would have had it not
been for their creativity and their individual will to find
a way forward on tough issues.

Diplomacy is about people in two respects. We
diplomats must help people who are suffering the
horrific costs of conflict, but we diplomats are people
and when the Council functions, it is often because
individuals in this Chamber have lobbied their capitals
for a change in instructions or for flexibility in the
cause of peace. While we, who have the privilege of
sitting around this table, may get the attention, we also
know that our work would not be possible without the
people sitting behind us and in the booths above us
and many others in our Governments who never even
get to join us in the Chamber: the teams of diplomats
and foreign service officers at our respective missions,
the officials in our capitals and embassies abroad who
feed into our work, as well as the staff at the United
Nations who make these meetings possible - from the
Security Council Affairs Division to the inexhaustible
interpreters, to the staff from across the United Nations
who brief the Council, write the reports that we
consume and provide information from the field often
at great risk to themselves. I offer a special thanks to
my truly remarkable team at the United States Mission
who works tirelessly to try to make the world better. It
has been an honour to work with all of them.

I am fortunate today to be able to deliver my last set
of remarks on an issue that shows just how much we can
achieve by using the tools in our toolbox at the Security
Council. An issue where the United States, France,
the United Kingdom, Germany, China, Russia and the
European Union were able to all come together - first
to impose powerful sanctions against Iran, including
in 2010 after receiving information that Iran was
building a covert enrichment facility and then to have
the courage and the creativity to negotiate a deal - the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), which
cut off Iran's pathways to a nuclear weapon and verified
Iran's compliance through the most extensive inspection
regime ever developed for nuclear programme.

I take note, as I depart, that some on the Council
are expressing what seems to be a growing scepticism
about the efficacy of sanctions. It is more than
reasonable to raise questions. Sanctions are not suited
to every crisis. They alone are never a panacea.
They cannot be treated as an end in themselves and
sanctions almost never provide instant gratification
of the kind that the news cycle seems to demand. It
took almost nine years from when the Council first
imposed sanctions on Iran and multiple rounds of new
sanctions after that before the P5+1 and Iran were able
to conclude the JCPOA. However, sanctions were an
absolutely essential tool to bring Iran to the table and
to keep Iran negotiating until we reach the diplomatic
outcome that we sought, one that has significantly
enhanced our collective security. We never would have
reached this goal without uniting to impose sanctions
and without working to ensure that our resolutions were
enforced. This lessons applies not only when dealing
with the threat of nuclear non-proliferation, but also to
other threats to international peace and security, from
genocide to terrorism and violations of other States'
territorial integrity.

But beyond showing how effective sanctions
can be, the JCPOA also shows the life and death
importance of diplomacy - hard-nosed diplomacy.
The United Nations was created as the premier venue
for diplomacy. As Winston Churchill once put it, "To
jaw-jaw is always better than to war-war". Reaching
this deal - the JCPOA - like so many ofthe collective
achievements of which we are most proud, including
the global response to the Ebola outbreak, the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change and the Sustainable
Development Goals - required gruelling, at times
exasperating negotiations and countless hours invested
by diplomats, technical experts and even many of us
at this table. There were times in each of these efforts
when we thought we would not be able to reach an
agreement, that the differences were just too great, the
suspicions too deep, when we wanted to give up, walk
away and go home to spend more time with our families
who are far easier to get along with than our foreign
counterparts in negotiations.

But in these and so many other instances we
achieved something together that none of us could have
come close to achieving alone. While, of course, there
are other threats to which we have invested similar
time and energy and sweat, but have not been able to
find solutions or consensus - the Syria war and the
quest for Middle East peace being the two most obvious
examples - is there anybody here who would have
rather that we not have tried? Of course, there is not.
I am proud to have served a President who believes in
the power of principled diplomacy, not out of a naive
belief that we will always succeed, but rather because
of a clear-eyed empirical assessment that our security
often necessitates collective action and that while at
times diplomacy may not be enough, there is never a
time when it is not needed.

It has now been a year and a half since the
JCPOA was concluded and one year since what we
call implementation day, when the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) verified that Iran had
completed the nuclear-related commitments required
for sanctions relief. What we know after all this time is
that the JCPOA is working. All ofthe deal's participants
are keeping their commitments. Consider what that
means, what the deal has achieved. Iran's plutonium
reactor core at Arak is now filled with concrete. The
IAEA has confirmed that Iran has dismantled two-
thirds of its centrifuges and shipped out 98 per cent of
its enriched uranium. What is left of Iran's uranium
stockpile is under continuous watch to make sure that
it stays within the limits that the JCPOA put in place.
For our part, the United States has fully implemented
its commitments to lift nuclear-related sanctions as
specified in the JCPOA.

In the Council, the mechanisms that we created
to support the JCPOA are working as intended. When
States want to pursue the nuclear-related activities
permitted under the JCPOA that require the Council's
approval, the Council is ready to consider their request.
Reporting is also happening with the appropriate
division of labour with the Secretary-General reporting
on the restrictions that apply to Iran under resolution
2231 (2016) while the Joint Commission monitors
implementation of the J CPOA.

However, recognizing this progress on Iran's
nuclear issues should not distract the Council from
Iran's other actions that continue to destabilize the
Middle East in ways that affect a lot of issues on
the Council's agenda. This is after all a regime that
repeatedly threatens Israel and that continues to violate
the human rights of its own people. Under Secretary-
General Feltman has informed the Council about
reports of Iranian non-compliance with the remaining
arms transfer and travel restrictions in resolution 2231
(2016). These reports include new information about
interdictions of arms exported from Iran, transfers
Hizbullah Secretary-General Hassan Nasrallah has
openly boasted about in his public speeches even
as resolution 2231 (2016) prohibits these shipments.
Israel has also reported to the United Nations that Iran
uses commercial flights to supply arms to Hizbullah.
According to the Secretary-General's report, Iran
did not even deny these allegations when the United
Nations asked about them.

These arms transfers should be deeply troubling
to each member of the Council in part because Iran is
clearly defying a resolution the Council unanimously
supported. Therefore, even though Iran is living up to
its nuclear commitments, we on the Council need to
come together to push Iran to effectively implement
the binding provisions of resolution 2231 (2016),
especially restrictions that ban Iran's export of arms
and related material and that ban all Member States
from transferring to Iran advanced weapon systems,
like missiles, tanks and combat aircraft.

That also means every Member State needs to
enforce the travel restrictions that remain in effect
under resolution 2231 (2015). The Secretary-General's
report (S/2016/1136) notes that both Major General
Qasem Soleimani and Brigadier General Mohammad
Reza Naqdi have travelled to Iraq and Syria, in
defiance of the Council's decisions. That is and should
be unacceptable to all of us.

As we have said before, the strength of resolution
2231 (2015) comes from the commitment of Member
States to enforcing it, and the United States calls
on them to do so. It is clear that, with the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, the world today is
better off than it was before. Even though there is a
long way to go in countering Iran's destabilizing
behaviour in the Middle East, any world where Iran is
not pursuing a nuclear weapon is a safer world. Looking
ahead, as this deal is likely to be subjected to even
greater scrutiny than it is at present, it is important for
all of us - here and outside, in all of our nations - to
remember that it is much harder to build up frameworks
and institutions than to tear them down. The progress
we have achieved, so far, depends on maintaining our
collective determination to sustain the JCPOA. So, we,
and each of the JCPOA participants need to stand by
the commitments that we have made and work even
harder to make sure that all States comply with their
obligations under resolution 2231 (2015), and we need
to remember that if negotiating an Iran nuclear deal
was possible then we on the Council have it within our
power to act decisively when other crises demand it.

Let me conclude with an idea - fittingly, given the
Swedish presidency, from a renowned Swedish author,
Elin Wagner, who said that values and ideals are like
those old-fashioned bicycle lights. They do not light up
until and unless you start to pedal forward. That can
be said for so much of the work we aspire to do on the
Council, and it is true of all of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Unless we pedal, they do
not light up. The principles do not become real for real
people out in the real wold. Problems do not get fixed,
conflicts drag on, crushing poverty persists. Unless
we pedal hard and pedal together, we do not make the
impact that we seek. We do not make the impact that
we, who are sent here by our citizens and people, are
here to make. And we must keep working to make those
principles real, because as I have tried to underscore
so often, the lives of so many people depend on those
principles being turned into practice.

To the girl fleeing armed soldiers in South Sudan,
making protection more than a promise in a mandate,
means the difference between life and death. To the
child in a besieged city in Syria, the prohibition on
the bombing of schools and hospitals may mean the
difference between life and death. To the man or woman
in Uganda or North Korea, the idea that a person should
not be locked up for who you love or what you believe
might mean the difference between a life of freedom
and a life ofimprisonment or harassment. So, as I leave,
I urge the Council to keep pedaling and to not give up,
especially when it seems hard. Make sure that those
principles in the United Nations Charter light up. Do
not let them go dark for the people who count on us. I
wish the Council all the best in the months and years
ahead, and I reiterate my thanks for the professionalism
and friendship of its members.

