Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): I thank you, Madam
President, for giving me this opportunity to speak
before the Security Council. The Philippines notes
the adoption today of resolution 2143 (2014) and the
briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, as well as
the statement of the Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

My Government reaffirms its firm and demonstrated
resolve to protect our children and their rights wherever
they may be or in whatever circumstances they are in.
My Government's actions on the matter speak volumes
about our seriousness. Our commitment cannot
be questioned. My Government has been working
steadfastly to institute meaningful and significant
additional measures or specific actions to ensure that
the framework for the protection of our children in
any circumstances, including challenging situations,
remains robust. That includes the signing of Executive
Order No. 138, which created a monitoring, reporting
and response system for grave child rights violations
in all possible venues that a Filipino child may be in,
including situations that may be characterized as armed
conflict.

My Government and our negotiators from both sides
are working very hard in forging the agreement that
will ensure a durable solution in southern Mindanao.
My President went to Malaysia a few days ago to thank
the Malaysian Government for hosting many of the
negotiations on a very comprehensive agreement for a
lasting solution in southern Mindanao.

Members should note that Typhoon Haiyan hit
the central Philippines in the central region of the
Visayas. Our negotiators were even very careful in
their choice of words. The Council is very familiar
with the nature, sensibilities and complexities of
negotiations - anywhere and everywhere. And yet one
still hears general sweeping references in statements
or terms regarding the Philippines that cause one to
wonder if they are at all reflective of a geographical
knowledge of my country or helpful to national efforts.

The Philippine Government continues to work
closely with the United Nations for the promotion of
the interest of the children. The reports issued by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative and
the documents emanating from the Working Group
should follow from clear, accurate, verifiable and up-
to-date data. It is therefore important that gaps in the
reporting process that have been identified be addressed.
Old data must be discarded. The Philippines raised that
issue with the Working Group. The observation has
to be translated into appropriate recommendations.
The Security Council must be cognizant and address
those gaps. The integrity of the reports and work of the
Security Council and everybody else involved rests, in
fact, on such basic requirements.

Let me also bring to the fore additional points
that need to be highlighted and commented on. We
acknowledge and are grateful for the due recognition
given to the positive developments that have taken
place in the Philippines. Those institutional and legal
developments need to be appreciated in the larger
context of inclusive and sustainable growth and the
peace and development agenda of my Government. It is
a delicate balance that we in the Philippines are trying
to achieve. The work carried out here on children should
support the work that is being done at the country level.

The Philippines also wishes to take exception
to the statement in the report of the Working Group,
recognizing that

"children's vulnerability to violations and abuses
committed by parties to the armed conflict
might have increased in areas in the Philippines
affected by Typhoon Haiyan, and urging relevant
international governmental and non-governmental
agencies working in affected areas to bear this risk
in mind" (S/AC.5]/2014/1, para. 6 (d)).

My delegation wishes to know the factual basis
of that statement. It bears noting that Typhoon
Haiyan - the strongest typhoon ever recorded in
history to hit landfall - while cutting a huge swathe
through the country, significantly affected provinces
in the Visayas region, not in Mindanao. Those are not
areas of operation of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front,
with which we have forged a lasting solution and which
might be slighted by those reports or comments, or
the Abu Sayyaf Group or other armed bands. Previous
reports of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General will bear that out.

There were a number of nasty reports that came
out at the time, including on the trafficking of children,
but all had shaky factual bases; such reports came out
to advance the specific interests and hidden agendas
of certain groups - but not the armed groups. I would
refer, for instance, to the report that relief goods and
medicines from the United Kingdom were diverted to
private distributors or markets outside the calamity-
stricken areas for private gain, but there were no such
distributors in kind from the United Kingdom. Given
the very real challenges that confront my nation's
reconstruction and rebuilding efforts in the aftermath
of Typhoon Haiyan, such speculative statements are
quite insensitive and outright irresponsible, Thet
are a disservice to the thousands of children in the
typhoon-affected areas who need all the help they can
get at this very crucial time.

I take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-
General for visiting the calamity-stricken areas and the
international community - including the countries of
my region and those represented here - for the very
kind support they have extended to my Government,
their relief efforts, and their assistance the recovery,
reconstruction and development of the affected areas.

My Government wishes to inform the Council
that the fourth and final annex on the Bangsamoro
was recently signed. It is the last the 12 annexes of the
comprehensive framework agreement that was signed
more than two years ago. Throughout that period, there
has been tranquility in the area other than isolated cases
of violence. By the end of this month, the comprehensive
agreement will be signed.

Allow me to reiterate the position of the Philippine
Government. We value the sanctity of every human life,
particularly the lives of our children and youth. Our
position is unchanged - the situation in the Philippines
does not warrant any inclusion on the list. The concrete
developments and the concerns we have descrived,
including on data and reporting, should be taken into
full account. The Philippines offers more positive
lessons learned and points of advancement rather than
setbacks, which warrant our exclusion from the list.

The operational activities of the United Nations
could provide concrete instruments for the promotion
of the interests of the children. It would in fact be
an indication of failure on the part of the Security
Council, even on an issue that is very important but
of tangentional concern to the Council, if no final
action were taken with respect to those countries
on the list that are clearly not in situations of armed
conflict. The appropriate agencies or United Nations
operational activities can do more, instead, to secure
the improvement of the situation of children in those
countries and free up the Security Council to engage
in the larger and more pressing issues of international
peace and security.

