I thank Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her informative briefing, and I would like to express our appreciation to her and all the staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for their dedicated work. I also welcome the Permanent Representative of Iraq to this meeting. In May, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2522 (2020), extending the mandate of UNAMI for one year. It was a clear message of support from the international community to Iraq for its stabilization, reconstruction and development efforts. At present, the Government and the people of Iraq, under the leadership of Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi, are working hard to address the economic challenges, advance the political process, fight terrorism and combat the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The international community has every reason to commend those efforts and to support Iraq's pursuit of peace, development and a better future for its people. In that connection, I wish to highlight the following points. First, we should respect Iraq's sovereignty, political independence and territorial integrity. As Iraq is planning to hold early elections in June 2021, the political process in the country is at a crucial stage. The international community should respect Iraq's ownership of and leadership in all its endeavours. In giving a helping hand, the international community must listen first to the views of Iraq, respect its sovereignty and refrain from imposing solutions and interfering in its internal affairs. UNAMI should provide election assistance in accordance with the mandate entrusted to it by the relevant resolutions. Iraq has repeatedly protested against the unilateral military actions of some countries on its territory. We reiterate that Iraq's sovereignty and territorial integrity should always be respected. We join the Secretary-General in calling on the parties concerned to resolve issues that could escalate tensions in Iraq through peaceful means. We welcome the continued efforts of Iraq to build balanced and mutually beneficial relations with its neighbours and partners, and we commend the collaboration between Iraq and Kuwait in resolving the issue of missing Kuwaiti persons and property. Secondly, we should support Iraq in safeguarding its national security and combating terrorism. At the opening of the 2020 virtual counter-terrorism week last month, Secretary-General Guterres warned that terrorists are exploiting the COVID-19 pandemic to advance their objectives. He specifically mentioned that the terrorist force is continuing its efforts to reassert itself in Iraq and Syria. His call for vigilance is further vindicated by the recent increase in terrorist attacks in Iraq. We call on the international community to continue to support Iraq in consolidating the hard-won results of counter-terrorism and in addressing the issue of foreign terrorist fighters. We should also support Iraq in bringing terrorists to justice in accordance with its domestic laws and reject double standards and politicization in counter-terrorism. China recognizes the important work of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/ Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) in collecting evidence and encourages UNITAD to ensure Iraq's full access to the evidence so as to advance its national accountability efforts. Thirdly, we should help Iraq to address the current challenges and boost socioeconomic development. Iraq is now facing economic and fiscal hardship, exacerbated by low oil prices and the COVID-19 pandemic. We welcome the measures taken by the Government of Iraq to tackle those challenges, such as enhancing preparedness and responsiveness to the pandemic, ratifying the Domestic and External Borrowing Law, fighting corruption, et cetera. We also welcome the resumption of talks between the federal and Kurdistan Regional Governments on revenue- and resource-sharing, and we encourage their continued engagement to resolve other outstanding issues. Iraq has suffered immensely from wars. The Iraqi people are longing for a stable and happy life. The international community has an important role to play in this journey of hope. We must intensify efforts to help Iraq carry out reconstruction, diversify its economy, create more jobs, eradicate poverty and improve public services and livelihoods. Promises of help should be fulfilled. There should be no blank check and no political strings attached. Amid the recent surge of COVID-19 cases in Iraq, more international assistance is urgently needed to fight the pandemic and strengthen Iraq's public health system. China stands with the Government and the people of Iraq in their pursuit of peace and development. We support their efforts to safeguard national sovereignty and security. We join their fight against COVID-19 by sending our expert teams and providing medical supplies. China will continue to enhance its bilateral relations with Iraq; deepen cooperation, including through the Belt and Road Initiative; and contribute to its socioeconomic development for the benefit of all Iraqis.
