Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote d'Ivoire notes with great interest the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1104), His
Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, and reiterates its
support for his tireless efforts to promote sustainable
peace and security throughout the world in general, and
in West Africa and the Sahel in particular.

My country commends his Special Representative
and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel, Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, on his
outstanding briefing, which apprised the Security
Council of the progress made since the report of the
Secretary-General was published in June 2017. He also
cited the many ongoing humanitarian and security
challenges that continue to weaken the building blocks
of peace and security in a region already sorely tested
by several socioeconomic issues. The gains made in the
area of political governance spark hope, because they
are part and parcel of an irreversible process of deep-
seated change under way in our society. The Council
must continue to support efforts at dialogue and
peaceful dispute resolution in some States of the region.

In spite of the overall progress made in West
Africa, my country remains concerned about the
ongoing threats to terrorism and violent extremism in
the region, which are linked to transnational organized
crime and trafficking of all kinds, in particular
trafficking in migrants, illegal drugs, weapons and
persons. The phenomenon is exacerbated by poverty
and unemployment, in particular among young people
in areas where it is difficult for the State to exercise
its authority. The quest for sustainable solutions to
such challenges leaves us no other option but to work
together to adopt a holistic, coordinated approach that
would enable is to reduce threats to peace and security.
To that end, the delegation of Cote d'Ivoire believes that
action must be taken at three levels.

First, action must be taken at the political and
strategic level to ensure greater consistency among
mechanisms in order to strengthen security, political
governance and democracy in the West Africa and the
Sahel. In that regard, we think it essential to fully exploit
the comparative advantages of regional organizations,
in particular the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), whose
successive interventions in Guinea-Bissau, Mali,
Burkina Faso and The Gambia have demonstrated the
full extent of their capabilities in the areas of conflict
prevention and conflict management in the countries
concerned. Following the recent holding of peaceful
presidential elections and the subsequent democratic
transfer of power in Liberia, one of C6te d'Ivoire's
neighbours, we are hopeful that the country has
turned away from political and military crises, turned
over a new leaf and is now writing a new story that
is full of hope. It would enable this brotherly country
to continue to build peace and remain on the path of
socioeconomic development.

In that regard, we would like to congratulate
Liberia's political actors and its people on setting
a good example in Africa in general and in West
Africa in particular. Now more than ever, it is up
to the international community, in the light of the
withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in Liberia,
which is scheduled for March, to continue to support
the efforts of the Liberian Government and the
country's civil society organizations with a View
to building on the gains of the State's transition to
democracy and bringing about sustainable peace and
reconciliation that is indispensable to the country's
socioeconomic development.

The implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel through an innovative
multisectoral approach, and greater consistency among
regional initiatives is also vital and should do more
to strengthen security and enhance the resilience of
States and people of the region to crises. However, it
must be underscored that if the Strategy is to succeed,
all partners, including countries of the region and
international donors, must honour their commitments.

Secondly, at the operational level, it is important
to continue efforts aimed at forging synergies between
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) Joint Force
in their efforts to combat organized terrorist groups
that are now equipped with increasingly powerful
and sophisticated tools. In that regard, I welcome the
adoption on 8 December 2017 of resolution 2391 (2017),
which outlines MINUSMA's logistical and operational
support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force in an effort to
enhance its logistical and operational capabilities, as an
essential factor in achieving that objective.

By the same token, and in line with the
recommendations of the fifty-second ordinary session
of the Authority of Heads of State and Government of
the ECOWAS, held in Abuja on 15 December 2017, cote
d'Ivoire calls for the implementation of predictable and
sustainable funding mechanisms for the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force. It hopes that the commitments made during the
donor conferences in Berlin and Paris are honoured so
as to raise the funding required to ensure that the force
becomes operational in March.

My country also welcomes efforts made by countries
participating in the Multinational Joint Task Force,
which have curbed the operations and geographical
spread of Boko Haram. However, the information we
have regarding the withdrawal of a major country's
contingent is a source of concern.

Thirdly, we need to envision a more inclusive
socioeconomic development of the countries in
West Africa and the Sahel, especially in rural areas
where poverty-stricken and unemployed youth are
easy recruitment prey for combatants. Cote d'Ivoire
welcomes the launch of the Alliance for the Sahel, which
aims to bring together all the initiatives promoting
development in the Sahel region.

To conclude, I recall that there must be synergy
in the actions taken by the countries and regional
institutions of West Africa and the Sahel and the
United Nations with a view to ensuring lasting peace
and inclusive development. Such synergy will help us
to address the root causes of conflict in the region. In
any case, my delegation remains convinced that despite
the regional context, which seems to be particularly
difficult, UNOWAS continues to be an important tool
for conflict prevention in West Africa and the Sahel.
In that regard and in full cooperation with the other
members of the Security Council, cote d'Ivoire will
lend its full support to UNOWAS for the achievement
of the common goals shared by the Council, namely,
the maintenance of peace and security and promoting
development in West Africa and the Sahel.

