Mr. Yamakazi (Japan): I would like to express
my appreciation to you, Madam President, for
presiding over today's debate. I would also like to
commend Ms. Sandra Honore, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in Haiti, for her invaluable
and significant contribution to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I thank
her for her comprehensive briefing this morning. I
also wish to pay tribute to the men and women of the
MINUSTAH for the commitment and fortitude they
have demonstrated under difficult circumstances.

I welcome the Secretary-General's report on
MINUSTAH (S/2014/162), issued on 7 March. As the
report points out, the adoption of the electoral law and
the launching of an inter-Haitian dialogue process are
encouraging signs that can lead to overcoming the
recurrent political crises and defuse tensions. Various
challenges persist but significant progress has been
made in the stabilization and recovery process in Haiti.
In that regard, the support provided by MINUSTAH,
such as increasing the capacity of the Haitian National
Police, building electoral capacity, strengthening the
rule of law and supporting political dialogue, has been
indispensable.

Japan, as a close friend of Haiti, has also been
contributing to the recovery process in the country.
A total number of approximately 2,200 Japanese
Self-Defense Force personnel served as part of the
engineering unit that was dispatched until December
2012. Their activities contributed to clearing away
rubble and debris, building facilities and transporting
supplies in the aftermath of the earthquake that hit
Haiti in 2010. Moreover, at the time of the withdrawal
of its personnel, Japan donated engineering equipment
to the Government of Haiti and prefabricated houses to
MINUSTAH.

In addition to the Japan Self-Defense Force
contribution, my country has disbursed more than
$150 million since 2010 for the reconstruction of Haiti.
Basic infrastructure in the country remains fragile.
Therefore, Japan has focused its assistance on restoring
and establishing basic social services in the fields of
health, hygiene and education.

Recently, on 7 March, the Government of Japan
agreed to provide approximately $6.8 million in
assistance for a water supply facilities reconstruction
project in Leogane and approximately $7 million for a
hospital reconstruction project in Jacmel. In addition,
on 11 March, the Government of Japan signed a
document with UNICEF to provide assistance totalling
approximately $2.5 million for a cholera-prevention
project in Haiti. Further, approximately $3 million for
underprivileged farmers in Haiti has also been decided.
Japan intends to continue to support the recovery in and
cooperate with Haiti.

The Secretary-General's report raises an important
issue about the future United Nations presence in
Haiti. Japan welcomes the integrated planning process
on the post-2016 United Nations configuration in the
country that has been launched and the five broad
possible options presented in the report on the future
of MINUSTAH.

Mindful of the presidential elections scheduled
for November 2015, while also taking into account
the developments to date in Haiti, Japan was
encouraged to learn that a reduction in MINUSTAH
personnel - a withdrawal of 1,249 infantry and
engineering personnel - is planned to take place by
the end of June 2014. Through support to the recovery
efforts in Haiti, Japan hopes that, in the near future,
conditions on the ground will enable a progressive
drawdown of the MINUSTAH operation and a handover
of its functions to the Government of Haiti.

Two decades have passed since the first Japan-
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) consultation was
held in 1993. The year 2014 has been designated as the
Japan-CARICOM. Friendship Year in order to enhance
the relationship in diverse fields. The friendship built
between Japan and Haiti is also a strong and solid one.
Japan will never forget the solidarity shown by Haiti
in the aftermath of the Great East Japan Earthquake in
2011. Through that friendship, I am confident that we
can overcome the difficult challenges ahead of us and
advance towards a brighter future.

