Mr. Brende (Norway): Mr. President, I thank you
for this initiative. It is a very important meeting. With
the ongoing war in Syria and its escalating humanitarian
consequences both in the region and in Europe, it is
with deep concern that we have witnessed the vicious
cycle of escalating violence and tensions in Israel and
Palestine during the past weeks. The process of finding
a negotiated end to the conflict by establishing two
States living side by side in peace and security is stuck.
The two peoples now live side by side in fear, anger and
distress.

I would like to make three observations.

First, I welcome all efforts to promote calm,
encourage restraint and prevent actions that further
exacerbate tensions, in particular around the holy sites
in Jerusalem. But more needs to be done. I call on
every politician, community elder and religious leader
to refrain from reckless and inflammatory statements
and actions; reject the extremists who pursue a political
agenda to turn the current situation into a religious
conflict; condemn all acts ofterror; and show respect for
the sanctity and the dignity of the holy sites. I welcome
commitments to maintaining the status quo at the holy
esplanade. Security coordination between Israelis and
Palestinians must continue. Like every other State,
Israel has the right to take necessary measures to protect
its citizens against violence and unprovoked killings.
At the same time, measures construed as collective
punishments, such as house demolitions, should stop
immediately, both in Jerusalem and on the West Bank,
as they feed violence.

Secondly, I call for a return to a credible political
process. While tensions at the holy sites in Jerusalem
instigated the current crisis, lack of hope for a better
political future contributes to increased frustration
and anger among the Palestinian youth. No amount of
frustration justifies violence. Still, the crisis cannot be
resolved through de-escalation and security measures
alone. The current tensions call for immediate and
coordinated political steps by both sides. Israel should
stop building new settlements on occupied land and
expanding existing ones. Such building undermines any
political process and turns hope into frustration, anger
and rage. Palestine needs to reform and strengthen
its political institutions and governance structures.
In particular, the West Bank and Gaza need to be
reintegrated into one authority that fully respects the
parameters of the security agreements between Israel
and the Palestine Liberation Organization.

Thirdly, cooperation on tangible measures
to strengthen the Palestinian economy and the
reconstruction of Gaza can pave the way for the
political process. Last month, I chaired the meeting of
the donors group, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, here
in New York. The donors reiterated their continued
commitment to supporting the establishment of
capable and robust Palestinian institutions and a
viable economy. Measures need to be undertaken in
the West Bank, Gaza and Area C. Unresolved issues
related to the Paris Protocol need to be resolved without
delay. Donors cannot be expected to compensate for
unresolved economic issues between the two parties. I
urge the donors to increase their support.

It is clear, however, that no donor support can
substitute or compensate for inadequate measures
by the Palestinian Authority or by Israel themselves.
Also, achieving the full potential of a Palestinian State
with well-functioning political and governmental
institutions, including a sustainable economy, requires
a political resolution of the conflict. I therefore welcome
the interest expressed by both sides in doing more and
in working harder together to improve the Palestinian
economy and reconstruct Gaza.

Direct economic cooperation is no substitute for
a political process, but may help to build stability
and establish better grounds for the political process.
While the parties themselves hold the keys to resuming
talks, the international community needs to engage
and support them in a concerted manner that can bring
the conflict to a resolution. Business as usual cannot
continue.

I started my statement by referring to Syria. To
facilitate a more coherent and better funded response to
the humanitarian needs, Norway, Germany, the United
Kingdom and Kuwait are cooperating to convene a
donor conference next year. We hope that, while we
struggle to find a political solution to the conflict,
we can develop ways and means to better face the
humanitarian challenges.

