The President (spoke in French): I wish to
warmly welcome the Secretary-General, Ministers and
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisionalrulesofprocedure,Iinvitetherepresentatives
of Afghanistan, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Kuwait,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines,
Portugal, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Switzerland, Thailand,
Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and Yemen to participate in
this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Virginia
Gamba, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict; and
Mr. Mubin Shaikh, civil society representative.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Charles Whitely, Head of the Human Rights and
Social Affairs Section ofthe Delegation ofthe European
Union to the United Nations; and Mr. Swen Dornig,
Senior Advisor Children and Armed Conflict, Resolute
Support Mission, North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/82l, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.

I wish to also draw the attention ofCouncil members
to document S/2017/892, which contains a letter dated
20 October 2017 from the Charge d'affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of France to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres.

