Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
First of all I would like to join others in welcoming you,
Mr. President, and in expressing gratitude to Bangladesh, to
Ambassador Chowdhury and to the entire delegation of
Bangladesh for preparing today's meeting.

Russia regards the humanizing of international
relations as one of the most important aspects of
establishing a non-violent world, which is one of the
strategic goals of Russian foreign policy in the twenty-first
century.

In this context, we believe that in the mandates of
multifunctional peacekeeping operations approved by the
Security Council, the important place being assigned to
minimizing the human suffering associated with armed
conflicts is absolutely justified. This work includes assisting
victims of violations of international humanitarian law.

While not equating the functions of the Security
Council with those of humanitarian organizations, we are
convinced that, under the current circumstances, the
Security Council must lend active political support to the
activities of these organizations, and that humanitarian work
in general must be backed up by the authority of the
Security Council. We support the inclusion in documents
adopted by the Council of provisions that require parties to
conflicts to respect international humanitarian law, ensure
the safety of international humanitarian personnel and allow
unimpeded access to all those in need of assistance.

Humanitarian assistance should in no way be used as
an instrument for exerting political influence on any of the
parties to a political conflict, and it should be provided
exclusively on the basis of the principles of neutrality and
impartiality. The activities of international humanitarian
organizations and of the relevant non-governmental
organizations should not violate the sovereignty of the host
Governments and should not be at odds with the political
efforts being made to resolve a given conflict. This is an
incontrovertible rule for the coordination of the
peacekeeping, humanitarian-assistance and development-
assistance efforts of United Nations organs and agencies.

Russia supports the expansion of the practice of
consultations and cooperation between the Security
Council and humanitarian organizations. This means first
and foremost involving the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and all other divisions
of the Secretariat here in New York in the planning and
preparation stage of peacekeeping operations having a
humanitarian component.

The experience of recent years has shown that the
prevention and settlement of humanitarian crises has a
direct bearing on the maintenance of regional and
international stability. But it is also clear that we cannot
end violations of international humanitarian law by taking
actions that themselves violate the Charter of the United
Nations. Arbitrary military measures that sidestep the
Security Council - including those taken under the
pretext of preventing so-called humanitarian
catastrophes - are not acceptable and can only worsen
crises.

Russia is open to the idea of working to develop
criteria and legal frameworks for activities of the
international community, including enforcement activities
in cases of extreme humanitarian situations. However,
such work should be carried out collectively, and firmly
rooted in the United Nations Charter, thus enabling us to
provide agreed decisions whose legitimacy would not be
subject to doubt.

For these reasons, the Russian delegation supports
the adoption of a presidential statement today on the
humanitarian aspects of issues before the Security
Council.

