Ms. Muthukumarana (Sri Lanka): I join other
speakers who have commended you for convening
today's important debate. The delegation of Sri Lanka
associates itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Finding a just and durable solution to the
situation in the Middle East has been a priority for the
international community since 1948. The Middle East
conflict attracts a considerable amount of international
attention and resources. We look forward to proactive
leadership to end this unsatisfactory situation.

The conditions ofthe Palestinians must be improved
urgently. This can only contribute to improving
the situation of the region as a whole. Successive
generations of Palestinians have suffered owing to a
number of factors, in particular by being dispossessed
from much of their land.

In recent years, the continuing blockade of Gaza
has added to the pain and frustrations of Palestinians
living in the area. The blockade in Gaza has created an
aid-dependent economy and given rise to a deep sense
of helplessness. In 2012, its economy grew by 5.9 per
cent, albeit from a low base, which was less than half
the rate achieved in 2011. This has translated into
very high unemployment rates and low wages, which,
coupled with the increasing cost ofliving, have directly
impacted on the Gazans' access to food. In 2012, 34 per
cent of households, approximately 1.6 million people,
were assessed to be food insecure. In addition, the
continuing blockade continues to place a heavy burden
on the already-stressed education system in the Gaza
Strip. The recent closure of the illegal tunnels has put
further pressures on the people of Gaza. There is an
urgent humanitarian need to lift the restrictions on
most imports, including essential supplies, and exports,
through the legitimate crossings between Israel and the
Gaza Strip.

We note with concern that the United Nations is
hard-pressed to keep the vast majority of the people
of Gaza supplied with their minimum necessities. In
the Gaza Strip, the funding difficulties of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) have reached
a critical point. Despite significantly scaling back
humanitarian interventions since 2012, the Agency's
emergency appeal remains severely underfunded. We
underline our strong support for the work of United
Nations agencies in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including UNRWA and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs.

The situation in the West Bank is also of serious
concern. Although the number of search and arrest
operations in recent months has remained stable,
disturbingly the intensity of confrontations during
these operations and the number of resulting civilian
casualties has increased.

Israel has an obligation to protect the Palestinian
civilian population in the occupied territories and
desist from actions that are contrary to the established
rules of international law and practice. The settlement
activity is a violation of the law as reflected in article
49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, of 1949. The
Security Council, the General Assembly, the Human
Rights Council, the Economic and Social Council and
the International Court of Justice have all condemned
the settlement activities as being contrary to the law.
Ending such practices, which contribute to much human
suffering and the continuing friction in the occupied
territories, is an essential step to improve the situation
on the ground and to build confidence.

We are very much mindful of the security needs
of Israel. The indiscriminate attacks against Israeli
civilians will only widen the gap between the parties.
We encourage both parties to exercise the utmost
restraint for the sake of the peace process and the
safety of civilians. In addition, a climate conducive to
peace would be encouraged by a mutual adoption of an
approach sensitive to each other's concerns.

Considering the unsatisfactory circumstances in
the occupied Palestinian territories, we hope that every
effort will be made to achieve success in the resumed
negotiations so that both the Israeli and the Palestinian
peoples will be able to enjoy peace and prosperity
in their own lands. The objective of the negotiations
should be to secure a lasting peace accord which leads
to the establishment of a fully sovereign and secure
State of Palestine.

Sri Lanka supports the implementation of the
resolutions of the General Assembly regarding the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to statehood
and the attainment of a two-State solution on the basis
of the 1967 borders. The political unity and economic
advancement of the Palestinian people will contribute
to the viability of that solution. We therefore sincerely
encourage political rapprochement between Gaza and
the West Bank.

