Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
The situation in the Middle East and the conflict
between Israel and Palestine are matters that have
burdened the United Nations and the Security Council
for more than six decades now. For those who have
followed the events, and particularly the discussions in
the Organization, our attention is drawn to the
repetition of statements and denunciations not just by
the parties, but also by other participants. It is only
when leaders with the stature of true statesmen and
stateswomen have lifted their eyes above the
immediate disputes to look to the horizon, trying to put
into true perspective the material costs but especially
the human costs as well, in order to move beyond
nationalist and sectarian impulses, that we have seen
really meaningful steps being taken. It is thus that
today, more than 60 years after the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 181 (II) and more than 10 years
after the deadline established in Oslo, we again see the
hope of a renewal of direct negotiations between the
parties, so that there can be a settlement of all matters
related to the final status within a year. We therefore
now need leaders who are willing to abandon business
as usual and thinking in terms of confrontation, and
who will instead think in terms of peace and
cooperation. There are some positive signs in that
regard. In the light of those events, my statement today
is different from the statements we customarily make
here.

Costa Rica is not unaware of the difficulties
facing Israeli and Palestinian leaders. We do not ignore
the goals, aspirations, rights, pressures and the weight
of history that lead each party to distrust the other and
to think that tomorrow, or in three or 30 years' time,
they will be in a better position to achieve their
ultimate goals. But that is nothing but a mirage and has
shown itself to be just that - a mirage, not the way
towards an oasis.
10-59122

The current leaders of Israel and Palestine have
found a way to come to the table and reach agreements.
Moreover, above and beyond the pressures, both
parties are aware of the central features of what must
be a final agreement to the conflict. The basis for a
solution should be the acceptance of two States within
secure and recognized borders whose inhabitants live
free from threats of being pushed out of their homes
and lands or being kidnapped or subject of rocket
attacks - and who instead cooperate to increase
production, bolster access to health and education and
strengthen the prospects for a peaceful and hopeful
future.

There is a possible agreement on the table. It still
requires fine-tuning and necessary elements that
complement, and not substitute for, the crucial
conditions, namely, the establishment of a Palestinian
State and the signing of a genuine and secure peace.

As we have said on numerous occasions, Costa
Rica believes that the only sustainable solution to the
conflict in the Middle East is one based on absolute
respect for international law - not on force. Today, the
road to sustainable peace entails respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights. The
parties should focus on the central aspects of the
conflict. That was essentially the message that
President Laura Chinchilla brought to her meeting with
Israeli President Shimon Peres and Palestinian
Authority President Mahmoud Abbas here at
Headquarters in September.

I would like to express our satisfaction with the
implicit support expressed by the Arab League at its
meeting in Sirte, Libya, for President Abbas to
continue negotiations with the Israeli side, despite the
end of Israel's unilateral moratorium on construction.
However, that hopeful sign is not open-ended. The
parties should find a way to relaunch a constructive
dialogue.

Costa Rica continues to support the efforts of
Palestinian officials to restore Palestinian unity on the
basis of the commitments of the Palestine Liberation
Organization. While President Abbas and his team have
used the guidelines to improve security conditions and
free their people from violence, Palestinian unity has
been systematically weakened by radical groups that
pose an obstacle to the well-being of the people they
claim to defend. Israel also needs to be able to count on
valid interlocutors who can negotiate and bring an end
to the conflict. In that context, Arab countries are also
strategic partners in peacebuilding. They should
therefore help the Palestinian Authority to prevent the
conflict from becoming a vehicle for the actions of
extremists.

We know that that is not an easy process. We also
know that the conflict has its roots in disputes both old
and new. Costa Rica does not ignore, nor are we
disingenuous about, the difficulties involved in
reaching agreements to disputes between countries and
peoples. But we also know that peoples and leaders
come to a moment when they understand that they
must put aside some of their aspirations and goals in
order to achieve others that are surely more important.

Human lives and the well-being of the children of
today and tomorrow are more important than promises
to defeat an enemy. In the face of a spirit of
confrontation and heated passions, Costa Rica calls for
a spirit of peace, understanding and good faith. Let us
remove obstacles from our path, be they large or small,
and call for agreement on what is necessary and
crucial.

If the Organization wishes to play its role in this
conflict, it is time that it speak up to encourage those
who are reasonable, those who want to find solutions.
It is time to silence fanatics and extremists, wherever
they come from. Their voices and their evil predictions
should be overcome by providing support, tranquillity
and confidence to those who in their very homes
distrust international diplomacy. We must give them
reasons to have faith and to trust. Costa Rica calls upon
the parties to give their best and seek a meeting of the
wills.

