Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate, and I welcome Mr. Nickolay Mladenov's
presence and compelling briefing. The timing of this
open debate, a year after the conflict in Gaza, is sadly
fitting. Today is an important moment to remember all
those who lost their lives, recommit ourselves to doing
all we can to prevent further violence and extend that
commitment beyond Gaza to Syria and elsewhere in the
Middle East region.

As we heard in the moving Arria Formula meeting
earlier this week, the painful consequences of the
fighting in Gaza continue to this day. It is increasingly
clear that urgent action is needed to preserve the two-
State solution and alleviate the impact of the occupation.
The British Foreign Secretary saw that at first hand
during his recent visit. Improving conditions in Gaza
and the West Bank is a vital first step.

Israel's recent plans to construct more than 900 new
settlement housing units in the West Bank are clearly
contrary to the goal ofpeace, and so are the plans to evict
Palestinians from the village of Susiya. We are pleased
that Israel has taken some steps to ease restrictions in
Gaza, but increasing exports and doubling the water
supply are not enough. The humanitarian situation
remains unacceptable. More than 100,000 people are
still displaced. Power outages last for up to 12 hours a
day, and 120,000 people are still without a water supply.

We need to see rapid progress in improving living
conditions, the quality of life and the economic outlook
in Gaza. The movement of people between Gaza or the
West Bank and Israel should be eased. Exports from
Gaza should be allowed to increase to 2007's levels. The
water supply should be doubled again, and restrictions
on fishing, electricity and waste-water treatment should
be eased.

Action is needed from both sides. We call on
the Palestinian Authority, led by President Abbas, to
take concrete steps to return to Gaza. We urge him to
advance reconciliation and demonstrate clearly that he
is the leader of all Palestinian people.

The international community has a vital role to
play, too. All of us should urge donors to fulfil their
financial pledges in order to aid reconstruction efforts
in Gaza without delay. Of all the international pledges
made in Cairo, only 27 per cent have so far been met.
The United Kingdom is playing its part. We support
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East in its vital work, as
well Mr. Mladenov's calls for donors to step up. Since
last summer we have been one of the largest donors to
Gaza, providing more than $26 million in emergency
assistance, and we pledged an additional $31 million at
the reconstruction conference in Cairo.

Together we must work harder than ever to
create conditions on the ground to foster a return to
meaningful negotiations. In so doing, we can bring real
improvements to those on both sides who have suffered
for far too long. And the Council must be ready to play
its part when those conditions have been created.

That same approach is also desperately needed
in Syria. For too long we have been briefed on the
indiscriminate use of barrel bombs by the Al-Assad
regime. The recent briefing from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs made it clear
that attacks on hospitals are still commonplace. That is
barbaric and unacceptable. For too long we have heard
distressing reports of the use of chemical weapons.
The Council will soon have the chance to send a clear
message to Al-Assad on that issue, and I hope that all
members will support the draft resolution on a joint
investigative mechanism when it is presented to the
Council.

It is clearer than ever that there can be no military
victory in Syria; only a political solution can end the
bloodshed. I look forward to the briefing next week
by Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. It is vital that
we redouble our support for his efforts to bring about
an inclusive political transition that operationalizes
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). A
Government that acts on behalf of all Syrians, one
strong enough to defeat the threat of extremism, is long
overdue.

The consequences of not dealing with the crisis in
Syria can be seen in the camps across neighbouring
countries. Millions of Syrians are now reliant on
the generosity of Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey and the
international community. Lebanon has accepted nearly
1.2 million Syrian refugees, increasing its population by
nearly a quarter. We must recognize and help to alleviate
the pressure that has created. The United Kingdom
has given $296 million to support Lebanon. We are
making a real difference by providing food, shelter and

medical aid to the most vulnerable in refugee and host
communities. But we are concerned that the Lebanese
crisis response plan remains desperately underfunded.
All of us must work with donors, particularly in the
Gulf, to help meet the basic needs of host communities
and refugees. It is crucial that the Lebanese Government
elect a President without any further delay, so that it
can meet the needs of all Lebanese people.

I would like to conclude as I began, by focusing
on the timeliness of this debate. On Monday, the
Council unanimously agreed on resolution 2231 (2015),
on Iran's nuclear programme, bringing more than
a decade of negotiations to an end. It is good for the
region and good for the international community. We
hope and expect that the agreement will herald a new
era of positive Iranian engagement in the region. In
reaching the agreement, the five permanent members
of the Council, together with our German and European
Union colleagues, showed a unity of purpose that is
sometimes sadly lacking in other Council business
on the Middle East. It is that spirit of cooperation and
determination that we will need to harness for our work
on the Middle East peace process and Syria. We have
seen the consequences of our failure to do so for too
long.

