Mr. Bamya (Palestine): At the outset, I would like
to express our appreciation to the Polish presidency for
organizing today's important debate on a critical matter
at a critical time, and to thank the briefers for their
important contribution.

International law governs our international
relations. Its rules have been formulated collectively
and are binding for all. The major developments of
international law have occurred as a reaction to horrific
tragedies in an attempt to prevent their recurrence and
preserve future generations. After the horrors of the
Second World War, including the Holocaust, humankind
established the United Nations, adopted the Charter of
the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, formulated the Geneva Conventions
and formed its first and still imperfect international
criminal courts. At that time, in 1948, while humankind
was enacting that set of rules to preserve lives and
rights, the Palestinian people were enduring the Nakba,
the dispossession and forced displacement of our nation
and denial of our rights that continues to this day.

Despite being the victims of double standards
that have allowed Israel's impunity to continue and
enabled the widespread and systematic crimes against
our people to recur, the Palestinian people have
continued to place their faith in international law and
have reaffirmed time and again their commitment to
international law and to peaceful, legal and diplomatic
means for achieving their inalienable rights. The State
of Palestine has joined international human rights law
instruments without reservations. It has joined the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols and
declared its commitment to abiding by the International
Court of Justice's decisions and opinions. It has joined
the International Criminal Court and granted it
broad jurisdiction.

The occupying Power's intentional direction of
attacks at our civilian population; its transfer of parts of
its own civilian population into the territory it occupies;
its deportation or transfer of the population of the
occupied territory within or outside that territory; and
its persecution of any identifiable group or collective,
including a national group, all constitute war crimes
under the Rome Statute and, in certain circumstances,
crimes against humanity. There can be no doubt that
Israel is committing such actions in broad daylight,
intentionally and without shame or fear of being held
accountable. I say without shame because Israel is now
trying to make us responsible for its occupation of our
land and the oppression of our people, and it is claiming
a right to security for itself, the occupying Power,
while denying a right to security and protection for the
occupied people.

International law is the law for all of us, and it must
be applicable to all. All Security Council resolutions
are binding and should be upheld. Impunity and double
standards undermine international law and, as such,
threaten international peace and security. Individual
States and United Nations bodies must fulfil their
responsibilities by respecting and ensuring respect for
international law. When it comes to Gaza, all we are
asking is that the law be implemented. Let usjust restate
the facts. Israeli snipers, implementing orders received
from the highest levels of Israel's political and military
bodies, have opened fire on people, including children,
protesting from the other side of the border, using live
ammunition, including ammunition that causes serious
and irreversible injury, and often shooting people in
the back, head or chest while they stood hundreds of
metres away. They have killed 100 people and wounded
thousands. Israel has not challenged those facts,
and should it do so, we have called for an impartial,
independent and transparent investigation. If they are
so confident that they are right, let them accept it.

Are there laws that we are unaware of that justify
such actions? For Israel to yell "security" or "terrorism"
is not sufficient grounds for international law to yield or
surrender. Those who shield Israel from accountability
for such actions, as well as those who blur the lines
between legal actions that can be undertaken by States
to ensure security and self-defence and what constitutes
a war crime or crime against humanity, embolden Israel
in pursuing its crimes. There can be no justification for
colonization, forcible displacement, the use ofunlawful
force or arbitrary detention, and yet today there are
650,000 Israeli settlers in the Palestinian territory that
has been occupied since 1967. Innocent civilians are
targeted and killed in indiscriminate attacks. More
than 800,000 Palestinians, the equivalent of 40 per
cent of our male population in the occupied territory,
have been imprisoned or detained since 1967, including
parliamentarians, children, women, journalists,
academics and artists.

The Israeli representative spoke so proudly of
Israeli courts today, and yet those courts are complicit in
the commission of these crimes. B'Tselem, explaining
its decision to cease cooperating with the military law-
enforcement system, including Israeli military courts,
stated that there is no longer any point in pursuing
justice and defending human rights by working with a
system whose real function is measured by its ability
to continue to successfully cover up unlawful acts and
protect perpetrators. How can we explain that reality?
By the number of Israeli leaders and senior military
officials who have been held accountable for these
actions 4 none. In 70 years, none. No sanctions have
even been discussed here, at any point in time, when
it comes to Israel. No measures of accountability have
ever been undertaken. We are the victims of Israeli
colonialism and oppression but we are also the victims
of impunity, without which these crimes would have
ended a long time ago. Without them, we would have
achieved our freedom and fulfilled our inalienable
rights and peace would have prevailed in our region.

Accountability is the path to peace. There is indeed
a bias when it comes to Israel in the United Nations
and beyond. It is that bias that is shielding it from
accountability. Despite the clarity of the law 4 as
reaffirmed in countless United Nations resolutions and
by the International Court of Justice, treaty bodies,
special procedures, virtually every single body on
Earth and every State 4 Palestine remains the most
important test of the credibility of international law and
of the international system, especially at a time when
the laws and system are more at risk than ever. This is
a test that the international community cannot afford
to fail.

