Mr. Reske-Nielsen: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to introduce the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), covering
the period from 7 January to 20 September 2012
(S/2012/765). I would like to acknowledge the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation,
Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, an old friend with whom I have
worked closely over the years.

I would like to begin by saying that it is an honour
for me to be here today to share with the Security
Council the great progress that Timor-Lcste has made
since 1999. When I arrived there for the first time in
that year, the country had literally been burned to the
ground. I returned in 2006 and witnessed how the
country's initial gains had been put to the test. What
I see today is a young country of resilient people, with
great potential, led with dedication and vision.

Let me first thank the members of the Security
Council for the consideration they exhibited for
Timor-Leste through the visit of their mission from
3 to 6 November. That visit, along with the visit of
the Secretary-General from 15 to 16 August, served
as a powerful symbol of international recognition for
the notable progress made by the people of Timor-
Leste since UNMIT was established, in 2006. It also
served as a reminder of the importance of ensuring
the international community's commitment to
support Timor-Leste beyond 31 December, when,
with the Council's concurrence, the United Nations
peacekeeping presence in Timor-Leste will end.

The end of peacekeeping operations in Timor-
Leste is justified by the successful completion of
critical benchmarks and the generally positive security
situation we have seen this year. The assumptions laid
out in the Joint Transition Plan signed by UNMIT
and the Government in September 2011 have been
met - stability prevails; the 2012 national elections
took place in accordance with international standards;
a Government was formed based on the outcome of
the elections; and the political opposition has space to
operate in line with democratic principles.

As detailed in the report of the Secretary-
General, there has also been substantial progress in
achieving the benchmarks set forth in the medium-
term strategy, as requested by the Security Council in
resolution 1802 (2008). HI may remind the Council,
those benchmarks were designed to help measure
progress in addressing the underlying challenges that
gave rise to the UNMIT mandate. They are divided
into four areas, ensuring, first, security and stability;
secondly, justice, the rule of law and human rights;
thirdly, a culture of democratic governance and
dialogue; and, fourthly, socioeconomic development.

Several events this year exemplify Timor-Leste's
continued progress. Perhaps most notable, from the
perspective of UNMIT's mandate, was the ceremony
on 31 October during which Prime Minister Kay Rala
Xanana Gusmao and I signed an exchange of letters
marking the certification of the full reconstitution
of the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL). That
was an acknowledgement that the PNTL was fully
capable of conducting all police functions throughout
the country. As the Council may remember, the PNTL
took on responsibility for policing in March of last
year, with UNMIT police subsequently providing
operational support, as required and requested, as well
as support for capacity-building and the institutional
strengthening of the PNTL. That ceremony also marked
the end of what was known as the reconstitution phase
of the PNTL. It also marked the end of UNMIT Police
operational support to the PNTL and the beginning of
the drawdown of UNMIT's police personnel.

The certification was the result of considered
assessment processes described in the report of the
Secretary-General, conducted jointly between the
Government and UNMIT. On 5 October, the joint
working group created to assess PNTL capacity
submitted its report to the PNTL General Commander
and UNMIT's Police Commissioner. The report was
generally positive about the PNTL's development, while
candidly pointing out areas where further strengthening
was needed. The General Commander and Police
Commissioner endorsed the working group's findings
in ajoint letter dated 12 October addressed to the Prime
Minister and to me. On that basis, the Prime Minister
and I agreed that the exchange of letters could proceed
on 31 October. At the ceremony, the President and the
Prime Minister spoke graciously about the support
that UNMIT Police had given since the Mission's
establishment. The Government also expressed its
gratitude for the services of the international security
forces, a sentiment that I would like to second here
today.

Despite the ongoing drawdown of UNMIT
Police, capacity-building activities based on the
Joint Development Plan of PNTL and UNMIT Police
continue. The plan will be 95 per cent implemented by
the end of November. As of today, over 1,100 training
activities have been completed under the Plan.

The reconstitution of the police service of Timor-
Leste is a milestone that marks the great advances of
the PNTL and civilian oversight authorities since 2006.
That is not to say that the PNTL is a perfect police
service. Significant capacity challenges remain, which
have been identified jointly by the Government and
UNMIT. I am sure the members ofthe Security Council
would agree that building an effective and responsible
police service is an ongoing effort that stretches over
many years. As in other areas, Timor-Leste is now at a
stage where those long-term efforts can be better served
by other forms of international cooperation. United
Nations agencies will continue to provide some support
to the PNTL post-2012. However, I would like to take
this opportunity to urge Member States to continue
their strong engagement with the PNTL, including
through the "Friends of PNTL" initiative, which is an
important venue to mobilize and coordinate external
support. With the planned departure of UNMIT, their
engagement will become even more important.

As the report of the Secretary-General indicates,
the risk of confrontation within or between security
forces has diminished considerably since 2006. The
military and the police coordinated well during the
election period, and there have been no reports of
serious tension between the two for several years. The
relationship between the security forces is a crucial
element for the long-term stability of the country and
will require the continuation of clear policy guidance
and strong leadership. In the meantime, the military
continues its own institutional development initiatives
and, like the PNTL, continues to make contributions
to other peacekeeping missions. It deployed a further
two officers to the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan on 22 October, while 17 PNTL
officers have qualified for peacekeeping deployment,
in addition to two officers currently serving with the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau.

The other major event this year that highlighted
Timor-Leste's progress was the conduct of the
presidential and parliamentary elections. The Secretary-
General's report describes in detail the logistical,
security and political arrangements put in place for
the successful elections. I would just like to highlight
that in all of these areas, while the United Nations still
provided important support, it was much less than in
2007. The electoral management bodies demonstrated
their growing capacity, for the first time the PNTL
had policing responsibilities for national elections, and
Timorese institutions led the development of a political
pact signed by almost all of the registered political
parties and presidential candidates. The excellent work
of the electoral management bodies bodes well for
future elections.
The overall climate surrounding the elections
this year was very different from that of 2007. Five
years ago, Timor-Leste was still wrestling with the
immediate consequences of 2006, and there was still
a feeling of trepidation about security around the
elections. This year, there were no serious incidents
of political violence during the election period, the
few complaints of alleged misconduct were channeled
through the appropriate national mechanisms, the
results were accepted by the public and all major
political actors, and national and international ob erver
groups made positive assessments of the elections.
The election demonstrated that all communities and
political leaders were united in their desire to take the
necessary measures to promote the future prosperity
and development of the country.

Since the elections, the prevailing political
atmosphere has been calm. Since its formation
on 8 August, the governing coalition has already
demonstrated its stability. In addition to Parliament's
consideration of the Government programme
mentioned in the report, on 17 October Parliament
approved a rectification to the 2012 State budget,
with all 40 of the coalition's Members of Parliament
voting in favour. The next major Government initiative
will be the presentation of the 2013 State budget to
Parliament. Meanwhile, the opposition is playing an
active and responsible part in parliamentary debates
and proceedings. In a positive sign of the focus on the
areas outside of the capital, Dili, President Taur Matan
Ruak began a series ofdistrict visits, meeting with rural
communities to discuss their concerns and aspirations.

As part of the efforts to enhance a culture of
democratic governance, UNMIT has supported national
and local leaders throughout the country in organizing
events called democratic governance forums, where
national and local leaders meet with communities to
discuss relevant themes, such as accountability and
leadership. The last forum featured President Taur
Matan Ruak on 25 October. Over the past four years,
175 forums have been held throughout the country, with
almost 12,000 participants. I sincerely hope that this
dialogue between State institutions and citizens will
continue after UNMIT departs.

Since the report of the Secretary-General was
issued, there has been one important development
related to accountability for crimes committed in 2006
and mentioned in the report of the Independent Special
Commission of Inquiry (S/2006/822). On 19 October,
a court rendered a decision in the case of an arson
attack that resulted in the death of six people, including
four children under the age of 18. Twelve defendants
were acquitted, while two were sentenced to 24 years"
imprisonment for crimes, including murder. The two
sentenced individuals have appealed the decision.

The Mission is on track to withdraw by 31 December.
The phased drawdown of UNMIT has been moving
apace. One ofthe Mission's regional offices has already
closed, with two to close later this month and the last
one in early December. The repatriation of UNMIT
police accelerated after the certification ceremony on
31 October, with only a residual presence to remain by
the end of November. The High-Level Committee on
Transition continues to oversee UNMIT's drawdown,
having met twice since the closing date ofthe Secretary-
General's report, with the participation of all the key
ministers and under the chairmanship of the President.
The implementation of the Joint Transition Plan is
proceeding well, and UNMIT is on track to complete
our activities and hand over priority activities and key
facilities in an orderly manner.

The only notable area where our work will not
be completed by the end of the mandate concerns the
investigations into cases relating to crimes against
humanity and other serious crimes committed between
1 January and 25 October 1999. Under the supervision
of the Office of the Prosecutor-General, the UNMIT
Serious Crimes Investigation Team has completed 319
of 396 investigations. It is projected that an additional
16 investigations will be concluded by 31 December,
leaving 61 investigations outstanding.

The United Nations and the broader international
community should and will, I am sure, remain engaged
in Timor-Leste beyond December 2012. Timor-Leste
still faces many challenges. However, in my opinion
a peacekeeping mission is no longer best placed to
support efforts to meet those challenges. Prime Minister
Gusmao himself noted in his letter to the Secretary-
General on 20 September (S/2012/736, annex) that
the country no longer requires a peacekeeping or
political mission. The time has come for Timor-Leste's
interaction with the international community to be
guided through different structures and modalities. The
Government has expressed its wish for an innovative
working relationship with the United Nations after
UNMIT's closure, and we are working closely with
the Government to shape that future partnership,
first and foremost through the work of the United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes. Delivering
effective support to Timor-Leste's development
and institution-building priorities will require the
continued commitment and financial contributions of
the international community.

In conclusion, I would like to say that it has been a
privilege for me to accompany the people of Timor-Leste
on their exceptional journey to peace and development,
and I wish them the best of luck as they continue to
move forward. I also wish to take the opportunity
to thank the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Shigeru Mochida, and all the
dedicated staff of the United Nations who have served
and continue to serve in Timor-Leste.

