The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

I too thank Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel, for her
briefing, and I congratulate her on her leadership.

Faced with the situation in the Sahel region,
characterized by multifaceted challenges, the
international community must waste no time in taking
action. Following the high-level visit of the Secretary-
General to the Sahel region in 2013, significant resources
have been mobilized in order to promote projects for
peace, stability and development. In this regard, we
welcome the $8.25 billion mobilized for projects to
stimulate growth and eliminate poverty, as noted in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/542) of
24 July on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.
We underscore the fact that underdevelopment, in
particular youth unemployment, establishes a link
between terrorism and criminality, and we reiterate that
peace, stability, security and development go hand in
hand.

Chad takes note of the conclusion of the third
meeting of the Ministerial Coordination Platform for
the integrated strategy for the Sahel, which was held in
Bamako on 18 November.

Chad firmly condemns terrorist acts, specifically
those against the soldiers and facilities of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. We are counting on the Malian
authorities to carry out investigations and bring the
perpetrators of those terrorist acts to justice. We
encourage the Special Envoy to continue to emphasize
the coordination of various initiatives for the Sahel and
to lend an attentive ear to the priorities of the countries
in the region, in particular the Group of Five Sahel.

We remain confident that the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel, which has inspired
so much hope, will soon bring the benefits of
socioeconomic development, governance and security
to the countries of the region. The Security Council
urgently needs to give priority to regulating conflicts
in the region, in particular in Libya and northern Mali.

Moreover, it is also important to address the acts
of the Boko Haram terrorist group, which pose a grave
menace to peace and security in the Sahel as well as
in West and Central Africa. In that regard, we call
for a multifaceted platform of support, such as the
Nouakchott process, the Group of Five Sahel and the
Multinational Joint Task Force of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission. The security of the countries in the region
lies in the strengthening of cooperation and coordination
to combat terrorism and transnational criminality. It is
in those countries that peace and security, the key to
development, will need to be established.

Finally, in accordance with the presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/17, of27 August 2014, addressed
to the Secretariat, we request that the information
exchanges be strengthened with the countries of the
region through their representatives in New York in
order to better ensure monitoring of the strategy's
implementation.

As other delegations have done, I would like to ask
a questionof the Special Envoy. Given the increasingly
worrisome deterioration in the security situation, how
can the strategy help to operationalize the initiatives 1
have mentioned in order to strengthen cooperation and
coordination in the security sector among the States of
the region?

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Ms. Sellassie to respond to the
comments and questions of delegations.

