Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his
report and Mr. Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for the information he has
provided us. This update helps us to understand the
scope of the new challenges prevailing in Kosovo.

We make special reference to Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, who intelligently and devotedly led the
work of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for a year. We wish him
every success in his future activities. We also take note
of the appointment of Mr. Michael Steiner as his
successor.

Before proceeding to analyse the information that
has been provided, we wish to condemn the recent
assassination of the member of the Assembly for the
Democratic League of Kosovo. We call on the
competent authorities to spare no effort in finding those
guilty of the assassination. Now is the time for all
political forces to speak as one in condemning the
attack and in preventing such violent acts from
weakening the efforts of the majority of Kosovars to
create a peaceful society.

The elections for the Kosovo Assembly marked
the dawn of a new phase for Kosovo and the
international community. The foundations for the work
of an administration at a high level of autonomy have
now been laid. Gaps and problems remain in the
operation of the new administrative structures, but as
time goes by these can be overcome. For the moment,
what is most important are the good will and
commitment of the elected leaders to working to
strengthen the new institutions.

The outcome of the elections should be the very
first lesson for the new officials on the new reality in
the province and on what the people expect from them.
The time is over when majorities prevailed and only
the voices of a few could be heard. Henceforth, the
greatness of leaders will be measured by their capacity
to work as a team, to share decision-making and to
consult other political forces, with the future of the
province serving as their only lodestar.

That is why we urge the leaders of the majority
parties to continue negotiating to find a way out of the
current political crisis and to elect a President and a
Government as soon as possible. Only in this way will
Kosovo's new administrative structure be able to begin
its work. The more time is allowed to pass, the more
the problems of the past will dominate the agenda,
bring the progress achieved in creating a multi-ethnic
Kosovo to a halt.

Once a new Government has been set up, the
administrative structures will acquire their own
momentum in their daily operations and the
international community, through UNMIK, will be able
to continue offering its advice to facilitate the
functioning of the new institutions. We believe that this
should be the role of the international community. Such
advice guarantees direct and detailed follow-up without
direct participation in the decision-making process.
There are now legitimately elected leaders to assume
the responsibility of managing the future of the
province, with the kinds of mistakes and successes that
occur in any legitimately constituted democracy.

To conclude, I wish to echo the words of the
Secretary-General in paragraph 43 of the report, in
which he refers to the particular responsibility of the
Assembly members in helping to change the attitudes
of the past by openly rejecting violence and terrorism.
They must serve as models of reconciliation for the rest
of society.

