Mr. Morales Lopez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to thank Senegal for convening
this open debate on water, peace and security and for
the concept note (S/2016/969, annex ) shared with us.
We are also grateful for the briefings by Mr. Danilo
Turk, Ms. Christine Beerli and Mr. Sundeep Waslekar.

Less than 3 per cent of global water is fresh water.
Of that 3 per cent, more than 2.5 per cent is frozen
water in Antarctica, the Arctic and in glaciers, making
it practically unavailable. That is, humankind depends
on the remaining .5 per cent of fresh water for its needs
and for the world's ecosystems.

As the concept note mentions, water resources are
not uniformly distributed throughout the world. Even
when we carefully consider the natural water supply
within countries with significant water resources,
it becomes evident that local distribution is also not
homogenous - in some areas water is abundant and in
others the resource is scarce.

We know that most of the .5 per cent of fresh water
is stored in underground aquifers. However, increasing
use for farming, industry and consumption reduces the
available global reserves. Agriculture - the primary
sector for ensuring food security, and therefore
sustainable development - is estimated to account for
75 per cent of global freshwater consumption. Industry
is responsible for 20 per cent, while only 5 per cent is
used for domestic purposes. In that context, cooperation
is critical to ensuring a sufficient supply of potable water
for all sectors, as a catalyst for sustainable development.

Colombia is rich in water resources due to its
geographic location, topography and great variety of
climate patterns. Grounded in that reality, our country
has recognized the importance not only of the need for
comprehensive management of the resource but also of
the prevention, recognition and management of water-
related conflicts.

My country's efforts are reflected in the national
policy for integrated water resources management and in
its national water plan, which includes six objectives: to
conserve the ecosystems and hydrological processes on
which the country's water supply depends; to identify,
quantify and optimize water demand in the country; to
improve the quality and minimize the pollution of water
resources; to develop comprehensive management on
the risks associated with the supply and availability
of water; to create the conditions for institutional
capacity-building in the comprehensive management of
water resources; and, finally, to consolidate and bolster
governance for its comprehensive management.

Key to those objectives is a strategy for managing
conflicts that emerge regarding the use, access and
affordability of water. In that regard, our national water
plan prioritizes a programme for the management
of water-related conflicts that seeks to reinforce the
governance strategy set out in the national policy.

In addition, Colombia wishes to emphasize that the
Congress ofthe Republic is considering draft legislation
that seeks to make the right to water a constitutional
human right. As of today, six of the eight debates
required for legislative approval have been held. It is
clear that the work being done internally is in keeping
with the Sustainable Development Goals and reflects
Colombia's commitment to them, particularly Goal 6:
"Ensure availability and sustainable management of
water and sanitation for all".

For Colombia, it is essential that the issue of
water on the international agenda be considered in the
context of cooperation and dialogue among countries,
which will benefit all countries, their populations and
ecosystems. That perspective allows us to foresee
the emergence of conflicts arising from the supply,
conservation, use or exploitation of water. However,
given the current proliferation of international water-
related initiatives, Colombia emphasizes the importance
of taking into account the need for comprehensive
and pragmatic approaches within the United Nations
system to address existing water-related issues and
avoid duplicating efforts.

While the issue of water is not Within the purview
of the Security Council, the United Nations and
regional bodies play a key role through which it can
participate as a catalyst of international cooperation
through technical and scientific exchanges that
promote sustainable water use. States, for their part,
are called upon to make good-faith efforts to promote
dialogue and mechanisms of cooperation such as those
presented today in order to preserve the resource for
future generations and to ensure that its use is shaped
by sustainable patterns of production and consumption.

In that regard, Colombia wishes to reiterate the
importance it attaches to the work of the Security
Council. Nevertheless, it believes that the more
appropriate body to engage in water-related debates is
the General Assembly. Considering the functions and
aims of the Assembly and the intrinsic relationship
between water and sustainable development, it is our
View that water-related discussions should be held in
that universal organ, thereby ensuring an inclusive
and comprehensive approach with the participation of
all Member States. It is imperative that we strengthen
cooperation among States and help developing
countries, upon their request, to find responses and
solutions that will enable them build capacities in order
to prevent water-related conflicts.

