Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
have recently been witnessing a steady escalation of the
situation in some parts of Syria, including Aleppo, with
the humanitarian situation there steadily worsening,
triggering the international community's widespread
concern. China feels for the people who are suffering
in Syria and condemns any attack targeting civilians
and civilian facilities.

To ease the tension in Aleppo and other areas, the
international community should advance its efforts
along four tracks in a balanced way. The four tracks are
ceasefire, political negotiation, humanitarian assistance
and the joint fight against terrorism.
The international community should urge all
parties in Syria to end hostilities without delay and
work unremittingly to reach an agreement on the
relevant issues through peace talks. The international
community should continue to step up humanitarian
relief to Aleppo. China welcomes the concrete
initiatives taken by Russia and the Syrian Government
to increase assistance to civilians and hopes that United
Nations aid agencies will strengthen coordination with
Russia and the Syrian Government to jointly ease
the humanitarian situation in Syria, pursuant to the
United Nations principles governing humanitarian
assistance. Terrorist groups continue to launch attacks
in Aleppo and other areas, causing civilian casualties
and blocking humanitarian efforts, which calls for
greater coordination by the international community to
resolutely combat by uniform standards all the terrorist
groups designated by the Security Council.

How things transpire and evolve in Aleppo, as a
subset ofthe Syrian issue, is part and parcel ofthe grand
scheme of things pertaining to the question of Syria.
A comprehensive solution to de-escalate the situation
in Aleppo lies in an effort to remain seized of the big
picture in Syria, to hold fast to the prospect ofa political
settlement as the overarching direction, to maintain
the role of the United Nations as the primary player
exercising good offices and to continue supporting the
work of Special Envoy De Mistura towards the early
resumption of the Geneva talks.

Any action taken by the Council on the question
of Syria must be truly conducive to de-escalation, to
pushing all parties in Syria to an immediate cessation
of hostilities in support of, and in cooperation with,
United Nations humanitarian efforts, and to facilitating
a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led political process under
the good offices ofthe United Nations, so that a solution
that is acceptable to all parties may be reached. The
parties should demonstrate their goodwill, meet one
another half way, build mutual trust and jointly strive
towards achieving a comprehensive, fair and proper
solution to the question of Syria.

