Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I would like to
convey my delegation's appreciation to you, Mr.
President, for convening this important debate on
threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Arias of Spain for the exemplary manner in which he
has chaired the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).

South Africa, which is already party to 9 of the
12 United Nations conventions on terrorism and is in
the process of ratifying the remaining three
conventions, remains fully committed to the collective
effort of the international community to address the
threat of terrorism. However, we meet today at a time
when the Security Council has already completed its
review of the strategic direction, structures and
procedures of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
has even commenced negotiations on a new resolution.
We would hope that it is not too late for the views of
the wider United Nations membership to be taken into
consideration and that we can accurately express our
views in the few short minutes allocated to us.

My delegation is encouraged by the efforts to
make the CTC more proactive in facilitating the
provision of technical assistance to Member States and
in promoting closer coordination and cooperation with
relevant international organizations. At the same time,
we believe it would be important for the Council to
acknowledge, on behalf of Member States, the great
lengths already gone to by many Governments around
the world in bringing their national legislation in line
with the requirements of the Security Council. We
believe it is necessary that those factors be taken into
account when deliberations on any new counter-
terrorism measures are being considered.

The long-term sustainability of our collective
effort against terrorism will also depend upon the
Security Council taking into account the different
capacities and capabilities of individual Member
States. We should avoid placing unachievable
administrative, technical and financial burdens on
Member States. Inability by Member States to
implement Chapter VII decisions of the Security
Council not only would undermine the effectiveness of
those particular measures, but also could have negative
implications for the future application of measures
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter.

South Africa supports the approach always
followed by the CTC - that of adopting decisions by
consensus. The Committee's practice of promoting
cooperation and dialogue among sovereign and equal
Member States is also commendable and should
continue to inform the Committee's work.

One of the challenges that the CTC has faced is to
offer a cost-effective and financially transparent
service to the Security Council and to Member States
as they seek to implement resolution 1373 (2001). The
proposal to create one centralized structure for the
expert and Secretariat support staff - to be known as
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate - may help to address that challenge. Any
Council decision to give effect to that proposal should,
however, be in accordance with the Charter and with
the financial rules and regulations of the United
Nations.

We note that the CTC anticipates that the
establishment of the new structure should not increase
the budget and the resources already generously
allocated to the CTC in a way that would be
detrimental to the other priority programmes and
initiatives of the United Nations. That is particularly
pertinent at a time when the Organization is required to
address the needs of millions of people afflicted by
poverty and conflict within its already constrained
budget. In restructuring the support unit for the CTC,
care should also be taken to ensure that the principle of
preserving the integrity and representativity of the
Secretariat - and the authority of the Secretary-
General over the Secretariat - is maintained, in
accordance with Chapter XV of the Charter. Deviating
from those provisions would set unwanted precedents.

The South African Government is concerned
about perceptions that are created by unsubstantiated
statements or advisories by other Governments and the
media regarding the potential of terrorist activities in
third countries. Such unsubstantiated and selective
statements or advisories could negatively affect not
only a country's standing, but also its security
situation. There is a danger that terrorists and terrorist
organizations may either exploit such statements or
advisories or view them as providing indications of
opportunities to conduct terrorist activities.

The South African Government therefore calls on
the Security Council to bring these concerns to the
attention of Member States and to impress upon their
Governments the need to act responsibly when dealing
with such sensitive issues, which have potentially
serious consequences. States should desist from issuing
general warnings and other statements, including travel
advisories, about unsubstantiated threats of terrorism in
other countries. When States obtain information about
potential terrorist activities, it is essential for the
Governments of those States to alert the Governments
of the States where the potential terrorist activity is to
take place, rather than proceeding to issue a statement
or travel advisory without any such consultation. Prior
and confidential consultation would allow the States
concerned to first verify the information and then take
the necessary steps to prevent and act against the
terrorist threat. The objective here should be to prevent
and combat terrorism without creating a climate of fear
and insecurity.

The South African Government has made
significant progress in further refining and improving
its national counter-terrorism capabilities, and
comprehensive new counter-terrorism legislation is
currently before our Parliament. However, we are well
aware that terrorism is a complex global phenomenon
that can often be linked with other forms of organized
transnational crime. We therefore acknowledge that it
can be addressed effectively only through sustained
international cooperation, including in fields such as
intelligence sharing, police action and technical
assistance. Such a comprehensive approach
necessitates understanding and addressing the root
causes of terrorism. That would include the need to
resolve conflicts in all parts of the globe and a joint
commitment by the international community to
eradicate poverty and underdevelopment.

