Mrs. Haley (United States): I thank Under-
Secretary-General O'Brien for his briefing. Last
week, I stood in the no-man's land between Syria and
Turkey where trucks with life-saving humanitarian aid
begin their perilous journey to reach desperate men,
women and children in Syria. In the course of five
days in Jordan and Turkey, I witnessed the generosity
of those countries in providing Syrian refugees health
and educational services. I met dedicated teachers and
doctors who, with the help of the United States and the
United Nations, are working to shape a better future
for Syrians. I sat and spoke with refugee children and
met the counsellors who are helping them deal with the
trauma that has marked their young lives.

Overwhelmingly, the displaced Syrian men, women
and children with whom I spoke want to go home but,
tragically, the violence and brutality that led them to
flee their homeland has continued since we last met.
There is no peace in Syria, only continuing, appalling
suffering. There is no home to which those desperate
people can return. According to one Syrian human
rights group, in just the month of April, the Al-Assad
regime killed nearly 500 civilians. That brings the
total number of Syrians killed by the regime in just the
past five months to more than 2,000. The same group
reports that the total number of civilians killed by all
parties during this period is more than 3,800.

The Syrian Government continues to imprison

tens of thousands of its people. It subjects them to such
violence and inhumane conditions, including torture
and sexual violence, that those who manage to survive
suffer devastating and lasting damage. Their families
suffer as well. But the most persuasive indicator of the
continuing hell that is life in Syria is what we have
learned this past month about what has been built
inside Al-Assad's notorious Sednaya prison. Amnesty
International calls the prison a "human slaughterhouse".
Survivors report being approached by wardens
inside with ropes and knives. They are then given a
choice - kill friends and relatives, also in the prison,
or be killed themselves. The evidence comes from
a combination of photographs of structural changes
in the prison and estimates of the horrifying rate of
killings behind its walls. It has led us to conclude that
the Al-Assad regime has constructed a crematorium in
the prison to dispose of victims' bodies.

That is an appalling discovery. Even if Russia
and Iran had no direct role in the construction of the
crematorium, they have either aided in or passively
looked away as the Al-Assad regime commits atrocities
that are reminiscent of history's worst war crimes. It
is hard to fathom yet another regime so soulless that it
has to devise a more efficient method of disposing of
all the dead bodies it generates, but that is where the
evidence leads us. We need Russia to use its influence
over the Al-Assad regime to bring an end to those
atrocities. Even those inside Syria who managed to
avoid Al-Assad's prisons do not avoid suffering. The
bombings of hospitals and schools continue unabated.

I want to thank Under-Secretary-General O'Brien
for calling our particular attention to the staggering and
unacceptable impact of this war on children. Countless
Syrian children have lost family, friends and other
loved ones, and witnessed first-hand the unspeakable
horrors of war. For the more than three million Syrian
children under the age of six, many now orphaned, war
is all they have ever known.

As a recent report by Save The Children highlights,
children wake up at night screaming from reliving
those horrors as they fall asleep. They wet their beds;
some have lost the ability to speak, while others tell
their friends and families they would rather be dead
than live another day hungry and afraid. Others turn to
drugs as a way to cope with what they have endured. We
witnessed first-hand the effects on those children, with
many refusing to leave the house or struggling with fear

of loud noises. The United Nations, non-governmental
organizations and assistance providers have done an
admirable job trying to assist those children, but the
systems and structures that exists to provide care and
support for children are eroding around them.

One in three schools in Syria have been destroyed,
damaged, or are being used as a shelter for the
displaced or for military purposes. More than half of
Syria's public health facilities have closed and more
than 75 per cent of Syrian households' children have to
help support their families, with many of them as the
sole breadwinners. The psychological and physical toll
on Syrian children could cost us an entire generation
if action is not taken. I applaud the United Nations for
recognizing the challenges facing those children and
recognize the United Nations-led No Lost Generation
approach to provide counselling and education to
school-age Syrians, other refugees and vulnerable
Jordanians who cannot always access formal education.

But the truth is no child should have to endure any
of that. The Council is in a position to chart a different
course for the children of Syria and give them the
future they dream of and deserve. Ultimately, the best
and only way to truly support those kids is by ending
the conflict and getting them the assistance they need.
Unfortunately, delivery of humanitarian aid continues
to be blocked by the Government. The regime continues
to put up bureaucratic roadblocks to the delivery of
life-saving food and medicine. No one is fooled by the
games they are playing. They are making the choice to
starve their own people for political gain and are being
supported by Iran, as Russia looks the other way.

The message I took to the refugees I visited last
week was that the United States will never give up
working to ease their suffering, but we have to be
honest - what they want, what they need is to return
home - but they will never have a home to return to
until there is peace in Syria. In addition to the political
solution, we must start to focus on the development
needs of host countries, as well as the transition for
Syrians to go home.

I was at a Turkish camp and one of the refugees
came up to me and asked that we remember that they
need our support. He said that Al-Assad is a brutal
leader and that "we are happy when we listen to you
and when you are talking about us. Please do not forget
about the Syrian people." That must be our constant,
overriding and unfaltering purpose.

