Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We would like to
express special thanks to Mr. Jan Kubis, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
productive and effective work for more than three years
in his capacity as Head ofthe United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) at a critical time for Iraq.
Kazakhstan commends his skilful and persistent efforts
to cope with multiple challenges and help guide Iraq
on a positive track towards recovery and development.
We support the UNAMI's endeavours to assist the
Iraqi people, promote political dialogue, and establish
Government institutions.

We congratulate Iraq on the election of its new
President, His Excellency Mr. Barham Salih, the
appointment of Prime-Minister-designate Adil Abdul-
Mahdi and the partial formation of his new Cabinet.
Kazakhstan extends its sincere congratulations to the
Parliament, people and all political actors in Iraq on
their efforts to overcome serious challenges and build
Government institutions. We acknowledge that these
are bold steps towards strengthening democracy,
State-building and consolidating Iraqi society around
the country's Constitution.

Kazakhstan expresses the hope that, as a matter of
priority, the new Government of Iraq will take measures
to restore social and economic structures and meet
the urgent needs of the local population. Kazakhstan
calls on the representatives of various political parties
to support the newly appointed Prime Minister. Their
support is essential to improve the social status of
citizens, meet the needs of the people and strengthen
the Iraqi economy. We hope that senior officials of Iraq
will make an important contribution to the prevention
of religious and inter-tribal tensions in the country.

Kazakhstan reaffirms its position on the adherence
to territorial integrity, unity and respect for the
sovereignty of Iraq. We certainly support continued and
constructive dialogue between the federal Government
of Iraq and the regional Government of Iraqi Kurdistan.
We commend the fact that the Government continues
the process of electing senior officials despite the tense
situation in the Middle East, the threats posed by Da'esh
and the difficult internal socioeconomic situation. We
feel confident the new Iraqi Government will strive
to pursue an independent foreign policy and pay no
attention to the interests of various political parties and
outside forces.
We strongly condemn the recent deadly bombings
that targeted the residential areas of Baghdad and Sadr
City, and we wish speedy recovery to those injured.
Undoubtedly, those crimes and acts aim to break the
spirit of the Iraqis, in particular Baghdadis, who have
started to enjoy the fruits of peace and who fear the
derailment of their country's steady progress towards
stability. The unity of people and decisive efforts
of the security forces are certain to foil the designs
of terrorists.

We commend UNAMI for its efforts to work
with civil society, especially women's groups, for
Iraq's recovery. Women, once empowered, can make
a dynamic contribution to the peace process, with a
leading role in decision-making and mobilizing the
grass roots. We also appreciate the commitment of the
Special Representative to engage the youth in training
for democracy building and other developmental
activities. Community awareness and constructive
programmes are especially critical to prevent young
people from relapsing into violent extremism.

We were saddened and horrified to learn of the
more than 200 mass graves containing the remains of
thousands of victims in areas of the country formerly
controlled by Da'esh. We strongly condemn those
horrific crimes committed in Iraq, which have caused
immense and unimaginable trauma for the victims'
families. That tragedy once again confirms that all
measures must be taken so that such evil is completely
wiped out and not allowed to appear elsewhere. We
endorse the view and resolve of Special Representative
Kubis that determining the circumstances surrounding
the significant loss of life will be an important step
in the mourning process for families and along their
journey to secure their right to truth andjustice.

We welcome UNAMI's communication with the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Iraq and the Embassy
of Kuwait in Baghdad to schedule an official handover
of the first package of the located Kuwaiti property. We
praise the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Iraq for its
readiness to surrender Kuwaiti property to UNAMI to
be safeguarded until the date of the transfer is set by
the parties. We also consider it important that closing
the file on missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals
and missing Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives, will contribute to normalizing relations
between the two brotherly countries. We ask the
tripartite mechanism to persevere and remain seized of
the matter.
The world community should remain committed to
supporting the Government and the people of Iraq in
their various historic endeavours, and Kazakhstan will
be a strong partner in the multilateral action and process.
We again thank outgoing Special Representative
Jan Kubis for his dedication and contribution to the
settlement of Iraqi issues and wish him all the best in
his future endeavours.

