Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): The Council
has before it the report of the Secretary-General
(8/2016/824) on the situation in the Central African
Republic and on the implementation of the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) . I would like to briefly update the Council
on key developments since the issuance of the report.

We are at the end of the rainy season - a traditionally
volatile period - which has been used by armed groups
and other spoilers to advance their interests. Last week,
on 4 October, tensions flared when a member of the
Central African Armed Forces, the former of head of
the personal security team of the interim President
Samba-Panza, was shot and killed in the predominantly
Muslim neighbourhood of PKS in the third district
of Bangui by a gunman reportedly affiliated with a
self-defence group from PKS. In retaliatory acts of
violence, a total of 12 people were killed and another
20 wounded by some by uncontrolled elements of the
Central African Armed Forces, self-defence groups
and unknown perpetrators. Fourteen people are still
missing, but may be hiding.

MINUSCA acted decisively to prevent an outbreak
of intercommunal violence, including by securing the
perimeter ofthe PKS neigbourhood. It also engaged with
the Central African Republic authorities at the highest
level to coordinate the response. Representatives of the
Government of the Central African Republic and the
Muslim community called for calm. President Touadera
ordered an investigation into the killings, including the
reprisal actions. The President also activated - for
the first time - the joint coordination mechanism
between MINUSCA and the national security and
defence forces. Joint patrols were undertaken and
MINUSCA adjusted its protection efforts to better and
more directly respond to the needs of civilians and to
encourage community dialogue. Calm has since largely
returned to Bangui, but the tension remains palpable.
For example, on 7 October the body of a young Muslim
man was dumped by alleged elements of the Central
African Armed Forces in front of one of MINUSCA's
camp. The Government, MINUSCA and civil society
leaders are making an effort to break the cycle of
violence and put an end to impunity.

In the provinces, in the north-west and in Kaga-
Bandoro, recent clashes between anti-Balaka and ex-
Sele'ka factions and retaliatory attacks against the
civilian population have resulted in significant loss of
human life and forced 3,200 people to flee their homes.
The more than 16 attacks on aid groups in the region
in September alone forced many organizations to
temporarily relocate staff and reduce or suspend their
operations. MINUSCA has enhanced its uniformed
personnel deployments and used its good offices in
these areas to protect civilians and reduce tensions.

Meanwhile, in the north-east of the country,
members of some ex-Se'le'ka factions have continued to
gather in the town of Bria for an assembly, which some
want to use to reunite the ex-Se'leka. MINUSCA, in
line with its mandate, maintains a robust posture in the
area. The Mission continues to enforce the weapons-
free zone and to communicate its intent to arrest any
combatant caught in town with a weapon.

In stark contrast with these worrying developments,
the Central African authorities continued to make
progress in implementing President Touadera's vision
for the country, including by engaging the armed
groups to start a formal dialogue on the launch of the
national programme on disarmament, demobilisation,
reintegration and repatriation. The first meeting of
the consultative monitoring committee is expected to
be convened in Bangui on 12 October by President
Touadera. Representatives of 11 out of the 14 armed
groups are expected to participate. Those refusing to
attend include the ex-Se'leka Front patriotique pour la
renaissance de la Centrafrique; the Return, Reclamation
and Rehabilitation, or the 3R; and the anti-Balaka
Mokom faction.

In line with its strategic objective, MINUSCA
has supported all the Government's outreach and
awareness-raising efforts to help lay the groundwork
for the dialogue. Last Wednesday, MINUSCA met with
ex-Seleka representatives in Bria and urged them to join
the first committee meeting. Indeed, many ofthe leaders
agreed to participate and reiterated their commitment
to forging lasting peace, while nonetheless noting
their concerns over the Government's commitment
to inclusive solutions. In this regard, the ex-Seleka
assembly in Bria can be seen as an effort to strengthen
the negotiation position of certain armed groups before
the dialogue.

Continued international support for the Central
African people in their endeavours to stabilize the
country is now more critical than ever. The importance
ofthe donors' conference, hosted by the European Union
in Brussels on 17 November, cannot be overemphasized.
In previous crises in Central Africa, the international
community often failed to sustain its engagement in
the country over time, which critically undermined
stabilization efforts. While the primary responsibility
for the restoration of peace and stability rests with the
Central Africans, the international community must
also keep its word. I would like to mention that, in a
demonstration of the United Nations commitment to
peace in the country, the Deputy Secretary-General
agreed to lead the Organization's delegation in Brussels.

Preparations for the Brussels conference
have benefited from a unity of effort between the
international community and the Central African
Government. The country's needs for the next five
years have been jointly assessed by the Government,
the United Nations, the European Union and the World
Bank. As a political complement to these efforts, I
welcome President Touade'ra's personal commitment to
strengthening cooperation between the Central African
Republic and the international community through
the mutual accountability framework, sometimes
called the "compact", which is in development. At
the ministerial-level meeting held on 23 September
on the margins of the general debate, President
Touadera announced his intention to finalize this
mutual accountability framework before the Brussels
conference.

It is therefore more critical than ever to maintain
a positive momentum to build peace in the Central
African Republic. Important progress has inarguably
been made so far, but there is a great need for it.
The country's institutions must be strengthened in
a spirit of inclusiveness to make progress in national
reconciliation. Key reforms must be undertaken in
the security and defence sectors. The promotion and
protection of human rights needs to be strengthened,
and impunity must be brought to an end. Inclusive
economic development must be fostered. State authority
under the rule of law must be extended. Finally, basic
services for all must be improved.

Recent events show that the situation remains
fragile, and spoilers are still active on both sides, I would
say. Central African institutions must do everything
in their power and more to stop attacks against
humanitarian actors and help create the conditions for
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons,
an area that has seen very little progress. More than
ever, MINUSCA and the international community
must stand firmly by the side of the Central Africans to
address these challenges.

Everything that can be done, in particular by the
members of the Council, to rally the greatest number
of Member States, including non-traditional donors, to
support the country ahead of the Brussels conference
should be done. With such concerted and persistent
effort, there is a good chance that we can help Central
Africans to lay down the foundations for a lasting peace
in a country that has suffered for too long.

