Mr. Gambari: I am very pleased and honoured to
be here with the Council today to introduce the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/20lO/213) on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). The report covers the period from
1 February to 30 April and identifies the progress made
and the challenges that remain in implementing
UNAMID's mandate. It addresses the political process
and the security and humanitarian situation in Darfur,
and discusses the progress made on the benchmarks
which the Council has previously identified and
approved.

As members of the Council are aware, I assumed
my functions as Joint Special Representative for
UNAMID on 22 January and arrived in El Fasher, the
2

capital of Darfur, on 25 January to take up residence
there. As outlined in the Secretary-General's report,
Darfur has seen several positive developments since
then. Notably, the Joint Chief Mediator achieved
considerable progress in the Doha peace talks through
the creation of the Liberation and Justice Movement
(LJM), merging members of the Sudan Liberation
Movement-Revolutionary Forces (Tripoli Group) and
part of the Road Map Group (Addis Ababa Group) into
a single new movement under the leadership of
Eltigani Seisi Mohamed Ateem, a prominent Darfurian
politician who was at one time Governor of Darfur.
This was followed by the signing of two Framework
Agreements to Resolve the Conflict in Darfur between
the Government and the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM) and the newly formed LJM. on
23 February and on 18 March, respectively.

In April, the mediation team conducted a number
of capacity-building workshops for the armed
movements in order to strengthen their cohesion, as
well as their capacity and readiness to engage in direct
negotiations with the Government. UNAMID provided
experts, including on ceasefire arrangements and
gender issues, to support the mediation's efforts. The
mediation team and UNAMID also facilitated a
workshop with the LJM. from 6 to 8 April on ceasefire
implementation in order to enhance the common
understanding of the mechanisms to be put in place,
which are conducive to an effective ceasefire
implementation.

Unfortunately, despite several attempts by the
mediation, the parties were not able to agree on a final
peace agreement by the 15 March deadline or on a
ceasefire implementation protocol. On the contrary,
JEM. suspended its participation in the negotiations in
early May in protest over alleged violations of the
ceasefire agreement by the Government.

Indeed, the past weeks have been marked by
violent clashes between the Government and JEM. in
all three states of Darfur. On 13 May, JEM. launched
attacks on a Government position, as well as on a
convoy of commercial trucks escorted by Government
forces, in the area of Muhajeria, South Darfur. On the
following day, 14 May, the Government announced
that, after two weeks of fighting, it had successfully
dislodged JEM. from Jebel Moon, its stronghold in
Western Darfur. That same day, UNAMID troops
confirmed that JEM. had withdrawn from the area of
Shangil Tobay in Northern Darfur, which it had
10-36935
recently occupied from the Minnie Minawi faction of
the Sudan Liberation Army.

UNAMID has also received reports of renewed
fighting since 6 May between the Government of the
Sudan and the Abdul Wahid faction of the Sudan
Liberation Army in the J ebel Marra area. Furthermore,
tensions remain high in Southern and, most recently,
also Western Darfur following recent incidences of
inter-tribal fighting between the Misseriya and
Nawaiba-Rizeigat tribes near Kas in Southern Darfur.
These clashes have resulted in substantial civilian
fatalities and the displacement of communities, and
have hampered the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
In response, UNAMID has been working at all levels
to improve security and protection, facilitate improved
access for humanitarian agencies to the affected areas
and, in the cases of inter-tribal fighting, to support the
reconciliation process. I call upon all parties in Darfur
to facilitate the access of UNAMID and the
humanitarian community to places of recent fighting,
such as Jebel Marra and Jebel Moon, so that we will be
able to adequately assess and address the needs of the
affected population.

In line with these efforts, I have called upon the
parties to refrain from fighting and to engage each
other in dialogue rather than resort to violence. I am
very much of the view that the Darfur crisis can be
solved not through military means, because if it could
have it should have, but through negotiations and the
political process. I will continue to utilize every
opportunity to impress this viewpoint on the parties. I
did so on the occasion I met with Abdul Wahid
Mohamed al-Nur in Paris in March to discuss issues of
access and security in areas under his Movement's
control.

In this context, it is with grave concern that I
must report that United Nations and humanitarian
personnel continue to be targets of attacks and criminal
acts. Indeed, the reporting period witnessed renewed
attacks against UNAMID peacekeepers and cases of
abduction and kidnappings. These include an attack on
18 February on a Pakistani formed police unit and,
most recently, on 7 May, an attack on an Egyptian
military patrol, both in South Darfur. I am saddened to
report that, in these attacks, two Egyptian peacekeepers
were killed, while seven Pakistani and three more
Egyptian peacekeepers were seriously injured, some
suffering permanent disabilities. Also in Nyala, South
Darfur, four South African police officers were
10-36935
abducted on 11 April and held in captivity for 16 days
before they were released following intensive
engagement by UNAMID with all stakeholders.
Furthermore, on 14 May, a UNAMID local staff
member was carjacked and held for more than 24 hours
before being released. Most recently, on 18 May, three
staff members of the international non-governmental
organization Samaritan's Purse - two Sudanese male
and one female international staff members - were
abducted in Abu Ajura, close to Nyala, in South Darfur.

In an attempt to thwart future recurrences of such
incidents, I have given firm instructions to our troops
and police contingents to respond more robustly to
attacks. I have also made it clear in all my
engagements that such attacks against peacekeepers
constitute war crimes. Meanwhile, I continue to work
closely with all relevant parties to see that the
perpetrators of such cowardly acts are brought to
justice promptly and that the neutrality, impartiality
and inviolability of UNAMID personnel are respected
by all.

Significant challenges remain in the peace
process itself, including the continuing insecurity, the
lack of cohesion among the armed movements, the
refusal of Abdul Wahid to participate in the peace talks,
and limited progress made towards the establishment
of durable ceasefire arrangements and, of course, of a
comprehensive agreement. In order to resume the
negotiations, which were suspended during the
elections period, the Joint Chief Mediator has invited
all parties to Doha as of early June, and I would like to
re-emphasize the need for all parties to remain engaged
in the Doha peace talks. There is no alternative, in our
View, to the peace talks if we are to reach a
comprehensive settlement of the Darfur conflict sooner
rather than later.

On my arrival in Darfur, the Mission's
deployment strength had reached an overall average of
about 70 per cent. I am pleased to report that
deployment has since increased to about 87 per cent for
the military and 74 per cent for the civilian and police
components, respectively, and efforts are being made
to increase these figures by the end of this year.
Tactical helicopters provided by Ethiopia have arrived
in-theatre and UNAMID is currently working with the
Government of the Sudan on modalities and procedures
for their use in both routine and emergency operations.
Progress has also been made building up the
3
infrastructure needed to better enable the Mission to
carry out its mandated activities.

These advances have enabled the Mission to
increase the frequency and range of military and police
patrols, which provide increased presence and
protection throughout the region. However, while most
of the remaining military and police personnel are
scheduled to arrive in-theatre within the coming
months, critical enabling units such as military utility
helicopters and aerial surveillance units have not yet
been pledged by anyone to the Mission. I seize this
opportunity to appeal to those with the capabilities to
please help us to build up these very essential assets.
Without them, it will be difficult for the Mission to
fulfil its full potential as envisaged in the founding
Security Council resolutions.

In View of the achievement of these substantial
levels of deployment, consensus has emerged that
UNAMID should now begin to shift focus from
deployment-related issues to mandate implementation.
Accordingly, since taking up my assignment in
January, I have outlined the following four priorities as
my vision and goals for the mission.

First, we must enhance the security and safety of
United Nations and humanitarian personnel, as well as
protection for the civilian population and internally
displaced persons (IDPs). This will remain the core
mandate of UNAMID.

Secondly, we must provide more proactive support
for the ongoing peace process, because I believe very
strongly that we should not just sit in E1 Fasher and
wait for a peace agreement to be concluded that we
will then have to implement. Rather, we should inject
ourselves into the peace process and talk with all the
parties - the armed elements, the Government of the
Sudan, the Government of Qatar, which is acting as
facilitator, and the Joint Chief Mediator himself - so
that we can get a comprehensive peace agreement as
soon as possible.

The third element of my vision is to facilitate the
ongoing normalization of relations between Chad and
the Sudan, because when those relations are good, we,
as the people on the ground, are the beneficiaries.
When relations are not good, of course we, and the
people of West Darfur in particular, are the first victims.

The fourth element of my vision is to enhance
and facilitate support for recovery, reconstruction and
development in Darfur. In that regard, I would like to
emphasize that we are not going to do recovery and
development, but we are going to be at the forefront of
encouraging those who have the capabilities and the
mandate to do development.

I should also like to refer to the recently
concluded elections in the Sudan, with specific
reference to Darfur. Those elections have created new
dynamics for the political process in Darfur. I welcome
the fact that the polling took place in a peaceful and
orderly manner throughout the three states of Darfur, in
spite of strong opposition voiced by the armed
movements prior to the polling period. Despite certain
flaws registered by the international observer missions,
the fact of the matter is that we now three new
Governors, 144 members of the three state assemblies
in Darfur, and 72 representatives of Darfur in the
National Assembly. It is therefore important and
necessary in our view to factor this reality into the
peace process in view of the fact that these are elected
Darfurians. We also have to extend our efforts to cover
such important stakeholders as IDPs and refugees,
whose Views of the peace process may not have been
sufficiently reflected in the electoral process.

In this connection, I wish to note that the recent
strategic review meeting of the African Union and the
United Nations, as well as the consultative meeting
between the two organizations and international partners
engaged on Sudanese issues, held on 7 and 8 May in
Addis Ababa, recognized and stressed the need for the
Darfur political process to be "inclusive and to address
all issues of concern to the people of Darfur, including
peace and security, land issues, social and economic
issues, justice and reconciliation". The participants
agreed that the peace process in Doha should continue
and that, building on the progress achieved in Doha,
UNAMID should initiate and lead a complementary
political process on the ground in Darfur - a kind of a
home-grown process - to ensure the systematic and
sustained engagement of all Darfurian stakeholders.
Accordingly, UNAMID has begun to develop strategies
and put in place mechanisms to systematically engage
newly elected officials, IDPs, refugees, Arab tribes,
traditional leaders and the native administration and,
especially, women, young people and all other
representatives of civil society on all issues relevant to
peace and security and stability in Darfur. The goal is
to reassure them of their ability to have input in the
peace process and aid them in articulating their
10-36935
concerns. We are doing this in the strong belief that it
will contribute in no small measure to public
acceptance and ownership of the outcome of the peace
process, thereby making it sustainable.

There are indications that the recent
rapprochement between the Governments of Chad and
Sudan, a development the Joint Chief Mediator and I
have been working hard to support, is holding and has
actually been strengthened. Efforts at facilitating and
enhancing the implementation of the commitment
made by both countries in pursuit of the agreed goals
of their recent rapprochement are also continuing. I
recently returned from a mission to N'Djamena, where
I met President Deby with a view to facilitating and
encouraging his commitment to the obligations
undertaken by both countries on normalizing relations
following the 15 January 2010 agreement between
them.

In this context, I am pleased to report to the
Council that during the reporting period, the Mission
has not recorded any report of military activity or
cross-border attacks. In line with their agreement, both
countries have set up a joint border monitoring force
comprising 1,500 soldiers from each country, a total of
3,000, formed to enhance cross-border security. The
headquarters of the joint force is El Geneina, Western
Darfur. I am also pleased to add that on 10 April 2010,
the major border crossing point between the two
countries, close to E1 Geneina in Western Darfur,
reopened for transit and commercial activities, as many
Chadian registered commercial vehicles have been
spotted going across that border.

Let me briefly turn to the issue of the return of
IDPs and refugees to their homes in a voluntary,
appropriate and dignified manner. It is my firm
conviction that the nexus between peace, security and
development cannot be overemphasized when we
contemplate the complex challenge of resolving the
Darfur conflict in a sustainable and effective manner.
The retention of an estimated 2.3 million inhabitants in
IDP camps in Darfur constitutes a time bomb, as
experiences elsewhere, such as in Lebanon and in
Gaza, have demonstrated. One cannot permanently
keep over 2 million people in IDP camps without
experiencing some radicalization of the population and
some extremism.

In order to avoid such negative trends, a
programme for the voluntary and sustainable return of
10-36935

IDPs and refugees to their homes or to areas close to
the camps must be vigorously pursued. The primary
responsibility for this, of course, rests with the
Government of Sudan, which must allocate significant
financial and other resources for the recovery and
development of Darfur. However, the Government of
Sudan cannot accomplish this goal alone and it should
not be left alone to do it.

Beyond the needs of those in the IDP camps,
other Darfurians must also see benefits from the
dividends of peace. Hence, there is a need to support
appropriate early recovery, reconstruction and
development projects and encourage the provision of
basic services and economic revitalization and
livelihoods. To that end, UNAMID has intensified its
cooperation with the United Nations country team. Last
Sunday, on 16 May, I had the honour to co-chair,
together with Mr. Georg Charpentier, United Nations
Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator in
Sudan, a meeting in El Fasher of the United Nations
country team and UNAMID during which we discussed
cooperation and coordination among all actors involved
in this regard.

Furthermore, UNAMID has started to increase its
presence in the rural areas of Darfur, in particular in
areas of potential returns, so as to contribute to
enhancing security and safety there. We are also
looking into ways to use our available assets, such as
military engineering and logistics units, to assist the
Government of Sudan in the rehabilitation of the rail
network in Darfur and in the development of water
sources throughout Darfur.

On this note, I welcome and commend the efforts
of all donors, both traditional and new, in supporting
the needs of the people in Darfur. Recently, at the
international donors conference for Darfur which took
place in Cairo on 21 March, co-chaired by the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, Egypt and
Turkey, pledges of over $850 million were made, and
several projects, including model villages and housing
for IDPs who may prefer to relocate to areas
contiguous to or near urban areas and water resources,
were unveiled. In addition, the Government of Qatar
has pledged seed money of up to $1 billion towards
setting up a Darfur recovery fund.

I wish to note that during the meetings between
the African Union and the United Nations and
international partners, to which I referred earlier and
5
which took place on 7 and 8 May in Addis Ababa,
participants stressed the importance of promoting early
recovery and reconstruction efforts in Darfur and
welcomed UNAMID's active advocacy for and
appropriate engagement in this matter. It is my hope
that the Security Council will encourage such positive
gestures and facilitate similar efforts by the United
Nations family towards sustainable stabilization of the
situation in Darfur.

I would like to close by making an overall
assessment of the situation in Darfur and of
UNAMID's performance during the reporting period. I
am of the View that, despite our best efforts, results
have been mixed. In the areas of security and the
protection of the civilian population, some progress has
indeed been made, but pockets of instability remain.
The peace process, which I have been proactively
supporting under the leadership of the Joint Mediation
Team, has progressed, but a deep sense of mistrust
between the parties remains, and some parties are not
engaging in the process.
UNAMID is nearing full deployment, which is a
positive development, thus enabling personnel now to
focus more on the implementation of the mandate. In
other words, they are moving from deployment to
employment. But we still lack critical enabling units.

Despite these challenges, however, UNAMID is
working at all levels and on a range of fronts to
promote peace and stability in Darfur. The challenges
confronting the Mission are considerable, but my
colleagues and I remain determined to see that progress
is made in stabilizing the security situation in Darfur
and ending this conflict which has brought untold
sorrow to the peoples of Darfur.

