Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): My
delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for having
convened today's meeting.

We welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh, President of Djibouti. We
listened very carefully to his statement and we thank
him for updating us on the situation. We greatly
appreciate Djibouti's political and diplomatic efforts to
maintain regional peace, security and stability, and in
particular to promote the peace process in Somalia. We
also wholeheartedly thank the Government of Djibouti
for its valuable support for international cooperation
against piracy.

In recent years, the persistent turbulence in the
Horn of Africa has gravely frustrated peace, security
and development in the region. Just last week, the
Security Council considered the situation in Somalia
(see S/PV.6313). The present situation in that country
remains tense. The security situation is dismal, the
humanitarian crisis grows worse and progress in the
peace process is slow. The situation in Somalia is
posing a grave threat to peace and security in the Horn
of Africa and throughout the world. The international
community should urgently work to find an appropriate
solution to the question of Somalia as soon as possible,
by actively supporting the Djibouti peace agreement
and promoting the process of political reconciliation in
Somalia, so that Somalia can restore peace and achieve
reconstruction and development.

We hope that the upcoming Istanbul Conference
will make a substantial contribution to resolving the
problems of Somalia.

China has always been very concerned at the
disputes between Djibouti and Eritrea. We hope that
both countries are able to act in the interest of their
bilateral relations and of regional peace and stability
by resolving their differences through negotiation and
dialogue, so that their traditional friendship can be
restored. We applaud the Djibouti Government's
political and diplomatic efforts to find a negotiated
solution to the disputes with Eritrea. We support a
greater mediation role for the African Union with
respect to relations between the two countries. The
Council should do more to promote the resumption of
bilateral talks and the achievement of a negotiated
solution.

Countries in the Horn of Africa can choose their
friends, but not their neighbours. The countries of the
region share many common interests. In recent years,
we have noted that - whether on the Sudan, the
conflict in the Great Lakes region or peace and security
in West Africa - regional cooperation has yielded
significant results in addressing regional disputes,
easing tension and facilitating framework agreements
on relevant issues. We believe that there is quite a lot
of space for negotiation, regional cooperation and
dialogue on the question of the Horn of Africa.

We sincerely hope that countries of the region
will proceed on the basis of their long-term national
and regional interests and jointly and constructively
create a harmonious environment in which all countries
in the Horn will benefit from mutual cooperation.

