We congratulate Israel on the formation of a Government, and we look forward to continuing our close cooperation with the new Government. Germany remains steadfast in its strong commitment to Israel's security and its right to exist, as well as to peace in the Middle East. Now is the time to engage the new Government through dialogue. However, we are seriously concerned about the provisions in the coalition agreement as well as remarks made by members of the new Israeli Government regarding a possible annexation of the occupied Palestinian territories in the West Bank. We firmly believe that unilateral action in that regard would be extremely harmful to a peaceful resolution of the conflict. It would have serious, negative repercussions for the viability of the two-State solution and the entire peace process, as well as for regional stability and the rules-based international order itself. It would also negatively affect Israel's standing within the international community at a time when we need closer cooperation. As a close partner and friend, we therefore strongly encourage the Israeli Government not to implement any measures that would constitute a violation of international law. We will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, unless agreed to by Israel and the Palestinians. We will continue to distinguish between the internationally recognized territory of the State of Israel and the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, in accordance with our obligations under international law. Germany remains convinced that a negotiated two-State solution based on international law and the internationally agreed parameters is the only viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that meets the security needs of both sides, fulfils Palestinian aspirations for statehood and sovereignty, ends the occupation that began in 1967, resolves all permanent-status issues and guarantees equal rights for all inhabitants. We must find ways to revive the political process and resume direct and meaningful negotiations between the parties in order to resolve the final-status issues and to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace. The starting point for any discussion or negotiations should be the relevant United Nations resolutions, international law and the internationally agreed parameters. The format of such direct and meaningful negotiations must be agreed by both parties. We would support reviving the Middle East Quartet or establishing an alternative multilateral format. In the absence of such negotiations, the parties to the conflict must refrain from taking any measures that could further deteriorate the situation on the ground and undermine the viability of a negotiated two-State solution, especially where such measures would bring closer a de facto one-State reality with unequal rights for Israelis and Palestinians. We also note with concern yesterday's announcement by President Abbas with regard to cooperation agreements, including security cooperation with Israel. We call on both Israel and the Palestinian Authority to remain committed to the Oslo agreements and their obligations thereunder. Resolution 2334 (2016) remains the most crucial guideline and must be fully implemented with regard to settlement activities as well as acts of terror, violence against civilians, incitement, provocative actions and inflammatory rhetoric. We reiterate our position that Israeli settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territories are illegal under international law and severely undermine the prospects for ending the occupation and for achieving a negotiated two-State solution. We call upon Israel to end the expansion of settlements, including the latest construction plans for Efrat, Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and the E-1 and E-2 areas, the legalization of settlement outposts and the ongoing demolition and confiscation of Palestinian structures and land. We are also deeply concerned by the latest acts of violence and by the deaths and injuries on both sides. Germany condemns all attacks on Israel in the strongest possible terms, including those against Israeli security forces, and the repeated firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel by Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad. Israel has the right to defend itself and respond appropriately and proportionally to attacks against its territory or citizens. Incidents in which innocent civilians are indiscriminately targeted or subjected to violence must be thoroughly investigated and the perpetrators of any crimes must be held accountable. Finally, we remain concerned about the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories, while noting the important achievements by both sides in containing the pandemic. We reiterate our call on both parties to enhance their coordination and cooperation in order to further mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak in Israel, the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Gaza, bearing in mind their respective responsibilities and obligations under international law, in particular international humanitarian law. We commend the United Nations and all its agencies, in particular the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, for their efforts to respond to the humanitarian implications of the COVID-19 pandemic in the occupied Palestinian territories. Considering the increased risks to the health of detainees posed by COVID-19, particularly Palestinian children and other vulnerable persons, we encourage Israel to consider taking appropriate action on humanitarian grounds.
