Mr. Yamamoto: I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for scheduling this meeting on Afghanistan
on International Women's Day. I wish to express my
appreciation for Minister Kaag's initiative to lead an
all-women delegation today and to encourage other
members to do the same. I am also very pleased that
the Afghan delegation is joined today by Ms. Sarabi
and Ms. Safi. They are two women with distinguished
careers in working for the advancement of peace
in Afghanistan.

The members of the Council witnessed for
themselves the importance of women's rights and
women's empowerment during their recent visit to
Kabul. I am sure that they were deeply impressed, as I
am, by the resilience of Afghan women, Whose strength
holds the fabric of society together. I will touch on
the women, peace and security agenda throughout
my briefing.

A week ago, Afghanistan successfully hosted the
second conference of the Kabul Process for peace and
security. All conference participants endorsed the call
for direct talks between the Government and the Taliban
without preconditions. All relevant parties, including
the Taliban, agree that a negotiated political settlement
is the way to bring an end to the conflict.

President Ashraf Ghani offered peace to the
Taliban without preconditions and laid out a path for
negotiations, with a series of concrete proposals, to
create a space for the opening of talks. The offer of
negotiations is on the table. It is now incumbent upon
the Taliban to come forward with an offer of their own
and to start direct talks with the Government in order
to put an end to the suffering of the Afghan people. The
Taliban's argument that they will not talk to the Afghan
Government because the conflict is not between Afghan
parties misrepresents the reality that tens of thousands
of Afghan people are killed and maimed every year
in direct confrontations between the Taliban and the
Government forces.

Making peace and reaching out to opponents
requires resolve, courage and, above all, national
unity. Looking at recent developments in domestic
political, I am compelled to express my concern about
some actions that could deepen divisions in society.
Political leaders need to place the national interest
above a partisan agenda. National unity provides the
only basis for the continuation of international support
to Afghanistan and for the implementation of effective
reforms. Political stability also requires inclusivity. The
prolonged political impasse over the governorship of
BaIkh should be resolved swiftly through a negotiated
solution. It must not undermine the authority of the
National Unity Government or hinder progress on the
delivery of key Government functions. The upcoming
elections provide a further opportunity to ensure
that unity and stability prevail and that all groups
are represented.

When the members of the Council visited
Afghanistan in January, they delivered a clear and strong
message that parliamentary elections must be held in
2018 and presidential elections in 2019. Since then,
there has been accelerated progress on preparations
for voter registration. The Independent Election
Commission, under its new Chairperson, is working
hard on electoral preparations, but the timelines remain
tight. In one of his first statements, the Chairperson of
the Commission acknowledged that elections would
most probably have to be delayed beyond the current
date of July 2018 but that they could still be held this
year as long as preparations are not delayed and voter
registration begins on schedule in April.

The Independent Election Commission must also
concentrate on areas where it can deliver and seek the
assistance of other agencies of the Government in areas
that need to be accelerated, such as the recruitment
of voter registration staff. The Afghanistan Central
Civil Registration Authority must now do all it can to
enable eligible Afghan citizens to register to vote by
issuing citizen identity cards, known in Afghanistan
as tazkeras, to the millions of people who do not
possess them. Public outreach is important. Afghan
voters will need to understand the importance for them
to cast their votes, even though they may have serious
concerns about the electoral system because of past
experiences. The United Nations is working with the
Commission to ensure women's participation in all
stages of the elections - as candidates, campaigners
and voters.

The new penal code, which entered into force on
14 February, reinforces Afghanistan's compliance
with international human rights and criminal justice
standards and is a milestone in the country's criminal
justice reform. We wholeheartedly welcome its coming
into force. UNAMA played a valuable role in drafting
the code. I am pleased to report, on today's International
Women's Day, that the Afghan Cabinet has adopted the
necessary amendment to the penal code to ensure that
all provisions of the Elimination of Violence against
Women law continue to apply, giving Afghan women
continuing legal protection from violence.

Women are also disproportionately affected by
the conflict. More than 1,200 women were killed or
injured last year, mostly from ground fighting and
suicide attacks. I am particularly concerned by the
increase in civilian casualties caused by the Islamic
State in Khorasan Province, which has been expanding
its geographical spread beyond the hitherto stronghold
of eastern Afghanistan into northern Afghanistan. We
are monitoring those developments very carefully in
the light ofpotentially destabilizing effects in the north
and beyond.

I would like to turn to another issue of pressing
importance, which is the question of refugees and
displaced persons. Pakistan and Iran have generously
hosted Afghan refugees for decades in times of great
needs, and we appreciate their contribution. It should
not be forgotten that 1.5 million people returned to
Afghanistan in 2016 and 2017. The Afghan Government
has welcomed the return of its citizens, but such large
numbers inevitably stress the Government's ability
to provide services. Assurances that returnees would
gain access to land, housing and basic services have
unfortunately not been realized. We believe that gap
must be addressed before encouraging more people to
move back to their homeland voluntarily. It is possible,
and even likely, that hundreds of thousands more
Afghans will return from Pakistan this year alone.
While the international aid community is preparing
contingency plans to provide short-term help, the
responsibility for people's protection and welfare rests
with the State. Simply put, only the State can provide
land, guarantee property rights and ensure adequate
provision of services.

With regard to investment and improving
Afghanistan's economy, I am pleased to note
the recent ground-breaking ceremony for the
construction in Afghanistan of the Turkmenistan-
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India pipeline. The nearly
2,000-kilometre-long pipeline will be able to transfer
33 billion cubic metres of gas from Turkmenistan to
Pakistan and India through Afghanistan. The ground-
breaking was not only a success for regional cooperation
and integration, but the beginning of the fulfilment
of a long-standing project in Afghanistan that will
contribute significantly to Afghanistan's economic
self-reliance.

UNAMA appreciate's the Council's adoption of
a renewed mandate for UNAMA. We have important
tasks ahead of us this year, including peace efforts, the
upcoming elections and the ministerial conference on
Afghanistan, which the United Nations looks forward to
hosting with the Government of Afghanistan in Geneva
on 28 November. I must also mention the critical areas
of human rights and reforms, including with regard to
anti-corruption efforts. As we work with and for the
people and the Government of Afghanistan, we look to
the Security Council to provide us with a clear mandate.

