Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
Allow me at the outset to voice my gratitude to the
Argentine presidency of the Security Council for
having convened this open debate on a theme that is so
important to the international community. I should like
also to point out that Kyrgyzstan is currently chairing
two organizations, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO), and that my statement will consist
of two parts, one on behalf of each organization.

It is my honour to speak on behalf of the member
States of the CSTO: Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Russia and Tajikistan. The members of our
regional organization believe that the United Nations
is the linchpin of international relations and equitable
international cooperation. It commands universal
legitimacy and has at its disposal the powers required to
respond appropriately to the multitude of contemporary
threats and challenges.

At the same time, a milestone in the current stage
of development of international relations has been the
growing influence of regional organizations. In this
day and age, the effective work of regional entities is
an important component in the emergence of a new
global architecture, and their efforts on the basis of the
provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations have significantly aided the United Nations in
carrying out the functions and powers vested in it by
the international community.

A key role in such processes has been played
by the associations and organizations active in the
Commonwealth of Independent States space, including
the CSTO. The CSTO plays a pivotal role in ensuring
peace and stability in its area of operations. The CSTO,

which has emerged as a political and legal instrument
of mutual assistance in the event of foreign aggression,
has in the 10 years of its existence fundamentally
changed; it has become a key player in the emergence
of the system of collective security in the CIS space.

Today the CSTO is a multifunctional structure
with the potential for a rapid response to a plethora of
threats and challenges. The CSTO plays a significant
role in combating terrorism, illegal drug trafficking,
organized crime and illegal migration, including with a
View to strengthening security and stability in Central
Asia.

We note with satisfaction the progressive
development of interaction between the United Nations
and the CSTO. In December 2004 our organization
was granted observer status in the General Assembly.
The significance of the interaction between the
United Nations and the CSTO was highlighted by the
adoption of resolutions at the sixty-fourth, sixty-fifth
and sixty-seventh sessions of the General Assembly on
cooperation between the United Nations and the CSTO.
Those documents represented a recognition of the rich
potential of comprehensive interaction between the two
organizations and galvanized its intensification.

The development of contacts also was expressed
in the signing of a joint declaration on cooperation
between the secretariats of the two organizations in
March 2010. Meetings between the Secretaries-General
of the two organizations are now held on a regular
basis. In the light of the dynamics of development in
Afghanistan, we have seen a productive continuation of
the contacts between the CSTO and the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia as well as the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan.

We have established useful contacts with the United
Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate. The CSTO's successes also include
interaction with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC). We have conducted exchanges of
information and participated in the CSTO's pre-emptive
counter-narcotics Operation Canal. Operation Canal,
as well as the assistance provided by CSTO member
States in connection with the transit of cargo for the
international forces in Afghanistan, is an example of
effective interaction among CSTO member States
in countering the threats and challenges to security
emanating from Afghanistan.

We believe that the need for the coordination of
approaches and for the development and implementation
ofan agreed approach to Afghanistan by all international
players that care about the country is deeply relevant.
Among the most promising areas ofcooperation between
the United Nations and the CSTO is peacekeeping. A
significant contribution to interaction in that respect
was the signing in September 2012 of a memorandum
ofunderstanding between the CSTO secretariat and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the United
Nations. That document paves the way for practical
cooperation in the field of peacekeeping. The CSTO
peacekeeping mechanism offers the possibility of
using the Organization's capabilities in peacekeeping
operations, including under the auspices of the United
Nations. In that regard, it is worth remembering that the
goals of the CSTO, which has become an international
regional organization with the entry into force of its
Charter on 18 September 2003, are to strengthen
peace and international and regional stability, and
to collectively protect the independence, territorial
integrity and sovereignty of its member States.

Moreover, the priority for CSTO members in
achieving those objectives is to use political means
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
The results of the CSTO's activities reflect the genuine
potential for interaction with the United Nations
on the basis of the principles of partnership and
complementarity of efforts.

(spoke in English)

I now have the honour to make a statement on behalf
of the member States of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO): China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Russia, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. I also have the
honour to confirm that all members of our regional
organization accord special attention to strengthening
cooperation with the United Nations, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
We are united in our understanding that, in accordance
with the Charter, the Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The aspirations of the SCO member States are
closely interlinked with the goals and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. We
seek to transform the SCO area into a region of lasting
peace, friendship and prosperity. General Assembly
resolution 67/15 on cooperation between the United
Nations and the SCO, adopted in November last year,
acknowledged the important role of the SCO in securing
peace and sustainable development, advancing regional
cooperation and strengthening good-neighbourliness
and mutual trust.

We are developing our cooperation in the area of
counter-terrorism and the fight against separatism and
extremism; inter alia, we have created the Regional
Anti-Terrorism Structure. Some other areas of
cooperation include non-proliferation and combating
transnational organized crime. Tackling problems of
international information security is also a priority.

At the July meeting of the SCO Council of Foreign
Ministers, it was stressed that peace and stability in the
whole region depends on the situation in Afghanistan.
The central role of the United Nations in international
efforts to achieve an Afghan settlement was confirmed,
and we expressed our support for the aspirations of
the peoples of Afghanistan for peaceful recovery and
revival. The SCO supports efforts to make Afghanistan
an independent, peaceful, neutral and prosperous
country free of terrorism and drug-related crime.

Cooperation between the SCO and the United
Nations has a solid international legal basis. Our
organization has had observer status in the General
Assembly since 2004, and the Assembly has adopted
three resolutions on cooperation between our
organizations. The Joint Declaration on Ccooperation,
signed in Tashkent in 2010, between the secretariats
of the two organizations is a good illustration of the
growing authority ofthe SCO, its focus on the expansion
of external relations and the creation of a partnership
network of multilateral organizations and forums.

The memorandum of understanding between the
SCO secretariat and the UNODC was signed with
a View to enhancing the cooperation between the
United Nations and the SCO. It aims specifically at
effectively tackling the problems of the production,
trade and trafficking of narcotic drugs originating
in Afghanistan. Another important document is
the protocol on cooperation between the Regional
Anti-Terrorist Structure and the UNODC. Important
elements of effective regional cooperation include
consistent implementation of the 2011-2016 Anti-Drug
Strategy and Action Plan, the creation of an effective
system of joint countermeasures aimed at combating
the drug threat and establishing reliable barriers to
the illicit trafficking of narcotic drugs, psychoactive
substances and their precursors.

In order to actively contribute to the economic
development of the countries of the region and boost
the welfare of its peoples, the economic component of
the cooperation among the SCO countries continues
to play a pivotal role. A close interaction has been
established between our Organization and the United
Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and
the Pacific.

We are convinced that further strengthening of
the partnership between the United Nations and the
SCO will contribute to the realization of the goals
and objectives of the United Nations with a view
to deepening comprehensive cooperation aimed at
tackling the political, economic, social, cultural and
humanitarian problems of the modern world.

The forthcoming summit of the SCO heads of State
on 13 September in Bishkek in the Kyrgyz Republic
is aimed at giving a new impetus to furthering the
development of the organization and the strengthening
of its standing in the international arena. We are
confident that the outcome of the Bishkek summit will
form an appropriate basis on which long-term security
in the region and expanding trade and economic,
cultural and humanitarian relations will be ensured.

