Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In recent years, we have seen an increase in
the potential for conflict in the vast expanses of the
Middle East and North Africa - from Libya to Iraq.
Against that backdrop, an unprecedented increase
in the terrorist threat has also occurred. But in that
context we must not underestimate the explosive nature
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which has lasted
far too long. The common opinion that that conflict
is something to which one has grown accustomed
and that it will resolve itself is an untenable fallacy.
Efforts must be made to extricate the settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict from its current sluggish
state. Otherwise, the degradation of the situation will
continue. The recent spike in violence in the Palestinian
territories and in Israel is the most recent illustration of
that trend.

Progress towards a political settlement means that
settlement activity needs to stop. We are worried about
the plans of the Israeli authorities to confiscate another
150 hectares of land south of Jericho. The policy of
fait accompli conducted by the Israeli authorities
undermines, in a very literal sense, the two-State
solution. We are convinced that the main strategic goal
should be to revive the negotiating track. Currently,
substantive measures must be taken together, based on
Israeli and Palestinian agreements that strengthen the
Palestinian political and economic institutions, taking
into account, of course, the legitimate concerns of
Israel in the area of security.

In the current difficult situation, the Quartet, which
speaks on behalf of the international community, is
seeking a solution and a way out of the current dangerous
impasse. As a result of the ministerial meetings of the
Quartet on 30 September 2015 on the margins of the
General Assembly at its seventieth session in New York
City, as well as of similar meetings held on 23 October
last year in Vienna, statements were adopted that
focused on the need to implement the relevant United
Nations resolutions on the settlement of the Middle East
conflict. We believe that the recent visit of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process to Israel and Palestine was useful. Meetings
took place with the chief negotiators of the parties, as
well as with the leadership of the Foreign Ministries
and security agencies.

We think that the Security Council should play
an important role in efforts to settle the Middle East
conflict. So as to avoid yet another acute crisis with
regard to the Gaza Strip, two tasks need to be tackled:
extending the control of the central Palestinian
authorities in the Gaza Strip and ensuring stability
around that territory. The solutions to those tasks
should be sought exclusively within the framework of
ensuring inter-Palestinian unity based on the Palestine
Liberation Organization. We are working on an ongoing
basis on the issue with the regional parties.
We expect that inter-Syrian talks will begin in
the very near future. The launching of the Vienna
process, which was endorsed by the Security Council
in its resolution 2254 (2015), and the emergence of a
number of factors conducive to a political settlement
in Syria have created a unique prospect for progress
in settling that conflict. We must seize that window of
opportunity. We are surprised that even today some
Security Council members continue to muddy the water
by putting forward their unilateral interpretations of
resolution 2254 (2015). That is irresponsible, and such
habits should be cast aside.

In order to assist the Syrian Government, the Russian
Federation continues to provide military assistance to
that Government in the fight against the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist groups.
For the first time, ISIL forces have lost their footholds.
Russia is also helping in the humanitarian sphere by
providing humanitarian assistance, including in Deir
ez-Zor, where ISIL fighters have besieged over 100,000
civilians. We have heard various ideas regarding
Russia's activities in Syria. We firmly reject them.
It is especially strange when they are disseminated
by countries that are part of the Western coalition,
which, unlike the Russian Air and Space Forces, is
acting in an extremely untransparent manner and not
very effectively at all. But our American and English
colleagues always refuse to give information about the
numerous civilian victims of the coalition's air strikes
in Syria, Iraq, Libya and Afghanistan.

There is an urgent need to restore national unity
in Libya, where there is increasing evidence of the
presence of terrorist units there. ISIL is attempting to
create corridors between conflict-ridden countries in
the Middle East and the North African Mediterranean.
We urge the Libyan parties to respond responsibly to
the efforts of the United Nations to approach the issue
of forming a Government of national unity and to unite
in combating terrorism.

We cannot call the situation in Yemen anything
other than tragic. Fierce clashes in the country are
continuing. Civilians are being killed, and the civilian
infrastructure is being destroyed. We call on all the
parties to the conflict to cease hostilities immediately
and to resolve all existing problems through negotiations.
We support the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General on Yemen, Mr. Ahmed Ismail, to
bring that situation to a political track and begin an
inter-Yemeni dialogue for a sustainable settlement. For
our part, we shall provide requisite support to those
efforts.
An effective response to the difficult challenges in
the Middle East and North Africa can only be found
collectively. There is a well-known proposal from the
Russian Federation for broad cooperation to push back
against terrorism and ensure a political settlements of
existing crises, which remains on the table.

