Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
The Security Council, in resolution 1076 (1996), and the
General Assembly, in resolution 51/195, expressed the
fundamental principles for a settlement to the conflict in
Afghanistan: the Afghan parties must put an end to
hostilities and engage in political dialogue; foreign
interference, in particular in the form of supplying
weapons, must cease; and the United Nations has a
central role to play in the settlement of the conflict, first
and foremost, through the action of the Special Mission
to Afghanistan.

The latest report of the Secretary-General refers to
the tireless efforts of the United Nations Special Mission
to achieve a ceasefire. It also points out that humanitarian
assistance has continued in often difficult conditions. We
must pay tribute to these efforts, and France, in this
context, would like to thank all those who assisted us in
the release of the two French representatives of a non-
governmental organization who were imprisoned in Kabul
for a month.

The situation described by the Secretary-General
shows, however, that little progress has been made in the
implementation of the principles expressed in the
resolutions of the United Nations. We note, as does the
Secretary-General, that the warring factions have not
heeded the repeated appeals for peace and appear
determined to pursue the military option. The Secretary-
General indicates that it is widely believed that foreign
interference is continuing. The humanitarian situation is
characterized by persistent discrimination against women,
displacement of populations and mistreatment of the
personnel of humanitarian organizations.

This situation should not lead to discouragement or
indifference. The new initiatives announced by the
Secretary-General deserve our support. In particular, we
welcome with satisfaction the convening of a new
meeting of concerned countries, and we are in favour of
holding such meetings more regularly. In addition, we
support the idea of greater involvement by the Security
Council.

We reaffirm our full support for the efforts of the
special representative of the Secretary-General aimed at
a resumption of dialogue. We hope that the special
representative will be able to extend his contacts to
influential individuals in Afghanistan and influential
Afghans abroad. Mr. Holl's regular and close contacts
with all of the States that have influence, first and
foremost the States of the region, will also be extremely
useful. Cooperation with the Organization of the Islamic
Conference should also finally bear fruit.

 

The action of the Secretary-General and his special
representative, however, can only yield results if all
Member States adopt an attitude consistent with the
principles expressed by the United Nations.

We share the wish expressed by the Secretary-General
to see States interested in Afghanistan, and that have an
influence on that country, coordinate their activities with
those of the Special Mission and not favour any of the
parties to the detriment of another.

The cessation of interference is indispensable, in
particular the supply of weapons. Those States that interfere
in this way bear particular responsibility for the
continuation of this conflict. I wish to recall that France,
like its partners in the European Union, is applying a full
embargo on the supply of weapons.

The continuation of the conflict in Afghanistan has
prolonged the suffering of the Afghan people. This conflict
may result in the destabilization of the region, and it also
has adverse consequences for the entire international
community. We need only recall in this regard that many
terrorists, including some of the most dangerous ones, are
at this very moment sheltered in Afghanistan.

A settlement of this conflict can therefore be possible
only if the Afghan parties agree to cease hostilities and
engage in dialogue. We must reiterate our appeals along
these lines. Let us see to it that the Afghan parties fully
understand that these appeals reflect the unanimous will of
the international community and therefore of the Security
Council.

