Mr. Kiganahe (spoke in French): I take this
opportunity to thank in my turn the representatives of
various countries present at this meeting for the
support they expressed for the recommendations
outlined in the Kalomoh report (S/2005/158). I also
thank representatives for the support they are providing
and the attention they are devoting to the political
developments in my country.

Nearly all the speakers expressed their support
for the mechanisms proposed in the Kalomoh report.
We expressed approval of them in our statement, and
we believe that with the support and the contributions
of countries Members of the United Nations system,
those mechanisms can be implemented effectively.

During the various statements a number of
questions were raised. For example, the representative
of Romania asked whether the subregion and the force
and staff of the United Nations Operation in Burundi
(UNOB) in Bujumbura could assist us in implementing
the mechanisms proposed in the Kalomoh report. The
representative of the United States wondered what the
cost of the operation would be. The representative of
Japan asked how long it would take for the mechanism
to be established, given the legal process involved and,
in particular, the adoption of the necessary laws by the
Parliament that will be elected. Other speakers raised
an important question about the mechanism for
ownership by the Burundian people of the solutions
proposed in the Kalomoh report, because it is felt that
these solutions can become effective only if the people
of Burundi support them and believe that the path that
has been charted is useful and wise.

I consider the Great Lakes region countries of
Tanzania, Uganda and Rwanda, along with South
Africa, to have played a very important role in the
peace process in Burundi. In this regard, the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement, which has
provided the legal and political basis for the exercise of
power in Burundi over the past four years, was adopted
by Burundian political partners as a result of the
engagement and fine contribution of His Excellency
Julius Nyerere, former President of Tanzania, and,
subsequently, of the enlightened leadership of His
Excellency Nelson Mandela, former President of South
Africa, with the guidance of President Museveni,
Chairman of the Great Lakes regional initiative, all of
whom dedicated themselves to the success of the
process.

Today, the United Nations forces that are
operating in Burundi - whose contribution to
stabilizing the peace process is obvious - are made up
of elements from South Africa, Tanzania, Kenya and
even Uganda. The subregion's contribution is thus
vital. We must not forget, however, that such
contributions would not have been possible without
tireless and varied support, in particular financial
support provided by the United Nations.
We will continue, therefore, to attach great
importance to support from the subregion, as well as to
the support that the United Nations has constantly
provided to the people of Burundi and to the search for
peace.

The various elements of the United Nations
Operation in Burundi in Bujumbura, could, indeed,
play a genuine role in establishing the various
mechanisms - or, at least, in preparing an
environment conducive to their effective
implementation. This would mean, in particular,
participation in capacity-building, because, as has been
rightly emphasized in the Kalomoh report, most of the
components of the judicial apparatus have human-
resources shortcomings - in terms of the number of
staff and their qualifications and judicial experience
with regard to crimes of such gravity as genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. We are therefore
convinced that we will be able to benefit from the
presence of the various United Nations staff members
with a View to immediately laying the groundwork for
the implementation of the recommendations contained
in the Kalomoh report.

As for the timing - another issue that was raised
by a number of speakers - we believe that the
Government that will emerge as a result of the
elections will spare no effort to speed up the
establishment of the mechanisms.

By the end of August, a new Government will
have been put in place as a result of the electoral
process; to date, commune elections have been held.
We believe that, on the basis of the principle of the
continuity of the State, the current Government's
commitments will be taken into account by the next
Government. We are all the more convinced of that,
given that the majority forces that are progressively
emerging supported the Arusha Agreement in 2000
and, in 2003, the signing in Tanzania of the
comprehensive ceasefire agreement of 16 November
2003. That reassures and convinces us that, with regard
to these issues, there will be no regression. And we
want to give the Council that assurance, too.

On the question of ownership of the mechanisms
by the people of Burundi, we believe that, if the
mechanisms are perceived by the Burundian
community as being the result of foreign intervention,
the solutions that emerge will be unlikely to meet the
expectations of the people of Burundi.

The fact that consideration has been given to
involving the people of Burundi in the search for truth
and the process of justice is the first sign of respect for
the people of Burundi; this, in turn, will prompt them
to support the mechanisms. Furthermore, it was in
Arusha, where Burundian political partners met, that
the initial proposals were made and the request
formulated. We recognize that the recommendations in
the Kalomoh report represent a further elaboration on
the terms of the request made in Arusha, where the
Burundian political actors met. In other words, it will
not require a special effort to make the people of
Burundi understand that the solutions proposed in the
Kalomoh report are, indeed, solutions to the problems
that they themselves raised through their political
representatives.

We are also convinced that control and ownership
by the Burundian people of the mechanisms proposed
in the Kalomoh report will be effective only if the
Government commits itself to the debate on this
question with the participation of different segments of
society. We will thus be participating in an awareness-
raising campaign to ensure that any future solution
takes into account the opinions, views and feelings of
the various sectors of Burundian society.

Lastly, the mechanisms outlined in the Kalomoh
report will be integrated into our domestic legal system
through the adoption of legislation by an elected
parliament. We believe that the elected parliament will
see to the interests of the people. It will be mandated
by the people to manage the most important issues, and
in particular the troubling search for truth and justice.
The participation and involvement of the legislature in
the implementation of those mechanisms will be the
finest illustration of the fact that the people will have
been consulted through its representatives. We can
therefore assure the Council that there will be no
problem ensuring the national ownership of those
mechanisms.

