Ms. Jahan (Bangladesh): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
this important and topical issue.

The issue has been on the Council's agenda for
quite some time. We take note of the Secretary-
General's latest country report on children and armed
conflict and the annual report of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. It is heartening to find
that the continued engagement of the Security Council
and the efforts of its Working Group have produced
some tangible results and that many more, positive
outcomes are in the offing. In that context, we note that
certain countries and parties to conflicts have complied
with the recommendations.

While we appreciate the activities of the Working
Group, we would also like to see the discussion on its
working methods and procedural issues completed
quickly so that the Working Group can devote
itself fully to its mandated activities. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, deserves our particular praise for
her dedicated efforts in upholding the cause of children
involved in armed conflicts.

In a recent field trip to a country emerging from
conflict, I was struck by the shocking revelation of
instances of voluntary or coerced recruitment of child
soldiers in the conflict. I was struck by a story that a
2
nine-year old, who was completely deaf and dumb, was
using his toy of terror - in this instance, a loaded
machine gun - to satisfy the thrill of killing. What
prompts such actions? That is something that we need
to ponder. We need to come up with solutions.

While many child soldiers are coerced into
fighting, the induction of children into armed conflicts
is often prompted by difficult socio-economic
conditions. In that context, as also underlined in the
concept paper before us, approaching the issue from a
development perspective would be an effective way of
addressing the problem in a more sustainable manner.
While such a development approach should be a
comprehensive one, there should be a particular focus
on addressing the root causes of armed conflict from a
proper perspective.

The vulnerable situation of children in post-
conflict societies also needs special attention. For
peace to be sustained, those children must be
rehabilitated and reintegrated back into their
communities more effectively. Reintegration and
rehabilitation can be successful only if adequate
incentives are given to child combatants to return to
normal life. Reintegration would require instilling
certain societal values as well as some psychosocial
and ideological grooming of the returnees.
Rehabilitation entails child protection and welfare.

National efforts in this context should be
complemented by international assistance, including
resource mobilization. The Peacebuilding Commission
should have the issues of the rehabilitation and
reintegration of children permanently on its agenda
when taking up any country-specific configuration. The
sharing of countries' best practices would be useful in
formulating effective reintegration strategies.

The contribution of child protection advisers so
far in nine peacekeeping and political missions can be
regarded as significant progress. We would like to see
such approaches incorporated in the other ongoing
missions without delay.

The United Nations could explore the possibility
of assisting national Governments in mobilizing a
social movement in conflict-ridden and conflict-prone
countries to develop social and moral resistance to the
induction of children in armed conflict.

It is well documented that children suffer the
most under unregulated sanction regimes. The Council
08-42816
has a duty to ensure that sanctions do not affect the
innocent. The issues of children under foreign
occupation must also be appropriately addressed. There
should be special provisions for girl children, who are
particularly vulnerable to sexual exploitation and
Violence.

Despite the United Nations system-wide
response, the overall situation of children in situations
of armed conflict remains a matter of grave concern.
Ensuring compliance by non-State actors and armed
groups remains a big challenge. We must try to address
those issues in a more resolute manner.

Children are among the principal and the most
hapless Victims in all wars and civil conflicts. Armed
conflicts hold terrible consequences for children's
development and for the peace and stability of
generations to come.

Mitigating measures will have limited success
unless there is a genuine political will for conflict
prevention. We, the international community, should
join hands to work towards that end, and the Council in
particular has a responsibility in that regard.

