Mr. Dovganyuk (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
We thank the delegation of Egypt for convening today's
debate, which serves to highlight the direct influence
of peacekeeping operations on the achievement of
the overall goal of maintaining peace, especially in
situations where security is fragile or countries are
being rebuilt after conflict.

Conflicts have become increasingly complex and
ever-more fractious and difficult to predict. The old
and new drivers of conflict have serious implications
for efforts to move international, regional and national
processes beyond conflict prevention and conflict
resolution. Our success depends, therefore, on pooling
our efforts in the main areas of United Nations action,
which are peace and security and human rights.
Mandate development should be accompanied by the
Council's strategic vision of the desired outcome,
with adequate time allotted and possibilities for
consultations with experts on a wide range of
issues. Sustaining peace requires engagement and
coordination among the General Assembly, Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, in close
cooperation with the United Nations country teams and
the Peacebuilding Commission.

The Commission must serve as an advisory and
coordination bridge among all actors and assist in the
mobilization of resources. It is therefore important
to strengthen the Peacebuilding Support Office and
the Peacebuilding Fund with long-term, predictable
funding from donors, the World Bank and regional
financial institutions.
Success also depends on having realistic timelines
for United Nations peace operations and development
assistance. Sustaining peace after conflict is a
particularly lengthy and costly challenge. Thus, conflict
prevention and resolution, recovery, development,
together with disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes are important components of
sustaining peace.

Peacebuilding requires the increased participation
of women in the prevention and resolution of conflict.
Also important is the inclusive engagement of youth,
together with parliamentarians, religious leaders,
civil society and grassroots organizations. National
reconciliation and peace processes must be inclusive,
bearing in mind that conflict and peace impact every
person in a society.

We also need to strengthen the peacebuilding
capability of the United Nations system and to pay
more attention to the timeline and the management of
transitions and smooth handovers to the Government
and the United Nations country team. If we are focused
only on conflict prevention without addressing the root
causes of conflict, we run the risk of seeing the conflict
re-emerge. Therefore, we need to resolve the drivers of
conflict, the economic and environmental issues, and
ensure that we fight mismanagement.

Peace agreements need to guarantee legal land
rights and introduce effective land registration and
administration. Investments must be made in preventing
deterioration in the quantity and quality of water
resources due to climate change, pollution, privatization
and inequities in resource distribution. Transboundary
water disputes are widely prevalent and should be
regulated politically, as well as the mass migration
of people caused by climate change. That means the
Security Council needs to be climate sensitive as well.
Since the majority of peacekeeping operations are in
Africa, Kazakhstan supports the focus on Africa's
peace, security, governance and development.

(spoke in English)

Africa needs peace and stability - the bedrock
for development. Kazakhstan has therefore proposed
a new approach to eliminate the threat of war: the
establishment of the 2045 Global Strategic Initiative
Plan by the United Nations centenary, as presented
last year to the General Assembly by our President,
Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev (see A/70/PV.13, p. 46).
The aim is to create global development based on fair
conditions and a situation in which all nations would
have equal access to accountable world infrastructure,
resources and markets.

Finally, Kazakhstan is committed to sustainable
peace as the fundamental premise for all efforts to
achieve regional and global stability.

