Mr. Covie (Yugoslavia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I would like
to comment upon some remarks that were made. I
would like to thank you for your warm words, which
were directed towards me and towards the Government
of the Republic of Yugoslavia.

I would like to say that return cannot be one of
the 30 projects that are in the process of being realized.
The situation of the displaced persons in Yugoslavia is
very difficult and dramatic indeed. We have around
700,000 refugees and displaced persons. We have twice
managed to prevent people from raising barricades on
the roads to Kosovo. We really believe that financial
support is necessary in this respect. I applaud what the
Norwegian delegation suggested, that we should
coordinate our efforts with regard to the return of
displaced persons to Kosovo and Metohija.

As far as the benchmarks are concerned, we gave
them full support when Mr. Steiner presented them, and
we still give them our support. We want to improve
them, and the biggest improvement in that regard
would be a temporal dimension, a temporal plan for
their realization. I am grateful for the opinion that we
should not talk about the final status of Kosovo and
Metohija until we achieve certain standards.

Mitrovica has been mentioned several times, and
this is a question and a problem for all of us. However,
we are slowly making headway in this respect, and I
am sure that you understand all the facts that were
brought by the Yugoslav delegation.

Everything we achieved was achieved not by
pressure, but by agreement. We will solve the problems
of Mitrovica and we will continue our progress.
However, I have a suggestion. "Bandits" or "gangs" are
not good words for just any group. I have had the
opportunity to sit with members of the former Kosovo
Liberation Army in southern Serbia, but I never used
the term "bandits". The reason is that I wanted to solve
the problem. This is the case even though those people
were less educationally advantaged than those who are
at the bridge in Mitrovica. This is a problem we have
inherited from Yugoslavia. Parallel structures and gate-
watching are the consequence of fear and of the
violation of basic human rights of the Serbs in Kosovo
and Metohija. I am glad that we are making progress
every day.

As for Macedonia, we are very glad that there
was progress, and we hope that Macedonia will respect
the border demarcation agreement. We believe that this
is a very important task.

Finally, I am grateful for your support. However,
I did not come to the Security Council to listen to your
praise. This is my job. I will strive, with your help, to
continue being successful in this job. I like
compliments, but we cannot live on compliments. The
half-empty, half-full glass may still not quench your
thirst. There are many people who have problems.
There are Serbs, Albanians, Romas, people from
different ethnic communities, and I am very glad when
I saw that certain countries in the region were inspired
by what we were doing in Kosovo and Metohija. I am
very glad our efforts are used as a model to solve
problems in other regions. I will be at these countries'
disposal to help them out. And I am sure UNMIK will
do the same.

Mr. President, thank you very much for allowing
me to speak in the Security Council. I hope that we
shall meet again soon, and that we will discuss the
temporal dimension of these problems.

