I thank Special Representative Shearer and activist Yakani for their briefings. The spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic across South Sudan seriously threatens to reverse the positive course embraced by the country towards inclusive and sustainable peace. We stress that effective mitigation of the COVID-19 pandemic is at the core of efforts to protect civilians and is crucial to the implementation of key remaining terms of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, notably the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes, and to the advancement of the peace process at large. We welcome the steps taken by the South Sudanese Government to tackle the pandemic, particularly the appointment of a dedicated task force. We urge international partners to extend the needed technical and medical support, which, regrettably, remains in short supply. We urge the South Sudanese authorities to commit to full and inclusive governance throughout the country so as to enable comprehensive humanitarian outreach to communities in need, ensure the protection of civilians and respect for human rights, and strengthen the rule of law. We commend the continuous and crucial engagement of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in mediating solutions between the parties and in ensuring the implementation of the peace agreement. We welcome the continued provision of assistance and technical capacity- building by UNMISS in connection with its core mandated activities, and support the use of its good offices for promoting the peace process. In the light of the pandemic-related restrictions imposed on the operation of UNMISS, it is important for the Mission to maintain consistent public outreach and engagement with communities, foster closer dialogue with the South Sudanese Government and enhance mobility and a light-footprint approach to its operations. Tunisia's firm belief is that South Sudan needs to be backed by adequate international support and flexibility, including that of the Council, with due consideration of the humbling realities of the South Sudanese transition. We stress that the meaningful engagement of the Council in South Sudan hinges on its genuine willingness to lift sanctions and accept a paradigm shift in the sanctions mandate. Sanctions measures should be seen as a cooperative rather than coercive tool to bolster confidence and trust among the South Sudanese parties and promote sustainable peace and economic growth in the country. Last but not least, we emphasize the importance of addressing root causes and structural factors of conflict in South Sudan in order to prevent a relapse of violence and conflict, ensure holistic respect for human rights and lay the foundation for durable inclusive peace and sustainable development.
