Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): The
Algerian delegation is delighted and proud to see this
most important of organs meeting under the presidency
of the representative of a country with so many strong
links to our own, links forged over the centuries both in
the struggle against adversity and in generous and
fruitful exchanges that today move us towards a shared
destiny. My pleasure is all the greater because for many
years I have had the privilege of knowing you, Mr.
President, as a talented diplomat who has placed his
intelligence and his heart at the service of the cause of
justice and progress and who will wisely guide the
work ofthe Council towards the success we anticipate.

I wish also to express my appreciation and
admiration to Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani of
Singapore for his enormously successful presidency of
the Security Council at a time when he was taking his
first steps as a freshly elected newcomer to the
Council.

The item, Mr. President, on which you have
called for a transparent and democratic debate is a
timely one, because it comes before the Council in the
wake of the rich discussions held at the Millennium
Summit and of those prompted by the report
(S/2000/809) of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations chaired by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi; it also lies
at the heart of the whole question of peacekeeping. We
must think together about the methodology to be
followed and about the means to be put in place so that,
once peace is restored after a given conflict, a process
of peace-building can immediately be set in motion
with a view to attaining lasting peace and stability. In
other words, we must formulate and set up a
comprehensive, integrated long-term strategy; this
requires methodical organization, effective
coordination, strict follow-up and, obviously, adequate
financing.

To that end, it is useful if not imperative that
certain conditions be met both in the preparation and in
the implementation of such a strategy.

First of all, all those whose contribution is needed
should be involved and should be able effectively to
make that contribution. That applies, of course, to the
Security Council, which under the Charter bears
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. But it applies also to
the General Assembly and to the Economic and Social
Council, which have a major role to play, as well as to
the funds and agencies ofthe United Nations and to the
Bretton Woods institutions, without whose involvement
any effort in this sphere will be doomed to failure.

In addition to those key players, it is appropriate
also to involve the States of the region concerned and
regional and subregional political and economic
groupings, which possess a keener knowledge of the
situation on the ground and whose influence on the
course of events can be decisive.

Also, the causes of conflict should be carefully
analysed and properly addressed in order to avoid the
same causes giving rise to the same effects. These
causes are numerous, and often relate to poverty, a
source of frustration, despair and bitterness, as well as
to a lack of democracy and to poor administration of
public affairs. Particularly in the case of Africa, they
can also relate to the injustice established by brutal
colonization that did not respect human beings or the
subtle balances established over centuries. They can
relate too to the consequences of poor choices that may
have been made, when emerging from the darkness of
colonialism, by public authorities facing immense
challenges and expectations that were as complex as
they were urgent.

Finally, such a strategy must be able to offer the
country or region concerned a real chance of resuming
a normal life in peace and order, and above all of
embarking on the path of progress, justice and
freedom.

In that connection, let me share with the Council
a number of thoughts and considerations. First, it is
generally agreed today that disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes
are a fundamental element in the process of peace-
building. Indeed, last year the Security Council
devoted a meeting to that subject, at which important
thoughts and recommendations were set out. The
proliferation of internal conflicts, in which
Governments often face armed rebellion, involves the
often difficult and complex task of demobilizing
yesterday's rebels, who are today's partners for peace.
That is why we suggest that, in cooperation with the
Department for Disarmament Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, DDR
programmes be included as one of the elements of
operations. Such programmes should thus be a part of
the activities of United Nations missions, in close
cooperation with the parties; they should be financed
from an operation's overall budget, as indeed was
proposed by the General Assembly working group on
the causes of conflict in Africa.

This is a complex and highly risky operation,
undertaken to ensure the orderly and effective
reintegration of former combatants into society in such
a way that they are not tempted, for one reason or
another, to take up their weapons again.

Special attention also needs to be given to the
untenable tragedy of child soldiers. While calling for
respect by the warring parties for civilians, especially
women and children, and for the non-recruitment of
soldiers under the age of 18, the international
community must, through the United Nations and its
funds and agencies, make a special effort genuinely to
address the issue of child victims of war, be they direct
or indirect participants, so as to give them the care they
need and allow them to be gradually reintegrated into
society.

Secondly, among the most tragic consequences of
conflicts are the hordes of refugees cast onto the road
of exile, of whom the media occasionally give us a
glimpse in their untold suffering. This tragedy requires
us to address a number of concerns, such as how to
meet the needs of these refugees, ensure their
protection and interact with the countries of asylum.
While the return of refugees to their countries of origin
must be a post-conflict priority, that return must
nonetheless be correctly prepared for and implemented.
The reintegration of refugees must, in fact, allow them
gradually to resume a normal life thanks not only to the
return of peace, but also to a process of reconstruction
and economic recovery.

The special attention that refugees should enjoy is
called for, inter alia, by the fact that they are in the
category that has experienced the worst of war. It is
therefore normal that they be able to see their situation
improve with the return of peace. In this respect, the
fundamental contribution must be made by national
authorities, while international organizations - the
United Nations in particular - must give the country
concerned significant assistance, especially since the
reintegration of refugees generally leads to a reduction
in the number of those who benefit from humanitarian
assistance.

Thirdly, when war crimes or genocide have been
perpetrated, as was the case in the former Yugoslavia
and in Rwanda, justice must be implacable, because
nothing is more pernicious or more fearsome than the
culture of impunity. This iron fist must nonetheless be
accompanied by a bold and determined effort to mend
the broken fabric of the nation, rebuild the channels of
expression and communication, gain strength, mobilize
energies and establish the conditions for resumed social
interaction. The international community should strive
to encourage, facilitate and support this effort by
giving it political, logistical and financial backing.

From this perspective, we can only welcome the
establishment of the United Nations offices in Guinea-
Bissau, the Central African Republic and Angola, as
well as the activities of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor, for their invaluable
contribution to those countries through their support
for the promotion of human rights, the establishment
and development of democratic institutions and the
strengthening of their public administration capacities.
Nevertheless, an additional effort must be made in the
financial area, particularly in Africa, in order to ensure
that this work continues and bears fruit.

Fourthly and finally, since development is another
name for peace, it will always be necessary to establish
a programme specially adapted to the needs of the
country or region concerned and aimed at the
rehabilitation of basic infrastructure, the construction
of education and health centres, job creation and the
relaunching of economic activity on a more sound and
equitable basis. To that end, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the Bretton
Woods institutions have an important role to play in
establishing the necessary strategies and in ensuring
financing, without which no action worthy ofthat name
can be undertaken.

Indeed, it is neither by draining the meagre and
steadily declining resources of UNDP, nor by
turning to conventional tools and methods of
intervention - much less by piecemeal efforts,
improvisation and posturing - that we will provide the
necessary remedies for the economic and social
problems that are often at the root of conflict or that we
will eliminate their causes.

In this respect, we cannot consider the formula of
pledging conferences always to be the appropriate one
or even ever to have registered a real success. After a
war, many countries and financial institutions rush to
hastily organized conferences to promise their financial
support, but those commitments, unfortunately, are not
always followed up by action. The case of the most
recent donor conference for the Central African
Republic is significant in that respect.

Special treatment for the debt of countries
affected by conflict and more advantageous loan
conditions might perhaps be considered by the World
Bank and by the donor countries. In general terms,
more generous and effective development cooperation
would contribute significantly to the reduction of
sources oftension and conflict. The link between peace
and development, which everyone now recognizes,
should encourage us to step up our efforts to give
concrete form to the various commitments undertaken
here at the United Nations and at other forums to help
the developing countries, especially the least developed
among them, to prevent the outbreak or resurgence of
conflict.

In implementing its policies on the ground, the
Security Council has an extremely important tool in its
peacekeeping missions. The United Nations offices are
another tool available to the Organization as a whole,
but their mandates and means would clearly benefit
from being clarified, made more specific and, we
would hope, strengthened, while their resources should
be enhanced. Close and effective coordination should
be established between the missions and the offices in
order to avoid potential overlapping and to ensure
coordinated and harmonious implementation of a
peace-building strategy that involves actors other than
the Security Council.

Indeed, it is useful to recall that the
comprehensive, complex and demanding nature of
post-conflict peace-building requires an effective
contribution from other bodies, such as the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the
United Nations Secretariat and its agencies and
programmes, the Bretton Woods institutions and the
regional organizations concerned. In other words, a
partnership for peace must be established in clarity,
transparency and respect for the mandates and powers
ofeach.

These are the thoughts that I wished to share
during this consideration of peace-building, which the
Council has opened to discussion at just the right
moment. I hope that this exercise at collective
reflection will contribute to better organized peace-
building operations in the future. They are a means of
preventing conflicts that is ultimately less costly than
the exercise of conflict resolution and certainly more
orderly and calm, given that they are neither conceived
nor implemented under the threat or pressure of events.

