At the outset, I would like to congratulate Germany on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month. As we meet today, the situation in Libya continues to deteriorate. Please believe that I bear this weight, every second of my speaking time. I will be concise. I would share with the Council the perspective of my country, the Kingdom of Morocco, through three main messages. The first is a message of concern. The coronavirus has not made the situation any better. While everyone has been busy attempting to overcome the challenges of the pandemic, the political, military, economic and humanitarian situations in Libya have deteriorated further. In one year, 2,356 people have died, including 400 civilians. On the humanitarian level, the number of displaced persons and refugees continues to rise. Libya has more than 400,000 internally displaced persons, and nearly 50,000 refugees and asylum seekers. On the economic level, the decline in the gross domestic product growth is estimated at 58.7 per cent in 2020. The increase in the inflation rate is forecast at 22 per cent. The security situation is alarming, with the presence on the ground of uncontrolled armed groups, militias and terrorist actors. My second message is one of disappointment. International good will is unquestionable, but international political will is yet to be found. There is indeed consensus across the international community on the need to move forward and make progress in Libya. We are gathering today to renew and reconfirm that consensus. But let us be realistic and pragmatic in addressing some basic questions. Will the proliferation of initiatives help to resolve this conflict? Are they not mutually exclusive? Would they not have the opposite effect to that which is ardently sought - namely, that of prolonging an uncontrollable situation? Libya should not be regarded as a lucrative diplomatic business - a "fonds de commerce diplomatique". But, as a matter of fact, Libya has become an arena for external competition, where some foreign Powers are engaged in a proxy war, placing additional hardship on our Libyan brothers. Foreign intervention in no way helps the Libyan parties rise above narrow interests and face the challenge of forging together a better future for Libya. Of course, we need to be aware of the divergent objectives, different values and asymmetrical power structures of the various actors. But, first and foremost, let us be bold and commit ourselves to the specific targets of creating the conditions for inter-Libyan discussions. My third, and last, message is a call for mobilization. There is a consensus within the international community on the need to move forward and make progress in Libya. We should be determined to translate our consensus into practical and concrete terms. The Kingdom of Morocco is deeply convinced that a sustainable solution to the Libyan crisis is a political solution, not a military one; a solution that must come from the Libyans themselves; a solution that guarantees the unity, territorial integrity and national sovereignty of Libya; and a solution that is safeguarded from foreign influences and agendas, including military interference. The Libyan Political Agreement, signed in Skhirat, Morocco, on 17 December 2015, may not be the perfect deal. However, no equal alternative is on the table. Its provisions need to be adjusted and updated, in the light of developments on the ground. It is up to the Libyan parties to do so. Our responsibility is to encourage them and help them in their national endeavour. We consider the United Nations Support Mission in Libya as an important instrument. But it can be further improved, enhanced and restructured. Libya is not only a neighbour to Morocco; it is a brotherly country with which we share a common history, common bonds, common interests and a common destiny. For us, Libya is not just a diplomatic issue; our stability and security depend on the situation in Libya.
