Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): As I take the
floor, allow me to thank Ambassador Takasu,
Permanent Representative of Japan and Chairman of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for his report.

Today's debate provides us a useful opportunity
to take stock of the first two years of the activities of
the Peacebuilding Commission and of its relationship
with the Security Council. The Peacebuilding
Commission was established in 2005 to fill the gap
between peacekeeping and post-conflict rehabilitation
by bringing coherence to efforts aimed at the recovery
of countries emerging from conflict. That is why it was
decided that the Peacebuilding Commission should be
an advisory body not only of the General Assembly but
also of the Security Council.

The Commission started with realistic
expectations. Only two countries were on its agenda
for the first year, so that it could develop effective
mechanisms before embarking on larger tasks. We can
now safely say that the results have been satisfactory.
The countries on the agenda are on a promising road to
stabilization, despite some difficulties. Three integrated
strategies have been agreed on with the active
involvement of the countries concerned, in keeping
with the cornerstone principle of national ownership.

The Peacebuilding Commission is one element in
a triad. The other two are the Peacebuilding Support
Office (PBSO) and the Peacebuilding Fund. The job of
the Fund is to fill a crucial gap, namely, the one
resulting from the fact that, even when the donor
community is quickly mobilized, it can take time to set
up effective mechanisms to channel resources into
stabilization and recovery projects. We are therefore
heartened to see, as telling proof of the commitment of
donors, that the Fund has exceeded the target of $250
million set in 2005. We encourage the Secretary-
General to continue his work to make the Fund a
flexible and effective instrument. We also encourage
him to provide the Peacebuilding Support Office with
adequate resources as the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission expands. The Peacebuilding Support
Office's role cannot be overstated. It provides the
Commission with analyses and instruments to develop
and implement effective strategies and support for the
effective involvement of the United Nations system.

The Security Council has actively participated in
examining countries' requests to be placed on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission and has
closely followed the Commission's activities over the
past two years. We believe that that cooperation can be
intensified by identifying links between the
Commission's peacebuilding strategies for a country
and the Security Council's decisions and analyses
regarding peace and security, as well as by better
integrating the Commission's activities into the
Council's work.

A peacekeeping operation mandate is but the first
step towards the stabilization of a country. The scope
and nature of the mandate should contemplate the
further steps to be taken. Peacekeeping should no
longer be conceived as a stop-gap measure to simply
monitor a ceasefire or implement a peace agreement. It
should be seen as a long-term investment in peace and
the first crucial phase of the international community's
involvement.

The Peacebuilding Commission should develop
close and effective cooperation with the entire United
Nations system, first and foremost with the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
System-wide coherence is therefore a unique
opportunity to make the Commission's strategies in the
field more effective and to prevent gaps in the
transition from peacebuilding to development.

I would like to conclude by focusing on the
Peacebuilding Commission's agenda. The countries on
the agenda so far are from Africa. While the majority
of conflicts do indeed occur there, to be a truly global
instrument the Commission also has to look at other
regions. It must have a broad range of vision to become
the world's most reliable instrument for peacebuilding.
Time has shown that we can live up to these
challenges.

