Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to deliver to
the Security Council the sixteenth 90-day report of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), in accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of
resolution 1737 (2006). The report covers the period
from 16 September to 9 December 2010, during which
time the Committee held no meetings but conducted its
work using the silent procedure.

I would like to begin by noting that, on
5 November 2010, in consultation with the Committee,
the Secretary-General appointed the Panel of Experts
established under paragraph 29 of resolution 1929
(2010). The Committee welcomes this development
and is scheduled to hold informal consultations with
the members of the Panel today.

During the reporting period, the Committee
received communications from two Member States,
which reported two separate incidents of violations of
paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007), which imposes
a ban on the export and procurement of all arms and
related materiel from the Islamic Republic of Iran. In
the first case, a Member State informed the Committee
that, at one of its wharfs, its security authority had
inspected and seized 13 shipping containers of illegal
arms reportedly originating from Iran, and that a
comprehensive report on the results of its
investigations would be forthcoming. The Committee
responded, inter alia, by recommending that the
Member State retain and store the seized containers
until the Committee had concluded its consideration of
the matter, and encouraged the Member State to invite
2
the Panel of Experts, as appropriate, to visit and
inspect the seized containers.

In the second case, a Member State informed the
Committee that, at one of its harbours, its customs and
border authorities had inspected and seized a container
onboard the vessel MS Finland, originating from Iran
and destined for the Syrian Arab Republic, which
contained, a high-potential explosive known as T4 or
RDX. Further investigations were being carried out by
the Member State. As in the first case, the Committee
dispatched a response with appropriate guidance to this
State. It is a matter of grave concern that the apparent
pattern of sanctions violations involving prohibited
arms transfers from Iran, first highlighted publicly by
the Committee a year ago, is continuing.

In accordance with its work programme, on
1 November the Committee approved a hand-out
describing implementation by States of resolutions
1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929
(2010); and on 15 November, a fact sheet explaining
the respective roles of the Committee and the Panel of
Experts in investigating and responding to reported
sanctions violations. It is hoped that these two
documents, which were subsequently dispatched to all
Member States under cover of a note verbale and are
also available on the Committee's website, will assist
Member States in meeting their responsibilities.

The Committee considered and approved a
request submitted by a Member State for an exception
to the assets freeze, to the benefit of a listed entity,
under subparagraph 13 (b) of resolution 1737 (2006).
In addition, the Committee received three notifications
from two Member States in connection with the receipt
and/or unfreezing of funds in order to make payments
due under contracts entered into prior to the listing of
two entities, pursuant to paragraph 15 of the same
resolution. The Committee also responded to two
written queries on the assets freeze measure and on an
entity designated as subject to this measure.

Finally, the Committee is aware of a de-listing
request, submitted through the focal point process
outlined in the annex to resolution 1730 (2006),
concerning another listed entity and will be addressing
this request in accordance with the same resolution.

Allow me to conclude by noting the important
work that lies ahead of the Committee, including the
consideration of the forthcoming interim report of the
Panel of Experts as well as the conduct of a
10-68565
 

comprehensive review of the implementation reports
submitted by Member States under the four resolutions.
Thus far, the Committee has received 92 reports under
resolution 1737 (2006), 79 reports under resolution
1747 (2007), 68 reports under resolution 1803 (2008),
and 45 reports under resolution 1929 (2010).

Since this is the last 90-day report I shall deliver
to the Council in my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee, on my behalf and on behalf of my
predecessor, Ambassador Takasu, I thank the members
of the Committee for their cooperation.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
share my personal observations on the activities of the
1737 Committee during Japan's term in the Security
Council, since my mandate will come to end as of
31 December.

The most important event over the past two years
concerning the 1737 Committee was the adoption of
resolution 1929 (2010). Pursuant to this resolution, the
Panel of Experts was established, and its activities
have begun very recently. As the role of the Panel is to
assist the work of the Committee from an independent
point of view, ensuring an appropriate environment for
the Panel will serve in the best and long-term interests
of the Committee. The Committee and the Panel will
also need to jointly implement the programme of work
that was adopted on 23 July. As such, the Committee
and the Panel of Experts should work in a coordinated
fashion.

It cannot be overemphasized that the most
important work of the Committee is to ensure the full
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. This can be done only as long as all
Member States are fully informed of the work of the
Committee and the Panel, as well as their respective
roles in fulfilling the obligations of these resolutions.
Against that backdrop, I have stressed the importance
of ensuring transparency and sharing information with
Member States. We can now find on the website of the
1737 Committee such relevant documents as the fact
sheet, which explains the respective roles of the
Committee and the Panel, as well as the hand-out
describing the obligations of Member States under
relevant resolutions. I hope that Member States have
found such early dissemination of information helpful.

A number of Member States reported promptly
upon identifying Violation cases under their jurisdiction.
These actions demonstrate their strong commitment to
10-68565

 

carrying out their responsibilities under the resolutions.
As Chair, I have tried to respond to their sincerity by
expeditiously issuing acknowledgement letters so as to
express the strong interest of the Committee in
cooperating with their investigations. Speedy and
reliable communication between the Committee and
reporting States constitutes a crucial element of
fulfilling the mandate of the resolutions. In future cases,
the Committee should establish a means for the
Committee and the Panel to share information with
relevant parties in those cases and to closely coordinate
with them.

National implementation reports submitted by
Member States provide factual foundations for the
Committee to understand the situation surrounding the
implementation of the resolutions. It is therefore quite
unfortunate that the number of submissions remains
quite low. I would like to take this opportunity to
remind and request the Member States to submit the
reports required under all relevant resolutions.

In other Committees, I understand that analysis of
submitted implementation reports have helped them to
better understand approaches taken by Member States
in carrying out their obligations, and also to identify
challenges and difficulties Member States are faced
with. It is therefore important and necessary for the
Committee, with the assistance of the Panel of Experts,
to analyse the content of reports. In doing so, the
Committee can provide better guidance to the Member
States in submitting their reports and additional
information, and also in identifying any vulnerabilities
in fulfilling obligations under the resolutions.

Last but not least, I would like to emphasize that
the strong support of Member States is of critical
importance to the Committee in carrying out its work. I
have benefited greatly from the cooperation extended
by many Member States. More can be done by the
Committee, in my View, to gain even stronger support
from Member States. One effective tool that the
Committee can use in the future is to hold regular
briefings to the Member States. This can be
complemented by the active engagement of the Panel
of Experts in outreach activities. The Panel can also
support the work of the Committee and its Chair by
joining open briefings. It is essential for the Committee
to actively seek the support of Member States in
carrying out its mandate. Such an active role played by
the Committee will strengthen not only its visibility but
also its legitimacy in the long run.

 

