First of all, let me take this opportunity to express my appreciation to Under- Secretaries-General DiCarlo and Lacroix for their informative briefing. Let me start by highlighting the crucial processes taking place in the Sudan. It is clearer than ever that change is in the hands of Sudanese leaders and of the citizens who brought them to power, with the support of international actors. If this ongoing process guarantees a new political framework based on the rule of law, wide democratic participation, real accountability and the well-being of the Sudanese people, then it is highly unlikely that the transition could fail. For that reason, it is critical that extreme caution be taken on the withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). It is necessary to avoid a relapse into violence and to follow a comprehensive withdrawal that guarantees long-term stability, aligned with the priorities of the Sudanese Government. In that regard, we would like to highlight the positive effects of the Juba negotiations on the peace process. We call on the parties to keep up the momentum in order to reach agreement on all outstanding issues. It is concerning that violent clashes are still happening in areas like West Darfur, from which UNAMID has withdrawn. We cannot allow the Sudan to become the next Haiti. Although we understand that protection should be the responsibility of the Government of the Sudan, we also recognize the duty of the Security Council to ensure that that responsibility is fulfilled. This process constitutes an unprecedented challenge for the United Nations, especially the Security Council. Our decision will affect the lives of millions of people facing a dire situation that is worsened by imminent threats, such as the current outbreak of coronavirus disease, which is expected to cause even more severe hardship for an already vulnerable population. We face a difficult test and we must not fail. Darfur requires a gradual withdrawal that prioritizes the protection of victims of past and ongoing violence and guarantees the safety of people at risk of violations, such as sexual assault and violence. Continuing cases of sexual violence by men described as armed civilians and members of Government security forces are our utmost concern. In that regard, on a positive note, we welcome the signing on 11 March of the framework of cooperation to address sexual violence in the Sudan by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Government of the Sudan. In that same vein, we would like to recognize the efforts by the interim authorities to advance women's participation in the decision- making process. To conclude, the reputation of the Council is without a doubt on the line. Let us build on the successes of UNAMID and establish a follow-on mission that not only supports a nationwide transition to rights-respecting civilian rule and peacebuilding but also recognizes the need to continue protecting the most vulnerable.
