The President (spoke in French): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
France.

First of all, I would like to say that I am pleased
that the Security Council was able to hold this meeting
today, a meeting which France had sought for this
month in order to examine the cross-border problems
that threaten peace and security in West Africa. I would
like to join my colleagues in welcoming the presence
of Nana Akufo-Addo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ghana, who is the current Chairman of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, its Executive Secretary. I
would also like to warmly thank everyone who has
taken the floor this morning.

This meeting of the Security Council is taking
place at a time of hope for the settlement of crises in
West Africa but a time in which, as we can see today,
threats and elements of fragility persist. Following
Sierra Leone, Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia have in turn
initiated peace processes through the Linas-Marcoussis
and Accra Agreements, respectively. We must ensure
that these hopes for peace materialize. Of course, the
primary responsibility in this respect rests with the
signatories of the agreements, who must fully and
unconditionally, both in Liberia and in Cote d'Ivoire,
implement the commitments they have undertaken.
France appeals to them to do so.

The international community, for its part, must
continue decisively to support their efforts, as it has
been doing, and in this respect, the involvement of
ECOWAS must be welcomed. For its part, the Security
Council has taken many initiatives aimed at restoring
peace in the region. France has been at the forefront in
many of these areas. In Cote d'Ivoire, France will
maintain a substantial presence for peace alongside the
United Nations peacekeeping operation which is to be
put in place in the coming days.

I would like to recall once again that the
responsibility for restoring stability and peace rests
primarily with the Ivorian parties themselves. When
mutual commitments have been undertaken, it is
everyone's duty to respect them. Violence is taking
place, as we speak, in Cote d'Ivoire. France expresses
its concern and urgently calls for restraint and appeals
to the sense of responsibility of all of those involved in
Cote d'Ivoire.

In order to be fully effective, the mobilization of
the international community must provide a long-term
benefit to the region as a whole. Here we welcome the
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in West Africa. The recommendations
presented this morning in the Secretary-General's
report and in the statements on this subject outline
paths of cooperation between States of the region and
regional and subregional organizations, including
ECOWAS and the African Union, the United Nations
and other States and partner organizations. A few
points deserve to be highlighted.

First, we have to coordinate better the
considerable resources that the international
community has committed to the region and the many
initiatives to support the peace process. This has been
said by several speakers this morning. This issue is
especially urgent when it comes to the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR),
which is being carried out simultaneously in Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire. We must also
urgently end the trafficking of small arms and the
recruiting of mercenaries who destabilize entire
countries. It is the responsibility of all the States in the
region, but also - and I am thinking in particular of
arms trafficking - it is also the responsibility of all the
other States, which are potentially concerned by the
export, the brokerage or the financing of operations
involving small arms and light weapons.

With the assistance of the international
community, the countries of the region must combine
their efforts in order to better monitor their borders,
dismantle illegal checkpoints, which hinder the free
movement of people and goods, fight the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, ensure security in the
refugee camps and fight drug trafficking. I am also
thinking about the situation of children in armed
conflicts, which is a particularly tragic aspect of those
conflicts and which should be the object of special
mobilization and action on the part of States of the
region and of the international community as a whole.

There are many very useful proposals in the
Secretary-General's report, and we should thank him
for them. A few additional ideas could be added to
those set out in the report. For example, why should we
not consider setting up, in a regional context, an
embargo on arms destined for armed groups and non-
States groups? Or perhaps we could help the countries
of the region strengthen their control over their natural
resources through the support of United Nations
peacekeeping operations or through other mechanisms.

Apart from these ideas and proposals, the States
of the region and the international community as a
whole must also stress conflict prevention in order to
prevent falling into a spiral of instability. We must be
attentive to situations that, without being overt crises,
are likely to deteriorate rapidly. The Secretary-General
drew our attention to this point in the conclusion of his
report. He invited us to pay particular attention to the
situation in Guinea.

Generally speaking, we should coordinate this
preventive approach in the different international
authorities concerned - the United Nations and the
Security Council, of course, but also regional and
subregional organizations as well as international
financial institutions. Let us better coordinate our
collective action in order to prevent these crises and
conflicts.

Lastly, a new mobilization of Africans for peace
and development in their continent should also be
supported. The stabilization of West Africa and the
continent can be possible and lasting only through the
mobilization of the African partners themselves. We
should pay special tribute to the initiatives already
undertaken. I have already mentioned ECOWAS in
West Africa, but the Economic and Monetary
Community of Central Africa (CEMAC) in the Central
African Republic and the African Union in Burundi are
also key players in the restoration of peace through
their intense diplomatic efforts but also, when
necessary, through the establishment of a military
presence for stabilization. The African Union has
decided to set up a Council for Peace and Security.
This new body will be a special partner of the United
Nations Security Council, since a large part of the
latter's activity is devoted to Africa.

Within the framework of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD), African States have
chosen to further develop their collective action for
peace and security, and for this they have decided to
increase their institutional and operational capacities.

These initiatives all attest to the African
willingness to respond to challenges of their continent.
The international community must support these
efforts. France provides them all its support and will
continue to do so. It remains very active with its
partners within the European Union so that the latter
may reinforce its efforts for the service of peace and
development in Africa.

I now resume my functions as President.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Ireland. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
