Ms. Power (United States of America): Madam
President, you should know that your Ambassador,
Mr. Gary Quinlan, and his team have done a magnificent
job this month in the presidency ofthe Security Council.
We are all very grateful to them.

My Government welcomes today's ministerial
meeting and is pleased that greater attention is being
paid to the danger posed to international stability and
human life by the illicit trafficking, stockpiling and use
of small arms and light weapons.

On behalf of the United States, I congratulate our
friends from Australia for their leadership in bringing
this subject to the attention of the Security Council and
for promoting action that reaffirms the commitment of
the international community to addressing the problem
in a consistent, persistent and coordinated way. I also
commend the Secretary-General for his recent report
on small arms (S/2013/503), which includes a wealth
of insights and observations that have informed the
Council's unprecedented action this afternoon. I thank
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
Vice-President Beerli for her briefing and for the
valuable work that ICRC does each and every day, often
at grave risk, around the world.

The urgency and timeliness of the resolution
adopted today (resolution 2117 (2013)) is reflected in
the recent terrorist attack in Kenya, ongoing violence
in the Central African Republic, the devastation caused
by recent fighting Mali and the daily toll of suffering
caused by armed criminals, illegal militias, drug
cartels, pirates and others with illegitimate access to
such weapons. The resolution highlights the special
risks that illicit weapons pose to vulnerable groups,
including refugees, the internally displaced, women
and children and members of civil society, including
those who deliver humanitarian assistance to families
in desperate need. We are also reminded on a daily basis
that the availability of illicit arms is both a cause and
the result of violence, as rival groups arm themselves
in response to the growing arsenals of the other. Our
task, and it is a fully appropriate one for the Security
Council, is to encourage States to act together to reverse
those cycles of destruction and to invest our energy and
resources on behalf of the rule of law.

Of course, we recognize that nations have the
right to defend themselves and their citizens and that
small arms and light weapons are manufactured legally
and traded and retained for legitimate purposes, and
we would strongly oppose any effort impinge on the
constitutional rights of our citizens to bear arms. Our
concerns arise when legal controls break down and,
through weakness of governance, corruption or other
lawless activity, deadly weapons fall into the wrong
hands.

Every State has an obligation to prevent the illegal
transfer and accumulation of weapons, and in particular
to abide by Security Council resolutions pertaining to
the flow or arms into countries in conflict. We each
have a responsibility to work as partners in seeking to
improve border controls, support United Nations peace
operations, promote the sharing of information among
law enforcement agencies, and comply with relevant
international treaties and agreements.

The many dimensions of that task as reflected in
the programmes and policies of my own Government,
which has worked for many years to assist States in
developing better law-enforcement capabilities and
stockpile-management systems, while also discouraging
irresponsible and indiscriminate arms exports. Last
year alone, we contributed more than $149 million to
some 35 countries to safely destroy surplus conventional
weapons and inform area residents of potential risks
from unexploded munitions.

Looking ahead, I urge the Council to maintain its
focus on this challenge and to make creative use of
the full range of available options, including quick-
response mechanisms, in order to save lives by reducing
dramatically and permanently the illicit flow of light
weapons and small arms.

