The President (spoke in French): I would like to
thank Mr. Arthur Boutellis for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Senegalese Abroad.

This morning's debate is perhaps one of the most
important discussions the Security Council has ever
had. Indeed, one year after the submission of the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (S/2015/446) and the subsequent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2015/682), it is time for us to
grapple with one of the most complex challenges that
peacekeeping missions still face: asymmetrical threats.
This phenomenon, which threatens the lives of civilians
and undermines the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations from Africa to the Middle East, deserves
particular focus and attention, in particular on the part
of the Security Council.

It is against this backdrop that the President of
the Republic of Senegal, His Excellency Mr. Macky
Sall, has taken the initiative of convening this high-
level debate in order to strategically reflect on peace
operations facing asymmetrical threats in order
to consider the need to adapt the tools on which the
Organization's peace and security architecture rests.

I would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General, the Secretary-General of the International
Organization of la Francophonie, the Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, and the Director of the Brian Urquhart Center
for Peace Operations for their relevant briefings, which
speak volumes about the severity of the phenomenon
we are considering today and the options we have in
countering that threat.

We must agree that the international security order
has completely changed in today's world with the
proliferation of violent internal conflicts, as a result
of the emergence of large numbers of non-State actors,
including terrorist groups. This is especially true when
we see the worrying trend of conflicts and the emergence
of new cross-cutting and asymmetrical threats, ranging
from terrorism to transnational organized crime, which
continues to mark the current environment.

From northern Mali to Afghanistan, through the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and the Middle East, criminal groups regularly
target United Nations staff and civilian populations,
in particular those most vulnerable: women and
children. The examples of this in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan are symptomatic of serious
and repeated abuses against civilians and peacekeeping
forces.

According the report of the Secretary-General on
Mali (S/2016/8l9), the number of attacks on the Malian
Defence and Security Forces and MINUSMA increased
significantly in the period under review. The Malian
Defence and Security Forces were attacked 39 times,
MINUSMA was attacked 27 times and a company that
works for MINUSMA was attacked once; whereas
during the previous period, there were 9 attacks on
the Malian Defence and Security Forces and 15 on
MINUSMA. A total of 34 peacekeepers were killed and
190 were injured between January 2015 and November
2016 in Mali and, on 13 August 2016 alone, 50 civilians
were killed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Just the day before yesterday, attacks against a
MINUSMA convoy north of the town of Douentza led
to the deaths of two peacekeepers and the injury of
seven, three of whom are in serious condition. These
attacks and the modus operandi of these terrorist
groups underscore the insecurity in which United
Nations troops operate. Carrying out a peacekeeping
and peacebuilding mission in such circumstances has
become a perilous exercise, as evidenced by the heavy
price paid by peacekeepers in MINUSMA, which
has become one of the most dangerous and deadly
operations ever.

The gravity of the situation is such that it affects
the very effectiveness and efficiency of peacekeeping
operations and undermines their credibility. In that
regard, we have several options before us. We could
maintain the status quo and ignore the threats and
their devastating consequences. We could refuse to
get involved when terrorist movements are present and
thereby give up on our main objective of maintaining
peace and security. Our final option is to try to adapt
peacekeeping operations so that they can better respond
to the threats posed by the emergence of asymmetrical
threats and terrorism.

It is the firmly held belief of the Government of
the Republic of Senegal that the current and future
success of peacekeeping operations in fulfilling their
mandates will depend largely on their ability to adapt to
the changing environments in which they are deployed.
Any other course of action would divert us further
from our primary goal of maintaining international
peace and security. We should not satisfy ourselves
with simply taking note of the fact that United Nations
peacekeeping missions are not in a position to carry
out counter-terrorist military operations, as noted quite
rightly in the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations. In addition, we must also
think of other ways and means to equip our missions
with the necessary capacity to effectively respond to
the threats, which are today an indisputable fact of life.

My country, Senegal, which is the seventh-largest
troop contributor in the world, the third-largest in
Africa and the largest in West Africa, believes that in the
context of adapting peacekeeping missions to the new
and asymmetrical circumstances, there are two major
areas of action on which we must focus our attention
and mobilize our efforts. It is first and foremost a
matter of equipping peackeeping operations with the
capacities necessary to carrying out their mandate both
safely and effectively. This requires an objective review
of the reality and daily lives of staff deployed in these
theatres areas of operations.

In this respect, it would be advisable to review
and readjust operational concepts for peacekeeping
operations, tailored to the contexts within which they
operate in order to endow them with more robust
mandates. In that respect, resolution 2295 (2016), on
the mandate of MINUSMA, is a welcome step forward
towards the consideration of this need.

However, in order to have a better impact on the
ground, we must strengthen our missions in terms of
equipment and operational capacity, making greater use
of modern technology. In fact, better access to detection
technology, programmes to mitigate threats linked to
improvised explosive devices, intelligence-gathering
and resilience improvement through the development
of improved mobility and medical support capacities
could allow peacekeeping operations to function more
safely and effectively.

In any case, the experiences of MINUSMA, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MINUSCA,
which now rely on military capacities and modern
technologies, have demonstrated that the responsible
use ofthese tools has a multiplier effect on effectiveness.
In this connection, we pay tribute to the ongoing efforts
of the Secretary-General to reinforce that component of
peacekeeping operations. We welcome the discussions
under way for the development of a political framework
for intelligence-gathering in the aforementioned
peacekeeping operations.

The second major axis of action relates to innovative
interinstitutional collaboration in the fight against
asymmetric threats. Relevant organizations involved
in the fight against terrorism must therefore support
peacekeeping operations by sharing their expertise
and experience in terms of prevention and in the fight
against terrorism and violent extremism. In order
to optimize the contribution of these institutions, it
would undoubtedly be beneficial to ensure that they are
closely engaged in the planning stage of missions. The
strengthening of such interinstitutional cooperation
must therefore involve a wider-scale synergy and
coordination among the competent entities of the United
Nations, including through dialogue and the exchange
of information, especially during the conception and
planning stages of missions.

It would also be beneficial to develop a
strengthened cooperation among peacekeeping
operations and counter-terrorism institutions, troop-
and police-contributing countries and host States
in developing an innovative collaborative strategy
that could serve to mitigate the vulnerability of our
missions to asymmetric threats. It is clear that, through
collaboration and the sharing of efforts, experiences
and expertise, we will be able to better understand
these threats and thereby develop coherent, holistic and
global strategies and approaches in order to provide an
effective response.

As I conclude my statement, I stress that the
strengthening of the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations not only requires but demands an
unwavering and constant political commensurate with
the impact of asymmetric threats. That is the full scope
of this open debate, convened by Senegal, as a sign of
our commitment to peace and security in Africa and
throughout the world.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to other members of the Council,
starting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ukraine.
