Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia supports the statements
to be delivered later on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and the Committee for the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

Bolivia thanks Assistant Secretary-General Jenca
for his briefing.

I am somewhat startled as I begin my statement
today, because in the past few years not only have we
seen that the direction that these meetings have taken
has turned them into a sterile routine, we are now
seeing something that goes much further than that - an
attempt to silence and render invisible the Palestinian
issue, one of the most important subjects not just for the
Council but for the entire Organization.

Bolivia was pleased that, on 12 October, the parties
reached an agreement in Cairo making a settlement
of the intra-Palestinian conflict possible. It will not
only enable the Palestinian Authority to resume its
full functions in the Gaza Strip as of 1 November, it is
also a genuine expression of Palestinian unity. In that
regard, we would particularly like to thank Egypt for its
efforts on this and other issues in the region.

Bolivia also welcomes the statement made on
16 October by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator of the Secretary-General for the Middle
East Peace Process, in which he stated that, after the
meeting held with the Palestinian Prime Minister,
Mr. Rami Hamdallah, the legitimate presence of the
Palestinian Authority would be strengthened with a
view to partially alleviating the painful humanitarian
crisis in the Gaza Strip. We join in supporting the
contents of the statement to the effect that the agreement
is an important step towards the achievement of the
objective of Palestinian unity, with a Government
with a single democratically and legitimately elected
Palestinian Authority.

Despite this progress, we must recall that the
inhumane blockade that Israel is inflicting upon the
Palestinian people in Gaza persists. We wish to recall
to the occupying Power that, since the adoption of
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, the State
of Israel is in violation of the fundamental principles
of Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations, given
that, to date, it has not withdrawn its armed forces
from occupied Palestinian territories. Its belligerent
practices against the population living in these
territories impinges on their right to live in peace
within secure and recognized borders, free from threat
or acts of force.

Similarly, the 11 July report compiled by the United
Nations country team in the occupied Palestinian
territory shows the existence of a series of extremely
harsh Israeli measures imposed in the Gaza Strip that
have negative humanitarian consequences and continue
to affect access to basic services such as drinking
water for human consumption and the operation of
health centres and hospitals, with a negative impact
on the health of the Palestinian population, especially
children. For this reason, Israel must bring an
immediate and complete halt to the illegal blockade it
is imposing in the Gaza Strip. It should immediately
proceed to a continuous and unconditional opening
of border-crossing points, in order to make it possible
for humanitarian assistance, trade goods and people to
enter and leave the Strip.
In the same way, we categorically condemn Israel's
expansionist drive stemming from its intention to
continue planning and building new settlements in
occupied Palestinian territories, an extreme move that
was reported in the press release dated 10 October,
published by the Office of the Prime Minister of Israel,
concerning the construction of 3,736 new settlement
units throughout occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, in clear violation of
resolution 2334 (2016). We stress that such statements
or actions represent openly belligerent acts against the
Organization, undermining any possibility of achieving
a fair and lasting peace in the region and increasing
the state of anxiety in which both the Palestinian and
Israeli peoples live.

As a pacifist country, Bolivia believes that the
only option for guaranteeing a fair and lasting peace
in the conflict between Israel and Palestine is the
path of dialogue, with clear expressions of political
will to achieve the two-State solution, especially by
the Government of Israel. We therefore reaffirm the
importance of giving continuity to actions provided
for in the 1991 Madrid Conference, the Oslo Accords
of 1993, which recognize the existence of Israel and
ultimately the creation of a Palestinian State and its
right to live in peace and security, the Arab Peace
Initiative proposed by the Arab League in 2002, and
the road map of the Quartet of 2003 - all within the
framework of multilateralism. Bolivia reaffirms its
support for the self-determination of the Palestinian
people and their right to have a free, sovereign and
independent State, with the pre-1967 international
borders and East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly.

Finally, we wish to express our expectation that
the Secretary-General's next quarterly report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) will appear
in a written format, making it possible for us to prepare
our statements on the basis of the report and to see the
progress of the implementation of the resolution in
detail. We believe that presenting report in writing in
advance will keep the situation in Palestine from being
invisible and silenced.

