Mr. Gerald Scott (United States of America): I
want to thank the Minister of Justice of Burundi for his
appearance here and for his words to us, and to
congratulate him on his efforts to bring about a
transition to a peaceful, stable society based on the rule
of law. I also want to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for the Office of Legal Affairs for his detailed
and clear report to us.

The United States has strongly supported the
efforts to assist Burundi in making a peaceful
transition. Such a society based on the rule of law
holds out the best hope for a better future for the
people of Burundi and even for the region more
generally. To achieve that goal there must be a process
by which Burundi faces and understands its past.

In that connection, we have supported the
assessment mission, and we find much in the report
(S/2005/158) and its recommendations that merits
implementation. We look forward to the Secretary-
General starting negotiations with the Government of
Burundi to bring this about soon.

The recommendations raise a number of
questions which need to be addressed and which have
been alluded to by both the Assistant Secretary-
General and the Minister of Justice. The report and
recommendations, after all, constitute a skeleton rather
than a detailed blueprint. We would therefore be
obliged if further elucidation of these points could be
furnished at some point soon.

First of all, we note that the national truth and
reconciliation commission will attempt to implement
the report's recommendation to establish the facts and
determine the causes and nature of the conflict in
Burundi, classifying the crimes committed since its
independence and identifying those responsible for the
crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes committed in the various cycles of conflict.
That is a very large mandate, and we hope the
commission will not become excessively bogged down
in a detailed historical search for root causes in the
course of Burundi's history.

Secondly, the question of costs has been raised,
and we should like to have some sort of estimate of
what the ultimate cost of these efforts will be.

We agree strongly with the statement that we
need a national sense of ownership of both the
commission and the special chamber, and we should
like further elucidation of the ways in which this sense
of ownership can be promoted.

Finally, we agree that these activities should be
funded voluntarily.

