Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me start by expressing
Poland's appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his briefing today. We also thank the presidency for
recognizing the issue of natural resources in Council
discussions of the root causes of conflicts.

While natural resources do not themselves cause
wars, the competition for their access, control and
illegal exploitation and trafficking can be a driver
of armed conflict and play a role in post-conflict
situations. On the other hand, we should not forget
that natural resources can also create incentives for
peacebuilding processes. To begin with, I would like to
make few general remarks.
In many parts of the world, we are very concerned
to see that access to natural resources and control
over them can become a root cause of conflict, and it
particularly affects countries that have rich deposits of
oil, gas, gold, diamonds or other minerals. Despite their
potential for social and economic development, they
struggle with poverty, unemployment, epidemics and
violence. Weak border controls and poor infrastructure
are among the other factors that can aggravate such
situations. Moreover, these countries often seem to
fail to take into account the negative environmental
consequences of their actions. The massive exploitation
of natural resources can have a truly negative impact.
The international community should not be silent when
the environment is devastated, human rights are violated
and a country's economic growth and sustainable
development are hampered. We should never accept
situations in which authoritarian regimes are supported
merely to safeguard the interests of armed groups or
companies that benefit from lucrative industries.

When considering the role of natural resources in
the peace and security agenda, we must consider the
issue's complex character and its relation to many other
aspects. We believe that our debate must be carefully
focused. Respect for international law should be a
source of inspiration and a starting point for further
deliberations on the Council's role. That said, I would
like to underline the key importance of international
law, particularly the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and of the sovereignty of States, with
regard to the ability to effectively address issues
related to the control and illegal exploitation of natural
resources and of access to them. We have a variety of
international instruments at our disposal within the
United Nations system and in the Council in particular.
We must consider the full range of development, trade,
security and diplomatic tools available.

I want to stress the key importance of transparency,
good governance, the rule of law and cooperation in
our shared responsibility among a wide range of actors,
including regional organizations. While Governments
are primarily responsible for controlling the use of
natural resources, the engagement of the private sector
is also essential. In that regard, I would like to point
to the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative and the
United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights as examples of global standards and
good practices for preventing abuses.
For the Security Council, I want to stress the need
for a comprehensive and innovative approach, as the
issue of natural resources and conflict concerns the
actions of private companies and armed groups as well
as Governments. We need an inclusive approach so that
civil society and local communities can also be engaged
in addressing the issue. The missions and peacekeeping
operations of the United Nations and Security Council
expert groups and sanctions regimes offer a variety of
mechanisms and, as stated in presidential statement
S/PRST/2007/22,

"could play a role in helping the Governments
concerned, with full respect for their sovereignty
over their natural resources, to prevent the illegal
exploitation of those resources from further
fuelling the conflict."

In conclusion, while climate change, environment
and water scarcity may not be the focus of today's
debate, I want to emphasize the important role they
play in our peace and security agenda. Today more
than ever, the Council should take those issues into
consideration, as we see that in many parts of the world
climate change and environmental issues can become
threat multipliers for conflicts and escalate tensions at
the local and regional levels. We are ready to engage in
further Council discussions on that issue.

