Mr. Mackay (New Zealand): I should like at the
outset to thank the Secretary-General for the
preparation of this interim report. As foreshadowed in
April, the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET) has entered a final consolidation
phase. A three-month stock-taking of progress in key
mandated tasks is a useful way to determine what areas
require particular attention, as the Council prepares for
what we expect will be the final mandate renewal in
November.

We see many positive developments across
civilian institutions. Good progress has been made on
delineation of the land border between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia, with a final agreement expected in the
coming weeks. Key justice and human rights
legislation has been passed and preparations are on
track for parliamentary elections in 2006. We
congratulate the Government of Timor-Leste for its
determination in addressing the significant challenges
it faces as a small emerging nation with limited
resources and capacity.

With respect to the security sector, we agree that
there remain some critical challenges in building the
capacity of Timor-Leste's security infrastructure,
particularly in the area of rapid intervention. We look
forward to advice on further progress on police and
security sector training in the next report.

We continue to strongly support the work of the
Serious Crimes Unit and Special Panels as essential
components of an internationally supported process to
see justice served for crimes committed in East Timor
in 1999. We are encouraged by the advice that the
Serious Crimes Unit has prepared a strategy to
complete its work, according to the timetable set by the
Security Council in resolution 1543 (2004). Bilaterally,
we have also given strong support to the work of
Timor-Leste's Commission on Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation, which complements the work of the
Serious Crimes Unit in respect of lesser crimes.

New Zealand has consistently said that those
responsible for the crimes committed in Timor-Leste in
1999 must be brought to justice in a manner consistent
with the standards of international law. We are deeply
concerned that the ad hoc processes established for this
purpose appear to have failed. We do not consider it
acceptable for the international community to tolerate
an environment of impunity. If domestic processes are
not able to ensure justice, we see a role for the United
Nations and the Security Council in ensuring that
accountability is established and justice is seen to be
done.

We are encouraged by the engagement of United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes in a wide
spectrum of activities in Timor-Leste. The transition
from a peacekeeping presence to a standard
developmental presence for the United Nations is a
critical part of the consolidation phase of this mission,
and we see it as very appropriate for these issues to be
addressed in a peacekeeping mission progress report.
We encourage the United Nations to look at
opportunities for sharing its assessment of key
remaining tasks with donors. We consider that
information about what the United Nations assesses as
critical to support Timor-Leste, as it adjusts to the
planned departure of a peacekeeping presence next
year, could make a useful contribution to other
Governments' bilateral development assistance
processes.

