Mr. Seek (Senegal) (spoke in French): In January,
at a ministerial-level Security Council meeting
(S/PV.7609) held under the Uruguayan presidency,
we adopted resolution 2261 (2016), which created a
monitoring mission in Colombia designed to begin
its work during the 12 months following the signing
of a final peace agreement between the Colombian
Government and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia (FARC). Six months after that, in Havana
on 24 August, the Colombian parties signed the historic
Final Agreement, bringing 50 years of internal conflict
to a definitive end. Today, under the presidency of New
Zealand, and at another ministerial-level meeting - and
I would like to thank New Zealand's Minister for
Foreign Affairs for his presence here - the Council has
just adopted resolution 2307 (2016), approving, among
other things, the Secretary-General's recommendations
regarding the size, operational aspects and mandate of
the mission.

Senegal, as a firm supporter of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, welcomes the determined
commitment of the Colombian parties and the trust they
have placed in the Security Council, thereby helping to
restore the Council to the heart of its original mission.
That is why the Senegalese delegation sponsored and
voted in favour of resolution 2307 (2016), in a sign of
its faith in the peace process in Colombia. I take this
opportunity to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for its leadership in conducting the formal
negotiations, as well as the guarantor States, Cuba
and Norway, and Chile and Venezuela, the supporting
States.

As the international component and coordinator of
the tripartite monitoring and verification mechanism,
the United Nations mission in Colombia will have the
important job of monitoring the separation of the forces
and the laying down of arms, including through its
regional offices, set up for managing the transitional
local points for normalization. The recent tripartite
visit ofthe United Nations, the Colombian Government
and FARC to the areas where the operations will take
place augur well. To the representative of Colombia
here in the Council today, I would like to repeat what
I said at our meeting in January, in a quotation from a
popular Colombian television series, which is that "a
people that does not know its history is condemned to
see that history repeat itself indefinitely". Today I can
say that Colombia has learned the tragic lesson of the
past 50 years and has taken a historic step, one full of
hope.

