Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, allow me, Mr. President, to express
our solidarity with the Government and people of
Mexico on account of the outbreak of influenza that
has taken so many lives and has affected not only your
country but others on the planet. We feel solidarity
with Mexicans.

We also thank Mexico, in exercising the
presidency of the Council during the present month, for
having convened us to discuss children and armed
conflict. We are pleased to have had the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Patricia Espinosa Cantellano, with us.
That highlights not only the importance that Mexico
attributes to the matter, but also its active commitment
to advance the fight against the many atrocities
committed against boys and girls in situations of
conflict. We also appreciate the report on this matter
presented to us by the Secretariat.

Almost twenty years have transpired since the
Council first took notice of the fate of children in areas
of conflict, and ten years since resolution 1261 (1999)
was adopted - the Council's first resolution dealing
with children and armed conflict. The results since the
adoption of that resolution, which was followed by six
others in the intervening years, have been decidedly
mixed. In spite of some progress achieved - thanks in
great part to the initiatives taken by the United
Nations - we have also been witness to changes in the
tactics of war by which the civilian population has
become even more exposed to a spiral of violence and
to new threats to boys and, especially, girls.

We believe that the adoption of resolution 1612
(2005) in July of 2005 was an important achievement
in offering a conceptual framework that helps
strengthen the protection of children who are victims
of conflicts. In particular, we must devote all our
attention to the social disintegration caused by gender-
based violence and displacements, as well as the brutal
violence and sexual slavery to which girls are
subjected, and to the resulting stigmatization in their
communities.

Guatemala has actively participated, in the
framework of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, in the matter related to the progress made
in including questions regarding children and armed
conflict in United Nations political missions and
peacekeeping operations. We hope that the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations will finalize its policy
directive on mainstreaming the protection of children
affected by armed conflicts in peacekeeping activities,
as requested by the Special Committee since 2008.
This policy will also provide directions on the role and
functions of child protection advisers and will outline
the policy framework for their activities, further
defining their cooperation, coordination and
consultation with other key child protection actors in
the field.

We support the recommendation that, when
appropriate, specific child protection provisions should
be included in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and the deployment, on a case-by-case
basis, of child protection advisers should be foreseen in
those operations. However, we believe that the
Department must more precisely define the role and
responsibilities of these advisers and strengthen the
mechanisms and oversight arrangements to curb sexual
violence, as well as outline clear modalities for
cooperation with United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes.

We praise the designation of a coordinator or
focal point to liaise with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence
against Children, within their respective mandates.
However, we reiterate our concern about the delay in
the appointment of a person to assume that latter post.

My delegation would like to stress the importance
of training on child protection matters for
peacekeeping contingents in the field, since the
effectiveness of our work is measured in the timely
execution of programmes for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of boys and girls in
their communities or in the society. Those programmes
must receive more resources so that they become
sustainable in the long term.

Finally, I would like to refer to children accused
of illicit activities carried out during their affiliation
with armed forces or groups. They should be treated as
victims, in accordance with international law, in the
context of restitution and rehabilitative justice.

