Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
too would like to thank the President for convening this
meeting. I would like to welcome the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Jan Egeland. We express our
gratitude and appreciation of his regular reports and we
hope that we will continue to have these meetings in
the future.

Having carefully listened to his statement, we
have a few brief comments. As regards Northern
Uganda and the Lord's Resistance Army's (LRA)
activities, we are encouraged to hear his positive
assessment of the negotiations in the Juba process. At
the same time, it is important to reiterate the message
sent by Mr. Egeland and which is in keeping with the
President of the Council's message last week,
encouraging the parties to increase their efforts to put
an end to this long and painful conflict that has
included some of the worst possible atrocities against
the civilian population. The peace process should be
brought to a conclusion as soon as possible. The parties
must respect the ceasefire that has been agreed and the
LRA should immediately release women, children and
non-combatants.

We would like to take note of Joseph Kony's
commitment to respond with concrete humanitarian
measures and to identify the sick and wounded in a
reasonable amount of time. If the international
community is to continue this process, which is the
best hope for peace, as Mr. Egeland has said, it is
necessary for the LRA to keep its word and for the
Government of Uganda to develop a programme of
cooperation for the north of Uganda with the full
participation of the affected communities.

I would like to conclude, highlighting once again
that one of the fundamental elements of the process of
reconciliation is accountability for those primarily
responsible for massive violations of human rights. We
cannot achieve peace at the expense of justice. Novel
solutions will have to be found to bring together the
typical structures of reconciliation of the local
population with international criteria.

As regards the situation in Darfur, there is very
little to add to the dark and sad picture that has been
described to us. If the Government of the Sudan does
not allow Under-Secretary-General Egeland to visit
particular areas of Darfur in view of security
considerations, we may wonder what this means in
terms of the security of the millions of internally
displaced persons who have been chased from their
homes? What can civilians hope for in their daily
lives? What prospects are there for them if the very
Government that has the primary responsibility for
protecting them admits that certain places, places
where these citizens live, are too dangerous?

Mr. Egeland clearly described the terror that
prevails. We now have to rise to the level of our
commitment and do more to protect the population in
Darfur. These people have no one. They have no one.
We cannot allow more civilians to die under the pretext
of legitimate self-defence. We agree with Mr. Egeland
that the Addis-Ababa agreement, about which the
Secretary-General will brief us this afternoon, may be
the start in a new direction to turn this painful situation
around and may bring some comfort to the population
in Darfur, in particular along the lines of humanitarian
assistance.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
appreciation for the efforts led by Mr. Egeland to
improve the situation of civilian populations. We value
his commitment and we would like to reaffirm
Argentina's commitment to the day-to-day work
involved in protecting civilians in armed conflict.

