Guatemala congratulates the Republic of the Niger on its presidency of the Security Council for the month of September and thanks it for having convened this high-level open video-teleconference to address the humanitarian effects of environmental degradation and peace and security. We also thank all the briefers for their presentations. Extreme weather events, the spread of diseases, humanitarian crises, displacement, increasing poverty, drought and hunger are just some examples of the serious consequences that climate change and environmental degradation can have for the sustaining of peace in our societies. Disasters may also exacerbate existing conflicts, altering their form and duration, and lead to the outbreak of new ones, fuelling divisions. Guatemala is one of the countries most vulnerable to natural disasters and to the negative effects of climate change. In past years, extreme weather events and extended dry seasons have had an impact on the livelihoods of our people, especially in the Dry Corridor, where hunger and poverty increase pressures for migration, reducing the resilience of our families. For example, during the coronavirus disease pandemic, Guatemala and our region have been affected by tropical storms, which has shown how such weather events can reverse the achievements made and further increase pressure on livelihoods, national budgets and governance. We fully understand the urgent need to intensify efforts at the international level for more sustainable and climate-resilient development, with a focus on inclusiveness, that would contribute to the advent of more peaceful societies. Globally, we have the instruments to address these issues. All the relevant multilateral environmental agreements, including the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, must be fully implemented, leading to the building of peaceful, just, prosperous and inclusive societies. Guatemala highlights the need to create early-warning systems, investing in science and innovation in order to reduce the technology gap, develop human capital and promote education for peace and respect for the environment. Solidarity and international humanitarian assistance are key, as is investing in long-term development strategies. It is important to strengthen the participation of local Government, civil society and the private sector and to empower women, youth and indigenous peoples, taking a whole-of-society approach. But there are still gaps that we need to fill in order to stop the current drivers of conflict that undermine social and economic resilience. Preventive diplomacy must be at the centre of our efforts. Investing in prevention and peacebuilding efforts have tangible benefits for responding to a crisis and avoiding the damaging and long- lasting effects of conflicts. In that context, the link between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission is fundamental. We make a strong call to overcome persistent fragmentation among Member States and across the United Nations, and to strengthen the linkages across the three pillars of United Nations action worldwide. We need to improve coordination across the system and invest in peacebuilding projects. The time to act is now.
