Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I wish, of
course, to begin by thanking Mr. Steiner for his
briefing, which supplemented the comprehensive report
of the Secretary-General. I also welcome the presence
of the Secretary-General among us at the beginning of
this meeting.

These various elements give the Council a clear
picture of the situation in Kosovo two months after the
Council's mission.

I would also like to say, by way of preliminary
comment, that the presidency of the European Union
will be making a statement later on, and I fully
associate myself with that statement.
I shall therefore confine myself to three points.

First, we are concerned by the unilateral
statements and initiatives undertaken by some in
Kosovo and in the region concerning the future of
Kosovo. Those statements and initiatives could
destabilize the existing situation not only in Kosovo
but also throughout the Balkans. In particular, we
deplore the efforts being made by some members of the
Kosovo Assembly to adopt a declaration concerning
the future status of the province, in contravention of
resolution 1244 (1999).

Secondly, these developments - which are
definitely not a sign of the responsible attitude that the
international community expects - merely strengthen
our commitment to applying the standards. Meeting
those standards is a prerequisite for the question of the
final status to be addressed validly, pursuant to
resolution 1244 (1999).

In this regard, we thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the clear
presentation he has just made concerning arrangements
for implementation of those norms. We support in
particular the efforts to be made in the area of the rule
of law, which goes hand in hand with democracy.

Thirdly and lastly, we wish to voice our support
for the activities of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. We support the priorities that he has
set: the combat against crime; economic recovery; and
the building of a multi-ethnic society.

In this respect, we underscore the importance of
continued endeavours to bring about the orderly return
of refugees and displaced persons. We unreservedly
support the development of dialogue with the Belgrade
authorities on the basis of the principle of cooperation
but no interference, and the call for direct consultation
between Pristina and Belgrade on practical issues of
mutual interest.

Allow me to conclude by calling on all elected
members of the autonomous institutions to pool their
efforts to build a modern, multi-ethnic and democratic
Kosovo, in accordance with UNMIK's criteria and
keeping in mind the interests of all the people of
Kosovo.

This is the approach that needs to prevail, rather
than getting lost in untimely and pointless initiatives
which can only isolate the people of Kosovo from the
rest of the region and from the European continent, and
possibly lose the support of the international
community.
