At the outset, allow me to welcome High Representative Valentin Inzko. I thank him for his comprehensive briefing today on his Office's latest report (S/2020/345, annex). Croatia fully aligns itself with the statement made by the observer of the European Union (EU), and I would like to take this opportunity to make some remarks in my national capacity. Croatia has consistently participated in these semi-annual Council debates on Bosnia and Herzegovina and we welcome - even more so in these unprecedented circumstances - this opportunity to discuss the situation in the country. The unprecedented circumstances brought on by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) global pandemic is forcing the world of diplomacy and international politics to find new ways of doing things - some never tested - and to adjust its working methods in order not to lose sight of important strategic issues. For us, the topic on the Council's agenda today is critical. We have stressed on many occasions the importance that Croatia attaches to the territorial integrity, stability, functionality and prosperity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. And, on many occasions and even in the worst of times, we have demonstrated that in word and deed. Today, as we debate this issue in the Chamber, thanks to modern technology, another important debate for the future of the Western Balkans is taking place via video-teleconference - a summit of 27 EU and 6 Western Balkans leaders. Under the helm of the Croatian presidency of the Council of the EU, the EU-Western Balkans summit was to be held in Zagreb in May. As an in-person summit could not be organized due to restrictions introduced to fight the coronavirus pandemic, at the initiative of Croatian Prime Minister Andrej Plenkovi¢e, EU leaders agreed that the EU-Western Balkans Zagreb summit would be held via video-teleconference, with the participation of all EU member States and the six Western Balkan countries. Even in these extremely challenging times we are doing our best to support the Western Balkans. We are not losing focus or allowing important issues to be left unaddressed. Croatia, for its part, has provided its partners from the Western Balkans with an extraordinary opportunity. The holding of the EU-Western Balkans summit and the decision to open membership negotiations with Albania and North Macedonia speak volumes of Croatian engagement with the Western Balkans. We hope that the Zagreb summit will be a catalyst for encouraging Bosnia and Herzegovina's internal work on its EU agenda and related reforms. A stable, peaceful and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina, progressing steadily along its path to EU membership in a country where constitutional equality among its three constituent peoples and the rights of all the citizens are guaranteed, can play a pivotal role in the stability of the Western Balkans, Europe and the world as a whole. The political impasse in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the standstill in the formation of institutions after the October 2018 elections were finally resolved in December when the new Council of Ministers was formed. As the biggest supporter of the country's path to EU membership, Croatia welcomed that step in the hopes that it would untangle political knots and allow for much-needed reforms to be delivered. Mr. Gordan Grli¢ Radman, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Croatia, was the first foreign minister to travel to Sarajevo after the confirmation of Bosnia and Herzegovina's new Council of Ministers in December. In doing so, he expressed the support of Croatia and the European Union for the reform processes ahead. The Council of the EU also expressed its support for those reforms at the end of last year. In that connection, it is evident that Bosnia and Herzegovina will need to invest enormous efforts and undertake significant political, institutional and economic reforms. Those complex reform processes must be homegrown and can be achieved only through a rational and inclusive internal consensus-based process in an environment of compromise and reconciliation. It must arise from agreement reached among the legitimate political representatives of all three constituent peoples, as set out in the Dayton-Paris Accords, and must be predicated on the principle of equality among them. Bosnia and Herzegovina today needs far less divisive and inflammatory rhetoric and actions that trigger a spiral of distrust. Instead, it needs many more reforms aimed at strengthening institutions and their functionality, in general, and the rule of law and the judiciary, in particular. Too often, policies towards Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the country itself have been limited to the two extremes of centralism or divisionism. The growing tendencies of unitary domination, on the one hand, and separatism, on the other, are both destructive for Bosnia and Herzegovina, its integrity, functionality and, as a result, its future. In that regard, Croatia would like to echo the European Parliament's resolutions on the country's progress in 2015, 2016 and 2017. They note that Bosnia and Herzegovina will not be a successful candidate for EU membership until appropriate institutional conditions have been established on the basis of the principles of federalism, decentralization and legitimate representation. In the long-term, citizens are fleeing to European countries due to political apathy, as they cannot adequately participate in political and social processes. That problem is exacerbated by the poor economic situation and overall lack of perspective. People today - especially young and educated people - are voting with their feet. The last general elections, in autumn 2018, were held without prior changes to the provisions of the Election Law, which Bosnia and Herzegovina's Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional. For the third time, the flawed Election Law allowed for majority constituent peoples to both elect their own candidate and to impose on the Croats a candidate of their choice to the country's collective Head of State, the three-member Presidency. The Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina confirmed that legitimate and proportional representation of the three constituent peoples at all levels of Government is the basic principle enshrined in the country's Constitution, thus tasking the State Parliament to harmonize the Election Law with the Constitution. That was in 2016. It is therefore of key importance to embark urgently, without further delay, on the reform of the election law, pursuant to the decisions of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Ljubic case and on the city of Mostar. Such a reform is needed in order to implement the decisions of the Constitutional Court, strengthen the rule of law and prevent future electoral engineering. That should enable the full implementation of the principle of equality of the three constituent peoples - Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs - and their right to legitimate representation, which remains a key element of Bosnia and Herzegovina's internal political stability. This is becoming an even more pressing issue with local elections taking place in the autumn, and it remains the basic precondition for accelerating progress towards a fully functional country focused on its future rather than its past. Alongside these structural issues, Bosnia and Herzegovina also faces new challenges. The migration wave along the Western Balkan route and in the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina increased significantly in 2019, and the EU's longest external land border is under significant pressure from illegal migration. On top of that, the COVID-19 pandemic represents an additional burden on the country's already scarce resources and limited capacities as it increases pressure on local communities and institutions and heightens political frictions and instabilities. In the meanwhile, the Republic of Croatia has been providing ongoing technical, expert and financial assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina. Recently, the Croatian Government took two decisive measures to support Bosnia and Herzegovina in fighting COVID-19 and mitigating its consequences. In these challenging times for my country, as it is stricken with the pandemic and a devastating earthquake that caused severe damage to its capital, Zagreb, Croatia is contributing more than €5 million to Bosnia and Herzegovina's health-care system and is sending the country protective equipment to help prevent the spread of the virus. Let me conclude by stressing that Croatia has always been ready to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina and remains its biggest supporter. We support it and help it on its path to EU integration, and help it fulfil all the requirements in that regard. Reforms usually breed adversaries since they tackle narrow, specific interests. Fighting for a better past is useless and irrational. The one thing worth fighting for is a better future for all and the broader common good. We encourage our friend and neighbour to find the internal strength and wisdom to proceed, without delay, with a comprehensive set of reforms as a path towards a better tomorrow.
