Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to welcome Minister Leonid
Kozhara, whom we thank for his presentation. I
congratulate him on his assumption ofthe chairmanship
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), and I wish him every success during
his term.

Guatemala is convinced that regional and
subregional organizations can contribute to further
strengthening the multilateral system, including in
the area of the maintenance of international peace and
security. Cooperation between the United Nations and
the OSCE is a concrete example of an alliance that has
helped to promote peace and security in Eastern Europe,
the Caucasus and Central Asia. We are confident that
under the chairmanship of Ukraine, the OSCE will
continue to promote dialogue and cooperation with the
United Nations.

We wish also to highlight specific efforts in areas
that are on the agenda of the Security Council.

First, in Afghanistan, the OSCE has actively
participated in efforts to promote political dialogue,
enhance national capacities and support the democratic
process. In that regard, Guatemala welcomes the close
coordination between the OSCE and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. We welcome the
assistance provided by the Government of Afghanistan
in the areas of border security, police training and the
fight against drug trafficking.

Secondly, with respect to the situation in Kosovo,
the OSCE is also playing a constructive role, in close
coordination with the United Nations and the European
Union, in the context of an environment that poses major
challenges. Guatemala acknowledges the work that has
been done, inter alia, to strengthen the rule of law. We
note also the recent agreement signed by Belgrade and
Pristina, and we commend the results of the dialogue
conducted under the auspices of the European Union.

Thirdly, with regard to the OSCE zone, we are
concerned about the threats to security that the
prolonged, unresolved conflicts in that area continue to
pose. That is an issue that could be an area for greater
cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE.

Fourthly, we note the priorities that Ukraine has
set for its chairmanship of the OSCE in 2013. We are
pleased to hear that, in addition to efforts to resolve
protracted conflicts, there will be a focus on a renewed
commitment to democracy, the rule of law and human
rights, as well as transnational threats.

We wish also to welcome the recent memorandums
of understanding signed between the Office for
Disarmament Affairs and the OSCE aimed at promoting
the regional implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Lastly, Guatemala joins others in supporting
Ukraine's vision and priorities for the OSCE's work
this year, and it is our hope that there will be continued
fruitful cooperation between the OSCE and the United
Nations.

