Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): May I at the outset join the
many speakers before me in congratulating you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and for organizing this very important
public discussion. We are confident that under your able
leadership the deliberations of the Council will be
conducted in a manner that will ensure justice and
enhance the principles and purposes of the United
Nations.

My delegation associates itself fully with the
statements made earlier by the Organization of African

 

Unity Secretary-General and by the representative of the
current Chairman of our continental organization. I wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his very articulate and
thoughtful report (S/ 1999/ 1008) on the situation in Africa,
as well as for the visionary recommendations contained
therein. Well over a year ago, the Secretary-General
outlined in an earlier report recommendations that, if
pursued by the international community with adequate
political will, would have advanced the course of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa beyond its
current stage.

Indeed, there has never been a shortage of excellent
analyses of the African condition, including those contained
in the Secretary-General's report before us and in the many
speeches we have heard throughout this debate. The
missing link is the translation of the recommendations from
those analyses into concrete actions at the national,
subregional, regional and global levels. The world may
listen to these debates in this hallowed Chamber, but
ordinary Africans in the continent would prefer concrete
actions that help them solve the many problems with which
they are faced.
Africa is confronted with a proliferation of conflicts at
a time when the region has little leverage on the larger
international community to ensure the provision of
necessary human, material, logistic and political resources
to resolve them. Moreover, the decline in official
development assistance and the lackluster response of the
international community to the development agenda of
Africa are additional negative factors. Yet, the relationship
between peace and development is nowhere better
illustrated than in Africa. The lack of sustainable
development has indeed been linked directly to the
proliferation and intensity of conflict situations and wars,
which in turn have hampered and deflected development
efforts in the continent.

The ability to resolve conflict and effective conflict
management efforts in Africa would surely free resources
presently consumed in mindless wars and redirect our
energies towards development goals and objectives. The
enabling environment for foreign private investment in the
economy of Africa would also be enhanced. At present,
regretfully, Africa is the continent with the smallest share
of direct foreign private investment.

While we freely admit that there is a proliferation of
conflicts in Africa, our region has also recorded success in
trying to find solutions to a number of such conflicts. An
example of such initiatives in Africa is the Liberian civil
war, which was resolved after many years of fighting.
Also, the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and its Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) have
been playing a positive role in the process of the
restoration of peace and stability in Sierra Leone, which
has culminated in the Lome Peace Agreement.

The various peace initiatives and peacekeeping
efforts, such as those of ECOMOG and individual
countries like Nigeria, are predicated on the imperative of
peace and stability for the development process. Our
subregional efforts in the context of ECOWAS and
ECOMOG therefore need to be given further impetus. It
is neither fair nor wise to continue to expect a few
countries to shoulder a disproportionate share of the
burden of peace and security in the West African
subregion. The Security Council must therefore assume its
full responsibility for peace and security in Sierra Leone
by, inter alia, authorizing without delay the deployment
of up to six battalions for the new United Nations
peacekeeping force for Sierra Leone proposed by the
Secretary-General in his recent report on Sierra Leone.

We believe that conflict prevention holds the key to
the maintenance of peace, security and stability in Africa
and elsewhere in the world. However, it remains a big
challenge, both for the United Nations and for regional
organizations, such as the OAU and even ECOWAS. This
is because, without absolute vigilance, the early signs of
impending danger could easily escape notice. Hence, it is
with this awareness that the United Nations and regional
organizations must continue to fine-tune common
indicators for early warning and engage in a joint training
of staff in the field of conflict prevention. Moreover, my
delegation is recommending that the Security Council
fully endorse the decision made at the most recent regular
summit of the OAU in Algiers to make the year 2000 the
year of peace, security and stability in Africa. This
Council should actively support the efforts of African
leaders of considerable experience, stature and credibility
to promote peace among African States in the areas of
conflict prevention, conflict management and conflict resolution.

A recurrent theme in this debate has been
globalization, which is considered to be a twenty-first
century imperative, with the market becoming truly
global. As is well known, however, globalization has its
benefits as well as its pitfalls. The pressing question for
Africa is whether we are headed towards marginalization
in the emerging global economic order. The danger
signals for us in the continent are very clear. Africa is the
least industrialized continent in the world and even the

 

factories that are still being operated generally do so at less
than 30 per cent of installed capacity.

Furthermore, Africa's share of private foreign
investment continues to decline from the peak of $10
billion in 1982 to about $5 billion in 1996. According to
1995 figures, while Asia was the strongest magnet for
private foreign investment at 18.8 per cent of regional gross
domestic product, followed by Latin America at 13.9 per
cent and Eastern Europe and the Arab world at 12.6 per
cent, sub-Saharan Africa came last with only 7.7 per cent.
The crushing external debt burden on African countries
compounds the problem. Whereas in the late 1970s Africa's
external debt stood at a mere $48.5 billion, the figure is
now about $350 billion. Many countries in Africa, as the
Council is aware, now spend far more on debt-servicing
than they do on basic social services such as education and
health.

The debt problem is therefore for Africa a desperate
disease which requires a desperate cure through serious
measures for debt relief and outright debt cancellation.
Moreover, since 1992, Africa's exports and imports, as a
share of total world trade, have declined from 4 per cent to
about 2 per cent. Perhaps worst of all, it was recently
pointed out by the World Bank President, Mr. Wolfensohn,
that 37 per cent of Africa's private wealth is being held
outside of Africa, whereas the comparable figure for Asia's
share is 4 per cent and 17 per cent for Latin America. A
significant share of Africa's private wealth held outside
Africa is illegal capital flight. My President, Mr. Obasanjo,
has proposed to the General Assembly at this session the
idea - which we hope the United Nations will support -
of negotiating and adopting an international convention to
recover capital illegally siphoned out of our continent.

Africa must never consent to its own marginalization
in global economic, financial and political matters. What is
required of us is that we take advantage of some of the
positive developments in the changing international political
and economic order while taking measures to minimize
their negative impact on our countries and on our peoples.
We must diversify our economies and move the various
subregional integration efforts and the African Economic
Community - whose Treaty was signed in Abuja, the
capital of my country, in 1991 - from rhetoric to reality.
We must also intensify our efforts to create the enabling
environment for external private investment. Furthermore,
we must enthrone in our respective countries in Africa good
governance and public accountability. Africa's hope and
chances have been enhanced by recent positive
developments in my own country, Nigeria, and the new
South Africa. In general, the major challenges facing
Africa, in our View, are conflict resolution and peace,
sustainable development and enduring democratization.
With help from the international community, we must not
and will not fail in meeting these challenges as we come
to the end of this millennium.

If we live in a truly interdependent world that is
increasingly becoming a global village, Africans can
legitimately ask the question: What is the world prepared
to do in a sustained and committed manner to support the
continent's own efforts at rebirth and regeneration? I
share the belief that the era of separate destinies has run
its course. No one country or region can go it alone or
remain an island of peace and tranquility in the midst of
disease, wars, poverty, human and environmental
degradation and global chaos.

We in Africa will need the assistance of the
international community based on the principle of
reciprocal obligations and in the belief that peace and
justice are truly indivisible. In this regard, let us consider
the world's response to the recent crisis in Kosovo, in
contrast with the response we have seen to the conflicts
in Rwanda or Sierra Leone. In tackling the Kosovo
refugee crisis, the international community responded by
spending roughly $1.50 a day per refugee. The African
refugees in Rwanda and Sierra Leone received the
equivalent of ¢1l per head.
Let us also consider the fact that, in the aftermath of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) military
offensive in the Balkans, Western European countries and
their allies readily pledged well over $2 billion for the
reconstruction and rebuilding of Kosovo, even when it
was widely estimated that only about $500 million are
needed for the task. In Sierra Leone, where Nigeria, a
developing country, has been spending more than $1
million a day to support its troops in ECOMOG for the
past three years - in addition to the estimated $4 billion
spent in Liberia since 1990 - the same enthusiasm for
the Kosovo-type of financial support is sadly lacking.

When the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Mary Robinson, recently Visited Sierra
Leone, she remarked that there had been far more loss of
life there than in Kosovo and that there was therefore a
greater need for a more compassionate and humane
response from the world. Recently, Stephen Lewis, the
Deputy Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) was quoted as saying that

 

"It is morally repugnant that the West is prepared to
spend $40 billion to fight a war in the Balkans and
less than 1 per cent of that to save the lives of tens of
millions in Africa."

These observations raise some deeply troubling moral
questions, which the United Nations and the international
community must address as we enter the twenty-first
century.

Permit me to end this statement on a personal note,
Mr. President, since this is the last time that I will address
the Security Council in my present capacity as Ambassador
and Permanent Representative of my country. When I
assumed office as the Permanent Representative of Nigeria,
almost a decade ago, at the tail end of the cold war, the
Security Council was reticent in responding to African
conflicts. It took us, for example, about five months to get
Liberia on the agenda of the Security Council. As my
tenure now comes to an end, the agenda of the Security
Council is dominated by African issues.

The peoples and Governments of African countries
commend the interest and concern of the Security Council
and the international community as a whole. All they ask
for now from the Security Council is to match its words
with deeds and to apply a single standard, and not a
continuing double standard, when responding to conflicts in
Africa compared with the response from the Security
Council to conflicts in other regions of the world. And, in
so doing, the Security Council would then be fulfilling its
Charter obligation to assume responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security everywhere.

