Mr. Boutellis:
Let me first thank everyone on behalf of the International
Peace Institute (IPI) for the opportunity to present
the results of some of the research and convening
work that our think tank has done over the past year
on challenges facing peace operations operating in
countries confronting asymmetric threats, including
terrorist attacks.

Think tanks like ours help policymakers make
informed decisions on emerging issues by offering
practical, research-based ideas and by stimulating
debates on how best to operationalize those ideas.
The IPI report, which serves as a basis for this
briefing, entitled Waging Peace: United Nations
Peace Operations Confronting Terrorism and Violent
Extremism, which I co-authoured with Naureen
Chowdhury Fink, was produced by IPI and the Global
Centre on Cooperative Security and is the result of
extensive conversations with United Nations officials,
representatives of Member States and practitioners, as
well as field research carried out over the past year.

Of the 11 countries most affected by terrorism and
other asymmetric threats globally, seven currently host
United Nations peace operations, which range from
small special political missions to larger peacekeeping
operations. The deployment of peace operations in
countries where there may be little or no peace to keep
and where terrorist attacks are part of the landscape of
threats, adds to the complexity of the challenges facing

the United Nations system, Member States and national
and local partners.

To date, the discourse among experts and
policymakers on peace operations operating in
asymmetric-threat environments has focused narrowly
on two key issues. First, it has focused on whether
peacekeeping operations can undertake kinetic counter-
terrorism operations. On that, the 2015 High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations and the follow-
up report of the Secretary-General concluded that
United Nations peace operations are not the appropriate
tool for military counter-terrorism operations (see S/2015/446).

Secondly, it has also focused on the range of
capabilities and the posture required to protect civilians
in complex security environments and to improve the
safety and security of United Nations personnel on the
ground. Establishing missions in such environments
has costs, both human and financial, that we must bear
in mind. While it is indeed essential for the United
Nations to adapt its mission presence and activities
when operating in such environments, the practical
question before us is how to adapt while upholding the
spirit and letter of the doctrinal principles that have
governed United Nations peacekeeping thus far. It is
clear that retreating behind secure compounds, known as
bunkerization, is not the solution to the dilemma. There
has, however, been comparatively little exploration
of the broader political and practical challenges,
opportunities and risks facing United Nations peace
operations in such complex environments. That has
created a gap between the policy debate here in New
York and the realities confronting United Nations staff
on the ground.

The three major United Nations peace and security
reviews in 2015 all highlighted the need for United
Nations peace operations to adapt to the changing
nature of conflicts. They also emphasized the primacy
of political solutions for preventing and ending
conflicts and for sustaining peace. That emphasis on
prevention came up in the Secretary-General's Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism and during the
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. Both underscore the limitations of securitized
approaches alone, approaches that focus on symptoms
rather than causes and advocate for greater investment
in preventive multi-stakeholder strategies. That is the
added value of the United Nations. Therefore, the IPI
report seeks to expand the scope of the discussions
beyond whether peace operations can adapt to
asymmetric threat environments to how they can
better implement their mandates and support national
Governments and local communities in the face of
terrorism and violent extremism.

That raises a number of key questions relating to
whether, where, when and how preventive approaches
could and should be integrated into the mandates of
peace operations and how to capacitate United Nations
field missions as a consequence. Can it be done in a
context of limited resources and expertise without
impairing their impartiality or complicating relations
with host countries? Can it be done while ensuring the
safety and security of staff? And critically, how should
the issue of fragmented policy development at United
Nations Headquarters and the resulting lack of clear
guidance and resources for field missions be addressed?

Allow me to highlight a few key recommendations
the report puts forward for how peace operations
could adopt more cohesive and strategic approaches
to addressing the threat of terrorism and violent
extremism, which shape a number of asymmetrical
threat environments.

First, United Nations peace operations need to
develop a more nuanced understanding, not only of
terrorist groups, but also of the drivers and grievances
leading to radicalization and violence, as well as of
local capacities for peace and resilience. This will
require better and more real-time information and
analysis, including regional analytical frameworks in
some contexts.

Secondly, greater coherence and clearer policy
guidance on these issues are needed. This requires
continued United Nations system-wide discussions
not only between United Nations counter-terrorism
bodies and peace operations teams, of course, but also
among Member States and across the three pillars of
the Organization's work. In this regard, mandates and
structures should not be an obstacle to either United
Nations system-wide collaboration or to adopting
more strategic approaches to addressing the drivers
of asymmetrical threats without securitizing those
mandates.

Thirdly, it is important that United Nations peace
operations preserve and expand the space for dialogue
with all parties to a conflict. Security Council sanctions
do not legally bar United Nations actors from talking to
listed armed groups and their leaders, and there should

not be an a priori branding of who is a legitimate or
illegitimate interlocutor without a balanced analysis
of who they are and whether dialogues or alternative
strategies may bear fruit.

Fourthly, United Nations peace operations should
have honest conversations with host Governments about
what the United Nations does not do to fight against
asymmetrical threats, including terrorism, and where
the United Nations can add value and support Member
States' priorities in preventing terrorism, including
in the areas the rule of law, security institutions and
human rights, and in advising on national strategy
development, including on which national counter-
terrorism measures can be counterproductive. Peace
operations should also encourage host nations to
address the conditions conducive to the spread of violent
extremism, including by promoting better governance
and State-citizen relations.

Fifthly and finally, while more empirical evidence
is needed to fully understand the impact and potential
of preventive initiatives, peace operations could
already start mainstreaming some of these initiatives
as part of context-specific integrated mission strategies
for preventing and sustaining a piece. While doing so,
it should adopt a do-no-harm approach and exercise
caution in the use of labels.

In conclusion, the added value of the United
Nations in helping to address asymmetrical threats
is not to deliver a decisive military response, but to
support and strengthen preventive multi-stakeholder
approaches to sustaining peace. This timely thematic
debate will hopefully help the Organization develop
a more strategic and integrated approach to waging
and sustaining peace, rather than only protecting
an instrument to better manage the symptoms of
asymmetrical threats. I submit that the continued
relevance of the United Nations should be judged by
the former not the latter.
