Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having including this public debate in the Council's
April programme of work. The issues of security,
energy and climate change have usually been dealt
with separately. However, a comprehensive analysis of
the linkages between those subjects must be
undertaken if we are to forge a global understanding
and formulate policies that allow us to confront the
threat posed to international peace and stability. The
United Nations system, as it is a reflection of the will
of Member States, is the proper forum for the
discussion of these challenges confronting the
international community.

The development and well-being of all nations
can be guaranteed only if well-founded measures are
taken in a multilateral and concerted manner in the
relevant forums. Throughout history, energy has been a
strategic resource for human progress. The use of fossil
fuels, including coal, as the principal sources of energy
has allowed us to increase our capacity for
development. However, today we know that it also
endangers our common future. The most recent
scientific consensus confirms that a significant number
of natural systems have been affected by climate
change and that global warming has undoubtedly had
an influence on physical and biological systems.
Climate change represents a serious and growing threat
to the sustainable development and life of the planet.
Its impact will have direct repercussions on energy
supply and demand.

With regard to the issue of supply, climate change
would result in a shortage of natural resources, since
there would be a reduction in the quality and quantity
of water available for human consumption, agriculture
and electric energy generation, as well as in the amount
of arable land, along with a deterioration in
biodiversity and bioenergy in most of the tropics.
Furthermore, such a trend would coincide with a
historic decline in the availability of fossil fuels and an

increase in the difficulty of gaining access to them.
That could lead to an increase in the number of
conflicts in unstable areas as a result of the rush to gain
access to available reserves. That would create a
geopolitical environment shaped by the availability of
alternative sources of energy and by the capacity to
access appropriate technologies for their use.

Likewise, the envisioned impact of climate
change would put at risk the existing oil and electrical
industry infrastructure. Failing to factor the climatic
variable into energy management in the future would
reduce our ability to mitigate and adapt to the
phenomenon in the years to come.

With regard to demand, climate change would
alter our energy requirements and patterns of
production and consumption of various goods and
services, leading to distortions in the productive
sectors, with a consequent impact on the global
economy. Such considerations make clear the need to
adapt climate change models and scenarios to future
socio-economic and energy requirements.

Moreover, current challenges require us to
redouble our efforts to reduce reliance on coal in the
global economy. According to current estimates, by
2030 global energy consumption will have increased
by more than 50 per cent from today's levels. To
satisfy such increased needs while maintaining global
security, we must move to a sustainable energy base
that includes a growing share of renewable energy
sources and promote the development of cleaner and
more efficient energy technologies.

Furthermore, as has been said, climate change
would continue to intensify extreme weather
phenomena - cyclones, hurricanes, heat waves and
droughts - creating humanitarian emergencies in
many of our countries and increasing the human and
economic costs associated with them.

The increase in the global population, which by
mid-century will stabilize at almost 9 billion, will
aggravate the current situation of poverty in which one
third of humanity lives, while also increasing pressure
on the biosphere and its capacity for biomass renewal
and environmental services.

The spread of poverty and inequality, if not
reversed, will inevitably lead to more social conflicts
and to migratory pressures that are more pronounced
than those we know today. Such migration will be from
the zones of the planet that are the poorest and the
most affected by climate change towards the most
developed areas, with the resulting tensions and risks
for millions of people living in conditions of extreme
vulnerability.

There will be no genuine security if we do not
promote common solutions to the challenges we face
on energy and climate change. It will not be possible to
avoid the economic and human costs of the adverse
effects of global warming or its potential impact in the
form of conflicts of a new nature. The urgency of the
situation demands increased international cooperation
on the formation of a new political consensus on a
coordinated response to the inherent challenges to
global security.

Today's meeting constitutes a valuable exercise
that undoubtedly contributes to generating increased
awareness and a comprehensive vision of the threats
that could appear if the international community does
not act in a timely manner. States and international and
regional organizations must be able to shoulder their
responsibilities in their respective spheres. The
Government of Mexico has taken the institutional
decisions necessary to confront the consequences of
climate change and to fulfil the international
obligations it has undertaken.

However, in our deliberations, we must be clear
about the role that the various institutions of the United
Nations system should play. When identifying the risks
in the three areas under consideration - energy,
security and climate - it is also appropriate to identify
the competent forums and bodies that should deal with
them. We should not forget that, when it comes to
energy, the international community lacks an
organization in which all States can reconcile their
divergent interests.

In the Mexican delegation's View, although the
threats under review are urgent, the possibility of
conferring on the Security Council the responsibility to
adopt preventive measures that are the province of the
specialized forums and other entities, would confuse
the content and scope of the duties adopted under the
various international legal instruments to which we are
signatories, while also eroding the Council's efficiency
regarding the maintenance of international peace and
security. In any case, the action of the Security Council
could be oriented towards buttressing the call for the
fulfilment of the political commitment that each
Member State has assumed on this matter, and towards
ensuring that the organs and other entities of the
system are mobilized with greater determination.

In the present United Nations reform process, we
have agreed on the objective of ensuring the coherence
of actions taken within the Organization. Consistent
with that spirit, we should strengthen the operation of
the bodies of the system that affect or could affect
these matters, such as the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the conferences of
States parties to the relevant international conventions
and other instruments and mechanisms. The delegation
of Mexico is prepared to make a contribution in that
regard.

