Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Let me first welcome the
new Permanent Representative of Yemen. We wish him
every success in his endeavours.

We thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for
requesting this meeting, and we are most grateful for
the briefings by Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock.

For the first time in more than two years, the
Yemeni parties have made some real, albeit limited,
progress towards peace and stability in the consultations
in Stockholm, facilitated by the United Nations. We
can certainly welcome the agreements reached on
Al-Hudaydah, the establishment, a governorate-wide
ceasefire, the humanitarian corridor for Taiz and the
agreement on the exchange of prisoners. We welcome
the agreement of the parties to discuss a negotiating
framework at their next meeting. Those are certainly all
concrete developments. They offer a real sense of hope,
for almost the first time, for the millions of Yemenis
who continue to suffer from the consequences of the
conflict. Encouragingly, what has been achieved in
Stockholm demonstrates what can be done when there
is a genuine political commitment.

Those consultations are the result of the prolonged
and concerted efforts of many actors. We appreciate
the Yemeni parties, which have engaged seriously and
positively in the talks. We are profoundly grateful for
the tireless diplomatic efforts of the Secretary-General
and his Special Envoy, Martin Griffiths, and thankful
to Sweden for hosting the meeting, the countries of
the region and all others who have contributed. We
commend all their contributions. It is, at last, a start.

The next stage - the implementation of the
agreements reached in Stockholm - is obviously
critical. It will require the parties to continue to work
together and, equally important, to refrain from any
action that could undermine progress. This is a situation
that provides the opportunity for the international
community to demonstrate its support for the parties
to honour their agreements and to insist absolutely
that they do just that. The Council must speak with
one voice. The parties must sustain their constructive
engagement with the Special Envoy.

The revitalization of the political process is certainly
a very positive development and most welcome, but
the humanitarian crisis remains, which is of the very
deepest concern. Millions are on the verge of famine.
The economy of Yemen is collapsing. It requires the
total rebuilding of key State institutions and facilities,
as well as urgent and continued stabilization measures.
The scaling up of financial support for a humanitarian
response is now a total necessity, as Mr. Lowcock
underlined after visit his two weeks ago. The only
way to avert a humanitarian catastrophe of almost
unimaginable proportions is urgent and concerted
international effort. There are no alternatives left. It
is essential that we support the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners fully and completely. The
measure of progress must be seen in action on the
ground. It is imperative that life-saving supplies reach
the millions of people in desperate need and that safe
passage be provided for distribution. That will be the
real measure of success in Yemen.

Stockholm has been a very important step forward,
but now we must maintain the momentum and ensure
that the parties engage in the next round ofconsultations,
both to sustain the political process and to address the
humanitarian crisis. As my Prime Minister recently
underlined in a letter addressed to the Yemeni parties,
it is only the language of dialogue that can end the
unspeakable suffering of the people of Yemen. That is
what the people of Yemen expect and deserve, and we
must provide it for them. In the past, there have been
a number of ceasefires and agreements. We must now
throw the whole weight of the international community
behind persuading the warring sides to de-escalate
the fighting.

In conclusion, the continued diplomatic efforts of
Special Envoy Martin Griffiths have our full support,
as do the United Nations and its humanitarian partners,
in their work to deliver aid for all Yemenis in need. We
call on the Council to show its full support for both
the political process and the humanitarian work of the
United Nations in order to demonstrate its own unity of
purpose to bring an end to the suffering of the people
of Yemen.

