Mr. Bessho (Japan): Let me express my
congratulations to you, Sir, on assuming the post of
President for August. I look forward to working with
Malaysia in the Security Council presidency. I would
like to express my sincere appreciation for your
initiative in convening today's open debate. Let me also
thank His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
as well as the briefers for their respective briefings.

Japan associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict. We are proud to be a member of that Group.

Twenty years have passed since the General
Assembly adopted the mandate for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. I welcome the progress that has
been made in the years since. Very recently, as ofMarch,
all the countries engaged in the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign had signed their respective action plans. I
welcome this achievement and would like to commend
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
her tireless work in promoting the campaign. I should like
to point out, however, that signing an action plan is just
a starting point, not the goal. As the report (S/2016/360)
of the Secretary-General issued in April emphasizes,
it is difficult for child soldiers released from militaries
or armed groups to reintegrate themselves into the
societies to which they once belonged. Their time spent
as soldiers deprived them of invaluable opportunities,
such as education. Furthermore, these children often
lack the appropriate psychosocial support required for
their reintegration.

While tackling this issue, we need to remind
ourselves that children under armed conflict are
disparately vulnerable. Programmes to support them
must address their unique needs, as these children
often lack the knowledge and experience to make the
appropriate decisions on their own. Furthermore, in
most cases it is difficult to expect the States affected
by armed conflict to cope with the situation alone. It
is indispensable that the whole of international society
supports the conflict-affected States in funding and
sharing good practices. In that context, I would like to
commend the activities of UNICEF to support conflict-
affected children. I can refer to the projects in the
Central African Republic, the Sudan, Cameroon and so
forth. Japan has contributed $81.5 million over the past
seven years to these challenges throughout Africa, the
Middle East and Asia. We are committed to continuing
our efforts.

The issue of displaced children is one of the
challenges that has proved even more complicated
in the past 20 years. Those children are deprived
of access to education and health care. When the
growth of children is hampered, that could lead to
marginalization and possibly to the further rise of violent
extremism - depending upon the circumstances, of
course. Efforts should be made to provide education
and health care to those children. Japan is ready to
continue its support in these areas as well. We have
provided such health-care support as hygiene assistance
and vaccinations for refugees and internally displaced
persons, including children. We have also provided
temporary classrooms and educational equipment for
children affected by armed conflict.

Last but not least, monitoring and reporting
mechanisms based on resolution 1612 (2005) have been
critical for the progress so far. Information gathered
by this mechanism is the foundation of structuring
supporting activities for the children in need. The
Security Council must continue to address this agenda, as
violations of the rights of the vulnerable - in our context
today, the children - can threaten the maintenance of
international peace and security. Japan will continue its
active efforts to promote this agenda.

