Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
on behalf of the entire delegation of Senegal, I would
like to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, and
your team for the professionalism and efficiency with
which you steered the work of the Security Council in
the month of May.

The Egyptian presidency was certainly busy and
productive, and at times highly paced, both in terms of
the strategic discussions and the practical actions taken
by the Security Council. There were times for reflection,
with thematic debates on how to deconstruct terrorist
ideology and rhetoric (see S/PV.7690), on cooperation
in the areas of peace and security with the African
Union (see S/PV.7694) and on the security challenges
in the Sahel region (see S/PV.7699). There was also
moments of action in the Council. At the initiative
of Egypt, the Council travelled to East Africa - to
Nairobi, Mogadishu and Cairo. It also reviewed several
mandates and adopted five resolutions, four or which
concerned African issues.

I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your concept note on issues to orient our exchange
today, namely, on Syria, Somalia, the counter-terrorism
fight, cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union and protecting medical staff in armed
conflict. The elements to the press that you issued
on Friday, on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, and our
adoption this morning of resolution 2290 (2016) attest
to the crucial importance that your presidency has
attached to African issues.

The tenth annual session of consultations between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council stood out among this organ's
highpoints in the month of May. They were the first
such consultations held since the issuance of the report
(see S/2015/446) ofthe High-level Independent Panel on
Peacekeeping Operations, the Secretary-General's own
report (S/2015/ 682) on the implementation of the Panel's
recommendations and the report on peacebuilding
(see S/2015/490). This year's session made it possible
to renew the commitment of the two organizations to
pursuse their engagement - a development that gives
rise to much hope.

In addition, in considering the situations in
Somalia and Burundi, the Council and the PSC
held discussions about the need to adapt strategies
and methods to the changing situation. Its informal
consultations and dialogue made it possible to reflect
on redefining priorities and preventing conflicts
through cooperation between the two bodies. A key
outcome of those consultations was the importance of
orienting their cooperation - and thus their annual
consultations - towards a more pragmatic approach
based on the actions to be undertaken by them in
relation to specific challenges.

It is important to identify priorities, with concrete
deadlines and achievable objectives, that both
organizations can meet, including with regard to
strategic cooperation. As appropriate, that should make
it possible for us to align regional cooperation and the
triangular dialogue among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries so as
to provide more coherence and effectiveness to the
Council's work. Given the high number and complexity
of the issues on the the agendas of both organizations,
the question arises as to whether we should review the
consultations format, either to hold it over two days or
to convene two sessions per year.

Another issue that we should consider is that of
medical personnel in situations of armed conflict,
concerning which the Security Council adopted
resolution 2286 (2016). I recall, inter alia, General
Assembly resolution 69/132, concerning global health
and foreign policy, which my country had the honour
to submit to the Assembly in December 2015. The
resolution urges all parties to conflict to take the
measures necessary to prevent and suppress attacks
on medical personnel and health infrastructure. It
also requests States to be ensure accountability for the
perpetrators of such acts, because no one should shoot
at an ambulance.

At the same time, my delegation understands the
problem of providing medical care in armed conflict
beyond ensuring the protection and delivery of medical
humanitarian assistance. Regarding the harmful impact
ofthe recent Ebola epidemic on peacebuilding processes
in the affected countries, it is urgent that we be able
to keep the peace in the wake of emerging challenges
undermining the Council's actions in seeking lasting
peace. We dare hope that the report of the Secretary-
General that has been requested in the resolution will
offer an opportunity to launch an in-depth reflection on
the issue of health care in armed conflict.

We commend the role ofthe Security Council in the
process of electing the new Secretary-General, which
the Egyptian delegation has sought to clarify. We are
certain that the presidencies to come will effectively
and efficiently organize straw polls and interactive
dialogues with all candidates who desire to so engage.

To conclude, I reiterate the congratulations of the
Senegalese delegation to you, Sir, on your leadership
this month, and assure Ambassador Francois Delattre
of France and his team of our support. We wish them
every success as they prepare to assume the presidency
of the Security Council for June, which will be
extremely busy.

