Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
join previous speakers in welcoming High
Representative Valentin Inzko to the Council. I thank
him for his detailed, accurate and objective report
(S/2011/682, annex).

The United Kingdom would like to express its
gratitude to the High Representative for his ongoing
efforts to uphold and ensure implementation of the
Dayton Accords and to encourage reform in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in what has been a difficult year. High
Representative Inzko has a demanding job, and we
appreciate the principled and committed manner in
which he carries it out. Like others, I would like to
acknowledge Bosnia and Herzegovina's contribution to
the work of the Council since the beginning of 2010.

The United Kingdom shares the High
Representative's serious concerns over the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Some of my colleagues have
pointed out that the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been broadly stable. Perhaps so, but it
has certainly not been moving forward.

More than a year after the elections held in
October 2010, elected politicians are still failing to
deliver an agreement on the formation of a new State-
level Government, delays in the formation of the
Council of Ministers are preventing the passing of
legislation, and no agreement has yet been reached on a
2011 budget.

We also share High Representative Inzko's
concerns over the intensification of nationalistic
rhetoric and challenges to State institutions, the
negligible progress made in reforms for the European
Union and NATO accession and the failure to fulfil any
further elements of the 5+2 conditionality necessary
for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative.

We note with concern the details set out in the
High Representative's report of actions taken by the
Republika Srpska authorities, challenging Bosnia and
Herzegovina's State-level institutions, competences
and laws and challenging the High Representative's
authority under the Dayton Agreement. Those actions
simply serve to obstruct Bosnia and Herzegovina's
progress in the reform process. They offer no benefit to
any segment of the population of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We call on political leaders from all parties and
ethnic groups to refrain from using divisive rhetoric
that undermines State sovereignty and the authority of
State institutions.

It is clear that some politicians remain unwilling
to put the needs of the country and its citizens above
their own nationalist agendas. We therefore echo the
calls of the Peace Implementation Council for Bosnia
and Herzegovina's elected politicians to fulfil their
obligations to the Bosnian people to form a stable
Government capable of taking forward Bosnia and
Herzegovina's essential reform agenda without delay.

Delivery of effective Government is the most
basic of responsibilities owed by elected
representatives to those who have voted for them. The
prolonged stalemate over State-level Government
formation strikes us as a disappointing neglect of that
responsibility. We need to focus not just on formation
of a State-level Government but also on establishing a
clear reform momentum. Until reforms such as the
adoption of State aid and State census laws are enacted,
Bosnia and Herzegovina will continue to fall further
behind its neighbours on the path towards European
Union accession. Constitutional reforms will also be
necessary to bring Bosnia and Herzegovina into line
with its international legal obligations, meeting the
minimum criteria for European Union membership, as
well as providing a workable basis for the country's
future.

Political stagnation is also having a negative
impact on Bosnia and Herzegovina's economic
situation, and the United Kingdom shares the High
Representative's concerns over worrisome

unemployment and investment figures. Recent
decisions by rating agencies to downgrade Bosnia and
Herzegovina's outlook provide a clear indication of
how political statement damages economic confidence.
That situation is made worse by endemic corruption at
both the State and entity levels. We urge elected
officials to take determined action to tackle all
manifestations of corruption.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has had a difficult and
tragic recent past. It is hard to overstate the suffering
inflicted upon the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
during the period of conflict. But Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a country that should now have hopeful
prospects. It has a clear perspective for European
Union and NATO membership, which provide a proven
framework for peace, security and intensified regional
cooperation. However, that perspective requires a
commitment to reform and functionality that Bosnia
and Herzegovina's politicians have yet to demonstrate.
The United Kingdom urges Bosnia and Herzegovina's
politicians to focus on delivery of the reform progress
that will carry their country forward. Their
responsibility is to realize the country's potential, not
stifle it.

I referred a moment ago to the suffering
experienced by the population of Bosnia and
Herzegovina during the conflict of the 1990's. The
arrest of Ratko Mladic' earlier this year is a very
welcome step. It brings a prospect of long-awaited
justice for some of the victims and their families,
which have suffered and continue to suffer. It was an
important moment for the region and serves as a strong
statement of the international community's
commitment to international justice.

We warmly welcome the European Union's
revised strategy for Bosnia and Herzegovina that was
agreed in March. We offer our full support to the new
EU Special Representative and the new EU Head of
Delegation, Peter Sarensen. Special Representative
Sorensen has made an excellent start in the role and we
commend the positive and collaborative relationship
that has been forged between him and High
Representative Inzko.

The United Kingdom supports High
Representative Inzko's assessment that EUFOR
Operation Althea continues to reassure the Bosnian
people of their security and it welcomes the agreement
reached in October in the EU Foreign Affairs Council
to continue to fulfil EUFOR's executive mandate. In
light of the ongoing political instability and stagnation,
it is our belief that international safeguards against
instability remain essential alongside the strong EU
presence. We look forward to the Council's agreement
to an extension of EUFOR later this week.

Finally, to pick up on a point made by some
colleagues, this year's attacks on decisions made by the
High Representative come against the backdrop of talk
from within Bosnia and Herzegovina of pursuing legal
action against former High Representatives. Any such
attempt would, in our view, be neither warranted nor a
responsible course of action, and we welcome German
proposals for further discussion on the matter.

