Mr. Guilherme de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil):
I thank the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for
convening this important open debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing. Brazil also wishes
to acknowledge the interventions of the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Deputy Permanent
Observer of the State of Palestine.

About a month ago in this Chamber, Mr. Robert Serry
shared his thoughts as the outgoing Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process. His message could
not be clearer, nor could it be more frustrating: "the
parties are heading towards an outcome which I can
only describe as a one-State reality" (S/PV7417, p. 4).
Those were his words. Indeed, that is what we have
been witnessing in the past years, in particular after
the failure of three peace talks initiatives, all followed
by tragic wars in Gaza and the expansion of settlement
activities.

In the past months, statements by the Israeli
leadership to the effect that there is no prospect for
a Palestinian State in the near future were appalling.
Such statements can only fuel the cycle of confrontation
and mistrust, exacerbate the situation on the ground
and lead us farther away from peace. The international
community must take all necessary measures to bring
about a renewed negotiating process that will lead to a
two-State solution.

The international community cannot allow for the
current circumstances to be taken as normal. A clear
message against business-as-usual is urgently needed.
As Brazil has repeatedly pointed out, it remains the
primary responsibility of the Security Council to play its
role in developing a new peace architecture for ending
the conflict. We call on the Security Council to exercise
its responsibility and actively set the parameters for the
relaunching of the peace process.

Brazil welcomes the entry into force for Palestine
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). The accession of the State of Palestine to the
Rome Statute represents an important step towards the
universality of the ICC, positively contributing to the
fight against impunity and to the promotion of lasting
peace and reconciliation. Once again, we reiterate that
the resort to multilateral mechanisms should not be met
with reprisals and sanctions.

Brazil is deeply disturbed by the realization that
we have entered the fifth year of the conflict cruelly
ravaging Syria, a nation to which we feel deeply
connected to due to the presence of many of its
nationals and descendants in our country. The drastic
deterioration in the Yarmouk Palestinian refugee camp
is a stark reminder that the situation can get even worse.
We strongly condemn the killings and serious human
rights violations perpetrated by the so-called Islamic
State and the Al-Nusra Front in the Yarmouk camp. We
firmly support the efforts by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East to provide all necessary assistance.

Brazil urges all parties to the conflict to comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, to provide unhindered access to humanitarian
agencies and to refrain from any action that could
protract the conflict any longer.

As Brazil has consistently reiterated, there is
no military solution for the conflict in Syria. It is
the responsibility of all countries to prevent further
militarization of the conflict, and to push for genuine
dialogue with a view to finding a political solution to
the conflict. Brazil has been contributing with food
and medicine to help alleviating the dire humanitarian
situation of Syrian refugees and dislocated people.

The need for the enhanced engagement of all parties
in political negotiations in Syria cannot be overstated.
We reiterate our support for the work of Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura, as well as to the International
Inquiry Commission headed by Professor Paulo Sergio
Pinheiro. A genuine and inclusive dialogue, based
on full respect for human rights, the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Syria, is
as urgent as ever. Brazil welcomes the second round
of intra-Syrian talks, held in Moscow, as an important
step towards the re-launch of the political process.

The security and stability in Lebanon is a matter
of great concern. The recent escalation of violence
reinforces the need to fully support the Lebanese
policy of disassociation from regional crises agreed
in the Baabda Declaration of June 2012. We firmly
support Lebanon in its fight against terrorism and
in its pursuit of stability and development. Our
participation in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, whose Maritime Task Force has been led by
a Brazilian officer since 2011, plays a prominent role
in translating our commitment into practical actions.
Brazil also contributes to strengthening the Lebanese
Armed Forces by training Lebanese navy cadets at the
Brazilian Navy School in Rio de Janeiro.

Brazil is encouraged by some of the latest
developments concerning the internal political
processes and national reconciliation efforts in Iraq.
We are, however, very concerned by the security and
humanitarian situation in the country, particularly
the control of the so-called Islamic State of extensive
parts of the Iraqi territory and its implications for the
entire region. We believe that a strategy focused only
on military operations will not be able to address the
root causes that led to the proliferation of terrorism and
religious extremism in the country.

Allow me to say a few words on Yemen. Brazil is
deeply concerned about the escalation of the conflict
in Yemen. We urge all parties to cease hostilities,
refrain from violence and resume dialogue in order to
peacefully resolve their differences. We are alarmed by
the severe deterioration of the humanitarian situation,
particularly the reports of hundreds of civilians killed
or wounded, including many children. All the parties
have an obligation to protect civilians and respect
international humanitarian and human rights law. We
urge the countries of the region to use their influence
to bring the parties to the negotiating table and engage
them in seeking a diplomatic solution. We thank Special
Adviser Jamal Benomar for his tireless efforts, and are
fully confident that the United Nations will join forces
to pursue a negotiated solution.

The stakes in Yemen are too high. The political
stabilization of the country is urgent if we are to bring
about a halt to the violence, suffering and destruction
affecting civilians and to pave the way for humanitarian
assistance. That is also crucial to preventing the further
proliferation of religious extremism and terrorism.
We support the Security Council in its efforts to act
decisively in order to help Yemen fully restore security
and stability.

