Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Ijoin others in
thanking you, Mr. President, for scheduling today's
debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I would also
like in particular to thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin,
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for his
statement. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
latest report (S/2012/462), and are appreciative of the
briefings by Under-Secretary-General Herve' Ladsous
and United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
Executive Director Yuri Fedotov.

India shares a privileged, historical and
civilizational relationship with Afghanistan. During
the past decade, our relationship has been renewed and
consolidated by our contribution to the rebuilding and
reconstruction of Afghanistan. India has pledged up to
$2 billion in development and humanitarian assistance.
We remain unwavering in our commitment to assisting
the people of Afghanistan in their endeavour to build a
peaceful, stable, democratic and prosperous nation.

With the first meeting of the India-Afghanistan
Partnership Council in New Delhi in May 2012,
the process of implementing the India-Afghanistan
comprehensive strategic partnership agreement has
been set in motion. That process will further intensify
our broad-based development assistance to Afghanistan
in a wide range of sectors that have been identified by
the Government of Afghanistan as priority areas for
reconstruction and development. We will continue our
engagement in reconstruction and rehabilitation projects
in alignment with the Afghan National Development
Strategy.

We are fully cognizant that the economic viability
of Afghanistan depends on its fuller integration into its
neighbourhood so that it can regain its historical role
as a land bridge between South Asia, Central Asia, the
Middle East and Eurasia.

We fully support the work undertaken in favour of
regional confidence-building as a critical component of
international efforts to support Afghanistan as it takes
forward the task of national reconciliation even as it
assumes full responsibility for its own security.

India fully supports an inclusive and transparent
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process of
reconciliation, as opposed to an internationally led
process, accompanied by an inclusive political process
and intra-Afghan dialogue, the renunciation of violence,
the cutting of ties to terrorist groups, abiding by the
Afghan Constitution and its protections for human
rights, including the rights of women.
At the Kabul ministerial meeting of the Istanbul
process, India expressed its willingness to take the
lead in the implementation of two confidence-building
measures (CBMs): the Chambers of Commerce CBM
and the Commercial Opportunities CBM. Further,
India will be hosting the Delhi Investment Summit
on Afghanistan in New Delhi tomorrow, 28 June. The
objective of the Summit is to attract foreign investment
in Afghanistan in the light of new opportunities opening
up in various sectors in that country. The Summit will
include presentations by the Government of Afghanistan
and others on the investment climate and opportunities
in Afghanistan, and panel discussions on cross-cutting
issues and sector specific themes. Potential regional and
international investors, including Indian companies,
will participate in the event.

We see the Delhi Investment Summit as a critical
link between the Istanbul process and the Tokyo
conference to be held on 8 July. The Summit will
also be helpful in countering the current narrative of
anxiety about withdrawal, reversing it with a narrative
of opportunity and hope. We are holding the Summit
fully cognizant that the aforementioned CBMs. require
an atmosphere of security in the country and in the
region. Amid the ongoing transition, the security gains
achieved in Afghanistan during the past decade are
still tenuous and fragile; security concerns remain
paramount.

The principal problem in Afghanistan remains the
existence of terrorism with ideological, financial and
logistical support coming from beyond the country's
borders. We need concerted action to isolate and root
out the syndicate of terrorism that includes elements
of the Al-Qaida, Taliban, Lashkar-e-Toiba and other
terrorist and extremist groups. We also need to create
an enabling environment in which the Afghan people
can live in peace and security and decide their future
themselves, without outside interference, coercion or
intimidation.

Moving forward, we need sustained international
commitment in order to strengthen the Afghan
Government's capacity for governance, security
and economic development. Enhanced development
assistance and foreign investment in Afghanistan and
the building of regional linkages are critical to ensuring
an irreversible transition in the country.

The Secretary-General's latest report rightly
observes that the serious challenges confronting
Afghanistan

"must not be underplayed, with the military
drawdown and an expected reduction in
development assistance giving rise to uncertainty
about the sustainability of such gains" (S/2012/462, para. 60).

We support the good work being done by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. The
international community as a whole must continue to
work with renewed vigour and unity of purpose towards
strengthening the efforts of the Afghan Government to
seek solutions that are inclusive and led by the Afghan
people themselves.

