Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the
presidency for organizing this important meeting, as
well as the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury
Fedotov, for his briefing.

We are aware that the region of West Africa
presents multiple challenges. Violent conflicts, as a
principal factor, have placed the institutional structure
of the countries of the area - and therefore their
populations - at serious risk. This is compounded
by transnational organized crime and petty crime,
which are additional factors that negatively affect the
deepening and prolongation of conflicts. Likewise, the
fragility of borders and the lack of available resources
to combat criminal activities in the region have fostered
the proliferation of controlled substances and their use
as a means of financing armed groups and terrorist
organizations.

The region therefore faces a challenge of a
transnational nature that requires a robust and cross-
cutting response from the international community,
based mainly on a broad degree of international
cooperation. We consider it imperative to adopt
urgent, serious and rigorous measures that are also
time-specific to counteract drug trafficking in and
around West Africa through a multidimensional
approach that neutralizes drug circulation at points of
origin, production, destination and consumption.

Furthermore, we believe that, in addition to
difficulties posed by the geographic backdrop,
limited State control in the affected territories
further exacerbates the situation, allowing criminal
organizations to adapt their illicit activities in order
to avoid losing their competitive edge and, of course,
profits. This adaptability translates into an increase in
their resistance and resilience to actions taken both by
the States of the region and by other international and
regional organizations.

The consequences of this scourge are very well
known in terms of its impact on the security sector and
the economic sphere. It deepens the fragility of many
States ofWest Africa, not to mention its negative effects
on the social sphere, since the sale and consumption
of illegal substances severely jeopardize the integrity
of the most vulnerable sectors of the population. We
must not forget that women and children are the targets
of violent extremism, armed groups and traffickers in
persons and in drugs.

Moreover, the link between terrorist groups
and transnational criminal organizations related
to these crimes is becoming increasingly overt, as
these organizations collect economic resources and
legitimize them through money-laundering and other
mechanisms that tend to diminish or eliminate State
control. In this vein, we commend the important
advances developed in the framework of cooperation
between the Economic Community of the West African
States and UNODC.

A clear example of this is the support project for the
Regional Action Plan on illicit drug trafficking, related
organised crime and drug abuse, which is consistent
with the policies and strategies outlined by the region
and based on the pillars of the strengthening ofjustice
and law enforcement institutions, strengthening the
legal framework, reducing drug demand and building
capacities for investigation and monitoring. It is
therefore necessary to highlight the remarkable effort
and work and transcendental links and exchange of
information between the two organizations, which
have allowed these initiatives to show the way forward
in the fight against drug trafficking in West Africa.

We cannot fail to note the work of the West Africa
Coast Initiative, which is a project that, since 2009,
has pooled the efforts of the Department for Political
Affairs and the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, UNODC and INTERPOL. The initiative
focuses on the most vulnerable countries and those in
post-conflict situations to reduce their vulnerability to
drug trafficking and organized crime by strengthening
their national capacities, providing the necessary
assistance to strengthen the control of coastlines
and airspace, and training members of relevant State
institutions.

In conclusion, we echo the words of Mr. Jean
Lapaque, Regional Representative of UNODC for West
Africa, who said that the Sahel crisis

"violently reminded us of the precariousness of
peace in West Africa... the hybrid and transnational
character ofthe security threats in the West African
space... the existence of flashpoints of tension that
could flare up at any time... In addition to structural
and historical vulnerabilities of the past, there are
today new factors of cross-border conflicts... The
rise of these new threats constitutes a priority in
the agenda of the States and their partners... as they
jeopardize great advances in peace and security
achieved these past ten years."

In this regard, we call on all States to address the issues
of West Africa and the Sahel through multilateral,
regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and to
work on strengthening effective measures to combat
and physically eliminate drug trafficking and, more
broadly, transnational crime.

