We would like to start by thanking Special Representative of the Secretary- General Swan for his briefing and Ms. Agnes Marcaillou for her focus on the work being carried out by the United Nations Mine Action Service on the continued threat of the use of improvised explosive devices in Somalia. We remain concerned about the continued political stagnation between the Federal Government and some federated member states. Overcoming the current stalemate is key to resolving the challenges that prevail in Somalia. We urge the leaders to put aside their differences and join forces to forge strategic agreements that would allow the priority concerns of the country to be addressed. We express our solidarity with the people of Somalia in their fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, whose effects represent a real challenge and whose consequences will affect all aspects of the daily life of Somalians throughout the country. Even in these very challenging times, preparations for timely, credible and transparent one-person-one-vote elections are vitally important, as is the continuation of the work for the adoption of the amendments to the political parties law. In this regard, we continue to advocate 30 per cent participation by women, whose participation in the electoral process - as well as that of minorities - is paramount. It is also essential to continue the constitutional review process, and we urge the parties to make full use of the tools put at their disposal by the United Nations and its partners. The Dominican Republic welcomes the measures taken by the Somali Government to mitigate the spread of the virus among the population and to facilitate continued access to emergency supplies. The fragile humanitarian situation paired with the increased number of recorded cases and a weak health-care system makes Somalia one of the most vulnerable countries facing this pandemic. It is equally worrisome that the seasonal rains that have prompted farmers to begin cultivation have also caused flash floods, increasing the possibility of water- borne diseases and creating the conditions for locust breeding, a plague already causing serious damage across the region. We encourage the international community to contribute to the Somalia Humanitarian Fund, which would save lives, alleviate the needs of the most vulnerable and help to scale up responses to the pandemic. We would like to pay tribute to the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali security forces for their sacrifices in the search for peace and stability in the country. The volatile security situation in Somalia is cause for concern. We condemn all attacks carried out by Al-Shabaab, especially the mortar attacks on the Aden Adde International Airport in Mogadishu, where the United Nations compound is located, as well as the attacks targeting AMISOM. We condemned the ongoing grave violations committed against children and encourage the Government to adopt and implement the national strategy to prevent child recruitment, facilitate the release and reintegration of child combatants and further strengthen the legal framework for child protection. Equally worrisome is the rise in female genital mutilation in the country during the pandemic, which is why the issue should be included in any COVID-19 response. We commend the work being carried out by the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) on the implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda. Young Somalis make up a vast proportion of the population; therefore, an enabling environment is needed to allow them to further engage meaningfully in peacebuilding and governance activities. To conclude, Somalia needs the support of the international community, neighbouring countries and partners more than ever. We recognize the continued efforts and role that the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, AMISOM and UNSOM have been playing in difficult conditions to achieve lasting peace and stability in the country.
