Mr. Sengwe (Zimbabwe): The issue before the
Council today is of the utmost importance, not only to the
Organization, but to the international community as a
whole. At the heart of international humanitarian
assistance are men and women who identify and
unconditionally respond to want and need. At the peril of
their very lives, humanitarian practitioners have always
and selflessly defied the inherent dangers of disasters and
calamities, particularly man-made ones such as wars, and
made it their mission and mandate to alleviate human
suffering by mitigating the effects of war.

Zimbabwe pays tribute to these selfless men and
women, who are really the best among us, and laments
the fact that we continue to lose some of them, and in
increasing numbers lately, as a result not so much of
natural calamities but of human irresponsibility, brutality
and callousness.

The post-cold-war era has witnessed an
unprecedented incidence of civil strife and internal
warfare, in which the battle lines are hard or impossible
to draw. In this type of strife, more people have been
caught in conflict zones, and the targeting of civilians has
been rampant. The phenomenon of weak or fragmented
state structures, and the resultant redefinition of threats to
peace, has given rise to a serious competition between
state security and the well-being of citizens.
In response to most, if not all, of these crisis
situations, humanitarian organizations have demonstrated
a remarkable capacity to mobilize resources quickly. As
a result, humanitarian action has too often occurred in a
political vacuum. It is important to point out here that
humanitarian action cannot be seen as a substitute for
political action.

The Security Council, whose mandate it is to
maintain international peace and security, should muster
or mobilize the requisite political will to address the
underlying political dimensions of such crises. This is the
most important role of the Security Council, and it
represents the best support the Council can ever provide
to organizations concerned with the humanitarian
dimension of conflicts. Whenever situations are allowed
to fester, harm is done to the protection and well-being of
endangered people are threatened, and the task of
securing a viable and lasting peace is further complicated.

Two basic conditions for the effectiveness of any
Security Council action in this regard are that mandates

 

should be appropriate to the tasks, and that the necessary
authority and resources should be made available to
missions. Half-measures are likely to do more harm than
good. It can be argued - and the experiences of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Rwanda and Somalia bear witness to
this - that when war strategies are designed to harm
civilians, the issue of protection cannot be divorced or
disentangled from the dynamics of the conflict. It is neither
smart nor sane to send Blue Berets to a conflict to provide
protection and to somehow assume that they can remain
untouched by the ongoing conflict. The inevitable abuse of
"safe havens" by warring parties, together with the culture
of violence attendant upon war situations, has often led to
the failure of those half-measures, since they fall short of
dealing squarely with the dynamics of the conflict.

It is harmful and unhelpful to all when humanitarian
action becomes a substitute for political and other action
required to resolve conflicts, and is made to operate in a
policy vacuum. In such settings, humanitarian action is
essentially in a no-win situation, as aid is diverted to assist
warring parties, and humanitarian practitioners effectively
find themselves on front lines that are considered too
dangerous for well-armed peacekeeping troops. A
prerequisite for effective humanitarian action, therefore, is
respect for the fact that relief has a limited but vital role to
play in minimizing suffering and mitigating the effects of
war. It has neither the capacity nor the mandate to resolve
cr1ses.
Another precondition for effective humanitarianism is
respect for its neutrality, impartiality and the overriding
imperative to go to the aid of all victims and people in need
of assistance. Failure to respect such fundamental norms,
including the right of people to receive assistance and the
right of humanitarian practitioners to provide it, will
jeopardize the lives of people in need, as well as those of
humanitarian workers. Similarly, the use of humanitarian
assistance as a bargaining tool to achieve political
objectives, however worthy, invariably breeds irreconcilable
competition between the mandate of the Security Council
and that of humanitarian practitioners.

While the mandate of the Security Council and that of
humanitarian actors may display a degree of
complementarity, it is vitally important to recognize that
they are distinctly independent of one another and not
interchangeable, and that one cannot substitute for the other.
The impression must clearly be portrayed and conveyed in
the operation field that humanitarian practitioners are not
emissaries of the Security Council and that their mandate
does not originate in the Council.

Furthermore, by virtue of the great importance
attached to it by all Member States, the question of
humanitarian assistance, and the responsibility which all
Member States and the international community in
general have towards humanitarian actors, must be
revisited time and time again by all Member States in the
General Assembly, not in the Security Council. The
General Assembly debate on the security and protection
of United Nations and associated personnel and the
pertinent Convention, which was adopted in 1994, are
outside the purview of the Security Council.

Just like humanitarian assistance, the question of
refugees and internally displaced persons should not be
politicized. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has performed
excellently as a protector of refugees, and its mandate
should not be diluted, not even to suit the pattern of
zealous reform exercises.

The bottom line is that, in an effort to protect the
providers of humanitarian assistance, the Security Council
should be careful not to take over or politicize the
mandate of humanitarian practitioners; neither should it
abrogate its own mandate of maintaining international
peace and security by seeking to reassign it to
humanitarian actors. By effectively acquitting itself of its
mandate through mobilizing adequate political will to deal
squarely with the political and military dimensions of
conflicts, the Security Council will greatly enhance the
safety, security and protection of humanitarian
practitioners. This constitutes the basic role of the
Security Council in this matter.

