Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the presence among us of His
Excellency Mr. Aristides Gomes, Prime Minister of
Guinea-Bissau, and thanks Mr. Jose' Viegas Filho,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS); His Excellency
Mr. Anatolio Ndong Mba, Permanent Representative
of Equatorial Guinea, in his capacity as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2048 (2012), concerning Guinea-Bissau;
and His Excellency Mr. Mauro Vieira, Permanent
Representative of Brazil to the United Nations, in his
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, for their excellent
briefings. My delegation would also like to express to
Ms. Elisa Maria Tavares Pinto, as a representative of
Bissau-Guinean civil society, its interest in everything
that she has said during our exchange.

Recent developments in the sociopolitical situation
in Guinea-Bissau, especially since the positive progress
noted in the wake of the extraordinary session of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), on 14 April in Lome, give reason for
hope in the process of exiting the country's crisis.
The appointment of a consensus Prime Minister,
the establishment of an inclusive Government, the
resumption of National Assembly activities and setting
the date for legislative elections on 18 November
are all achievements that need to be consolidated
through both the sustained support of the international
community and the firm political will of the Bissau-
Guinean political actors. With a view to helping end
the political impasse in Guinea-Bissau, the Security
Council ,via the adoption of resolution 2404 (2018)
on 28 February, conferred upon UNOGBIS three
priority support tasks, namely, the full implementation
of the Conakry Agreement, the holding of legislative
elections and the review of the country's Constitution.
In the light of the report (S/2018/771) of the Secretary-
General on the status of the implementation of those
priorities, my delegation would like to make the
following observations.

With regard to the full implementation of the
Conakry Agreement, the Secretary-General's report
clearly outlines the measures to be taken by national
stakeholders so as to move forward the implementation
of the ECOWAS road map and the Conakry Agreement.
In that regard, Cote d'Ivoire calls on the various parties
to pool their efforts so as to achieve the signing of the
stability pact, which remains an important step towards
bringing about peace in the country. My delegation
firmly encourages national stakeholders to pursue
consultations and focus on the benefits of achieving the
other aspects of the Agreement. We urge UNOGBIS
to continue the use of its good offices and to provide
technical support to further engage other organizations,
as well as civil society, in the process of ending the
crisis. In that regard, my country echoes the Secretary-
General's encouragement to ECOWAS to continue its
work towards maintaining a constructive dialogue
among national actors.

Along those lines, my delegation welcomes the
ECOWAS decision to lift the sanctions imposed on
certain Bissau-Guinean political actors following
the holding of the fifty third ordinary session of the
Authority of Heads of State and Government on 31 July
in Lome'. That decision will undoubtedly contribute to
de-escalating the local political environment, thereby
enhancing conditions for a constructive dialogue among
stakeholders. C6te d'Ivoire reaffirms the central role
of the Conakry Agreement, which remains to this day
the consensual framework of reference for achieving
a lasting solution to the political stalemate in Guinea-
Bissau.

With regard to the holding of the legislative
elections, it seems crucial to take all the necessary steps
to achieve the organization offree, peaceful and credible
polls. As the Secretary-General's report emphasizes,
the legislative and presidential elections remain at the
core of the country's political life. In that connection,
they must be held in accordance with the Constitution
and national laws and norms. Despite delays involving
practical aspects of the elections, national actors,
supported by the international community, are working
on completing technical preparations for the legislative
elections to prevent any chance of postponement.

Accordingly, Cote d'Ivoire commends the perfectly
coordinated work done on the ground by the group of
five international partners - the Security Council,
the United Nations, ECOWAS, the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and
the European Union - particularly with regard to
mustering financial resources, which is a real source
of concern. To that end, my delegation is pleased
to note the contributions of ECOWAS and the West
African Economic and Monetary Union of $2 million
and $1 million, respectively, which will help to fill the
financial gap in the electoral assistance project. cote
d'lvoire would like to take this opportunity to urge
countries and organizations to fulfil their pledges.

The review of the Constitution, the third
priority entrusted to the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office, remains an important pillar
insofar as it will enable the establishment of a new
political order that will promote the consolidation of
peace in Guinea-Bissau. In that regard, my delegation
encourages UNIOGBIS to take whatever measures it
deems necessary to provide effective support to the
Guinea-Bissau authorities in implementing an inclusive
institutional framework that will lay the foundations
for a country that is at peace and firmly on the path
to development.

The fight against transnational crime, in particular
drug-trafficking and money-laundering, represents a
major challenge for the authorities of Guinea-Bissau. In
this regard, and pursuant to the provisions of resolution
2404 (2018), the joint measures taken by UNIOGBIS
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) in this area should be continued and
intensified with a View to suppressing drug-trafficking
rings and those who long for a return to instability in a
country that has already suffered too much. We welcome
the fact that President Jose' Mario Vaz and the national
authorities as a whole are resolutely committed to this
path, having requesting the support of UNODC and
UNIOGBIS in designing and implementing a national
plan to combat transnational organized crime. We also
welcome the efforts of the country's political class to
adopt a law establishing a 36 per cent quota for women
in legislative and local elections and the creation in
April 2018 of a Guinea-Bissau council of women.

The major changes afoot in Guinea-Bissau call for
adapting international organizations and structures on
the ground so that their action can be more effective.
That is why my country awaits with great interest
the conclusions of the assessment mission conducted
in this regard, as well as proposals for restructuring
UNIOGBIS. Nonetheless, we must bear in mind that
any significant positive developments in Guinea-Bissau
during this time still depend on the proper organization
and conduct of elections, whose results will determine
the nature and scope of the change to be made. Cote
d'Ivoire commends the action taken by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and would
like to assure him of our full support in this important
task. We also take this opportunity to recall the
paramount importance of ensuring that Bissau-Guinean
stakeholders take firm ownership of the process for
emerging from crisis and prioritize the greater good of
the country and its people.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that in the
next few days Cote d'Ivoire intends to submit a draft
press statement on the situation in Guinea-Bissau to the
Security Council.

