Today we are celebrating the establishment of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS). At the outset, we would like to welcome the fact that the Sudan reached out to the United Nations for support during its historic transition. We also welcome the fact that the Sudan has stayed engaged throughout the process of deciding the configuration of the Mission. We hope that this will mark the beginning of a new chapter in the relations between the United Nations and the Sudan, with closer and better cooperation than ever before towards the common goal of providing a brighter future for the people of the Sudan. The Security Council had the immense responsibility of designing a mandate that would best help to support the Sudan. We were committed to designing a special political mission that would fully take advantage of what the United Nations has to offer to the Sudan and its people. Therefore, the mandate of UNITAMS offers the Sudan comprehensive support on a broad range of priorities. This includes but is not limited to helping the Sudan with the implementation of the Constitutional Document; helping to achieve peace; helping to build up human rights capacity; and helping to build capacity for civilian protection, as well as helping with economic recovery. The purpose of UNITAMS is to assist the Sudanese authorities during this historic transition, and the whole setup of the Mission is to provide any kind of support to the Sudan that it might need along the way. It is clear that the Sudan's goals of establishing democracy, bringing peace to the country and creating prosperity for the Sudanese people are very ambitious. It is all the more important, therefore, that the international community, including the United Nations, the African Union and the European Union, stand firmly behind the Sudan to help to achieve them. We hope that despite the coronavirus disease pandemic, UNITAMS can be operational as soon as possible so that it can start supporting the Sudan without delay. Finally, we would like to take this opportunity to thank the co-penholders, the United Kingdom and Germany, for having skilfully and collaboratively facilitated the negotiations that produced the draft resolution contained in document S/2020/485, which the Security Council is adopting today. Let this be a clear sign that the Security Council is committed to helping the Sudan during its historic transition. Estonia fully supports the Sudan and the Sudanese people as they pave the way towards a better future.
