Mr. Valdez Carrillo (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like first to say a few words of welcome and
congratulations on behalf of Peru to the Republic of
Colombia on having assumed the responsibility of
presiding over the Council for this month. Peru is
particularly pleased to take part in this dialogue under
the leadership of a country so deeply committed to the
establishment of a regime of control and cooperation to
eliminate the current threats to security arising from
the traffic in small arms and light weapons, as it
demonstrated by its skilful conduct of the recent United
Nations Conference on this subject. My delegation also
wishes to express its appreciation for the document
prepared by Colombia, which constitutes an important
contribution and a useful basis for determining the role
of the Security Council as regards small arms.

For Peru, this issue reflects a political and moral
imperative that requires joint international action at all
levels. For more than 10 years, the flow of small arms
and light weapons in my country sustained terrorist
movements, including those financed by drug-
trafficking networks, which left in their wake more
than 30,000 dead and billions in material losses.

On the basis of the reports of the Secretary-
General for 1995 and 1997, it was possible to ascertain
the broad and multidimensional scope of this problem
that involves numerous participants at various levels.
The multifaceted nature of the problem was recognized
by the Security Council itself, through its presidential
statement of 24 September 1999.

A conclusion shared by the aforementioned
documents has been the recognition of the important
role the United Nations, and in particular its main
bodies, is called upon to play in this matter, both in
setting and developing strategies for action and in
disseminating information on, increasing awareness of
and alerting people to the excessive and destabilizing
accumulation of these arms, a recognition that places
this matter as a priority on the current international
agenda.

The Security Council, in the evolution of its
duties, has taken on specific tasks with respect to small
arms. It has done so on the basis of its own thinking, as
in the open debate that took place two years ago.
However, there has been no interactive dialogue with
other bodies of the United Nations and it does not
reflect a general, coordinated and unanimous vision
belonging to the membership as a whole.

In this sense, Peru feels that the Security Council
and other bodies of the United Nations, the General
Assembly in particular, share a particular responsibility
in this area. Precisely because of the overlap in their
functions, this affords a splendid opportunity, through
careful coordination, to effect an assignment of specific
roles by engaging mechanisms created for that purpose
and through the coordinated work of their respective
presidents.

The Programme of Action adopted at the
Conference on small arms and light weapons, despite
the incomprehensible deficiencies apparent in its
adoption, rightly provides the general direction that
was lacking, above all at the regional and global levels,
and constitutes the fundamental international
framework for dealing with this problem. It recognizes,
among other levels of action, the specific responsibility
of the Security Council in underscoring the profound
impact of these arms on the duration and intensity of
armed conflicts and their effects on the most vulnerable
sectors of society. To address this situation, the
Programme of Action also underscores the importance
of the role of regional and subregional mechanisms.

Peru considers that the Security Council should
establish appropriate permanent channels of
communication to enable it to gather the opinions of
regional organizations on the particular circumstances
of each conflict. This information should be taken into
account before the Council incorporates into its
mandates or recommends for inclusion in peace
agreements such measures as arms embargoes;
moratoriums on the import, export and manufacture of
such arms; the control of borders; and programmes for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants.

We believe that representatives of these regional
organizations and of the countries involved should be
invited before the Security Council prior to the
elaboration and adoption of such measures.
Furthermore, their presence would serve to provide the
sanctions Committees with the latest information on
the implementation of arms embargoes previously
imposed by the Security Council. Another way in
which these organizations and participants can express
their points of view on this matter is through the
representatives of the Secretary-General in the field,
who can forward these opinions and include them in
the reports of the Secretary-General.

With respect to the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants, the Security
Council should play an important and essential role by
incorporating the appropriate measures included in the
Programme of Action into the mandates of
peacekeeping operations and by implementing them. In
this area, more detailed studies could be made of the
experience gained in cases in which the voluntary
surrender of arms was carried out on the basis of non-
monetary compensation, as has been successfully done
in such countries as Albania, El Salvador and Panama.
These exchanges of weapons for farming or building
implements, or for the construction of schools and
clinics, provide a viable and imaginative alternative
that can be used in diverse conflicts, based on a case-
by-case analysis.

The need for coordination is also clear with
respect to the United Nations role in promoting
technical and financial cooperation to encourage an
effective presence of the donor community in
programmes including information on best practices
for, inter alia, the collection, destruction and safe
storage of arms stockpiles, which is simply another
way of contributing to the prevention of conflicts.

With respect to the need to send Security Council
missions to study the issue of small arms in the
affected countries, Peru considers that the current fact-
finding missions of the Organization, such as that
which it recently sent to Kenya to determine the scale
of the proliferation of these arms, carry out this
function in a way that duly reflects the
multidisciplinary nature of the problem, involving
representatives of the Department of Political Affairs,
the Department for Disarmament Affairs and the
United Nations Development Programme. They should
therefore be sustained. In any event, the Security
Council can certainly incorporate concerns involving
the issue of small arms into the missions it is currently
undertaking in various regions and conflicts.

Finally, Peru wishes to express its complete
confidence that the United Nations and its principal
bodies will, at their respective levels of action, provide
adequate responses to national, regional and
subregional expectations that have arisen today
regarding this matter of profound moral concern.

