Mr. Ivezaj (Montenegro): We thank you, Madam
President, for convening today's debate on the human
cost ofthe illicit transfer and destabilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons. We
commend Lithuania's strong commitment to the issue,
as well as the outstanding concept note (S/2015/306, annex). We also thank today's briefers for their valuable
presentations.

Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier today by the observer of the European
Union. However, I would like to highlight some points
of particular importance to my country.

Today, we are all aware of the agonizing impact of
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons (SALW).
The uncontrolled availability of small arms and their
illicit trafficking exact an alarming cost from each of
the three main pillars of the United Nations - peace,
development and human rights. They pose a serious
threat to peace and reconciliation processes and lead
to a vast range of human rights violations. They will
also undermine our work to achieve sustainable
development and realize the new set of sustainable
development goals.

Over the past decades, the efforts ofthe international
community to prevent and reduce violent conflict have
increased and been strengthened. However, for many
countries, conflicts and instability remain intractable
problems, fuelled by the unregulated and irresponsible
trade in SALW. We believe that steps taken to tackle
the problem of small arms and light weapons must be
practical, effective and comprehensive. This is essential
in order to reduce the devastating and long-lasting
impact of the widespread availability and misuse of
SALW. The most effective way to prevent their misuse
is through imposing strict import and export controls,
enacting strong brokering laws and, as mentioned in the
report of the Secretary General (S/2015/289), urgently
addressing stockpile security and management.

Peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding
missions also play a role in addressing this challenge.
They can contribute by providing assistance with
stockpile management and with the collection and
destruction of weapons. The adoption of the Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT) last year is a step in the right
direction that will help prevent destabilizing arms
flows to conflict areas and to illicit users. It shows how
much we can achieve if we work together. The Arms
Trade Treaty will complement and strengthen a number
of existing international instruments, with its ability to
adapt.
Montenegro is proud to have ratified the ATT
in August 2014, thus being in the group of the first
50 countries to do so. That, in turn, made possible
the entry into force of the ATT in December of that
year. Our ratification is yet another illustration of
my country's firm commitment to the ATT and to
promoting responsible arms trading throughout the
world. Now that the ATT has entered into force, we
expect the instrument to be decisive in putting an
end to an uncontrolled arms trade that fuels armed
conflicts, with its ability to change the lives of the most
affected people. Montenegro will be devoted to the full
and effective implementation of the ATT as well as to
upholding the principles and standards enshrined by
the Treaty on a global scale. Our efforts will continue in
order to ensure that the Treaty truly becomes universal,
with as broad and effective application as possible.

Each year, over half a million men, women and
children die as a result of armed violence and easy
access to portable weapons, too often used by children.
Civilians suffer the most, particularly the poor. It is
encouraging that national legislation has improved in
a number of countries, although there is much work
ahead, since many States lack the capacity to exercise
effective control over small arms and light weapons and
to stem the flow of illicit weapons across their borders.

Montenegro has developed a solid legislative
framework regarding small arms and light weapons, in
line with European Union standards and supported by
the relevant strategic documents. It has done so with
a view to ensuring full compliance with international
obligations and commitments, in particular restrictive
measures and mechanisms adopted by the Security
Council and the European Union, as well as the human
rights situation in the country concerned. It is the best
way to stop weapons falling into the wrong hands
across the world, as a sustained process that requires
the commitment of all of us. We stand ready to work
closely with the international community and forge
a global partnership to prevent the future misuse of
SALW by developing common standards for arms
transfer control.

