Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): My delegation is grateful
to Mr. Petrov, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his informative briefing on the latest
developments in Tajikistan and the activities of the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT).

In March the Security Council agenda focused on
the parliamentary elections in Tajikistan that had been
held in February. On a very positive note, Council
members maintained that the elections were held on a
multi-party and pluralistic basis. During the elections, the
people of Tajikistan rose to the challenge of peace and
democracy by accepting the democratic standards of
governance. We are all aware that the elections brought
new capacities and new perspectives to the movement
towards long-term stability in that country.

We believe that the Government and people of
Tajikistan, in line with this democratic choice, will
continue to seek a way forward that provides for
development of democratic institutions. Even more
importantly, it must be accompanied by progress on
economic and social reforms in the country.

The progress that the parties to the peace process in
Tajikistan have made is most evident in the post-conflict
peace-building. We are pleased to note that the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) in
Tajikistan is broadly recognized as a success. In three
days the Mission will cease to exist. The more than seven
years of its dedicated operation in the country have
testified to the sincere desire of the international
community to bring peace and reconciliation to this
country.

The road to peace and reconciliation in Tajikistan
has not been a smooth one. It was marked by periods of
uncertainty and grave crises. However, the Government
and political parties of Tajikistan demonstrated their
commitment to the peace agreement, solved their
differences through dialogue, overcame many obstacles
and eventually embarked on the path towards the peace
and democracy.

 

As the Secretary-General rightly stresses in the report,
the support of the Security Council was decisive in helping
UNMOT through difficult times. My delegation pays tribute
to the Contract Group of Guarantor States and International
Organizations for the effort it made to maintain a political
dialogue between the Tajik parties. We would also like to
commend the UNMOT staff members for their dedicated
work during these years. This work ensured the successful
implementation of the task entrusted to them by the
international community. We are proud of the fact that
Ukrainian nationals made a real contribution to the
successful work of the Mission. We pay special tribute to
those Mission members who gave their lives in the service
of peace in Tajikistan.

The tasks that face Tajik society today are no less
important then those of the previous period. A major
challenge now is to consolidate peace and promote
democracy. International support during this very
challenging period will be of particular value to that
country. We are convinced that the Organization should
provide assistance to the consolidation of democracy in
Tajikistan. We anticipate that the implementation of the
provisions set forth in General Assembly resolution 54/96
A, "Emergency international assistance for peace, normalcy
and rehabilitation in Tajikistan", will receive new impetus
in the new, secure environment in Tajikistan.

In this context we welcome the efforts undertaken by
the Secretary-General in drawing the attention of the
international community to the current humanitarian issues
in Tajikistan and in mobilizing international assistance for
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the country's
economy.

We support the intention of the Secretary-General to
establish a United Nations post-conflict peace-building
office in Tajikistan. We believe that cooperation between
the future office and other international agencies in
Tajikistan and with the mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe will be of great
importance for the democratic development of Tajik
society.

I also would like to support the draft presidential
statement proposed be the Russian Federation.

