Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin my statement by thanking you, Sir,
and your delegation for your initiative to organize this
meeting to consider the challenges posed to providing
assistance to Somalia in its fight against piracy and
armed robbery. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his presence, which is a sign of
his clear support for the actions of this Council on this
issue. We would also thank the Secretary of State of the
United States, the Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation
and the Vice Foreign Minister of the People's Republic
of China. Finally, I would also like to thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Somalia for his presence.
Costa Rica appreciates the persistent efforts that
have been undertaken in the context of the national
reconciliation process by the Government and the
people of Somalia to achieve lasting peace and
stability. In that context, the full implementation of the
Djibouti Agreement must be a priority. However, we
are deeply concerned by the deterioration of the
situation in Somalia, which is facing the challenge of
establishing, with scarce resources, the peace and
stability necessary to eradicating piracy, robbery,
kidnapping and widespread violence. Persistent
political instability is the main obstacle to reversing
this state of affairs and guarantees near-total impunity
for those who break the law.

This year, the international community has
focused on the development and implementation of
substantial measures to combat piracy, one of the most
visible manifestations of the complex problem in
Somalia. These piracy activities have surged
exponentially this year. The vast profits derived from
ransom exceed the value of resources Somalia has
devoted to combating piracy and have fostered the
growth of the scourge.

Over the past six months, the Security Council
has adopted three resolutions exclusively addressing
the situation in Somalia and calling on Member States
of the region with the capacity to do so to cooperate
among themselves and with the Transitional Federal
Government in combating piracy and armed robbery at
sea off the coast of Somalia. Those resolutions also
address other legal issues. Today, we have adopted yet
another resolution broadening the scope of
implementation of measures to combat piracy in
Somali territory and adding measures for the gathering
of evidence and the prosecution of the perpetrators of
those acts.

In stressing the issue of piracy, we have almost
forgotten the efforts to address the fundamental issue
of creating the conditions necessary to improving the
political, security and humanitarian situations in
Somalia. In that regard, we welcome the manifest
readiness of the United Nations and the international
community as a whole, and the neighbouring countries
of Somalia in particular, to assist the parties in every
possible way in consolidating progress in those areas.

We agree that there is an urgent need to stem the
threat posed by piracy and armed robbery in Somalia to
maritime transport, international trade and, above all,
humanitarian relief for more than 2.5 million people.
At the same time, we are aware that, while anarchy
persists in that country, all the acts of violence we have
seen on a daily basis will continue.

My country respects the sovereignty, political
independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Somalia. We believe that respect for those principles
and mindfulness to the requests of the Somali
Government and the express consent of that
Government to every action that is decided must be our
points of departure when formulating the appropriate
response in the fight against piracy and armed robbery
off the coast of Somalia, in accordance with
international law and, in particular, with the 1982
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.

My delegation believes that any initiative relating
to maritime security must be supported by joint and
coordinated international technical assistance to
Somalia, neighbouring coastal States and the region. In
that regard, we welcome the initiatives of countries of
the region and international organizations such as
NATO to combat piracy off the coast of Somalia, in
compliance with the relevant resolutions and
applicable international law. We therefore welcome the
recent deployment of the naval Operation Atalanta by
the European Union to protect the maritime convoys of
the World Food Programme transporting humanitarian
assistance to Somalia and other vulnerable vessels, and
to repress acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea off
the coast of Somalia. We urge those countries that are
able to do so to join in those efforts.

We should also like to commend the delegation of
the United States for preparing a unanimous resolution
on such a complex issue through dedicated and
painstaking work and flexibility. We also thank all
other delegations that have contributed through their
flexibility to enabling the adoption of a resolution on
such a complicated subject, especially to the benefit of
the 2.5 million people whose daily lives have been
affected.

Finally, we commend the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) for its stabilizing presence, in
particular in Mogadishu. We believe it important for
the international community to provide the necessary
financial and logistical support to strengthen AMISOM
so as to ensure that it can effectively meet its
responsibilities, without prejudice to any decision to be
taken shortly by the United Nations on how to maintain
its presence in Somalia.

