Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at
the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February. I am confident that your skill and
experience will be of considerable help as we carry out
the work of the Council.

I wish also to thank Ambassador Churkin and the
members of the Russian Federation mission for their
wonderful work in January.

I welcome first the presence of the Prime
Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, and
his participation in our meeting today. I wish also to
thank Mr. Atul Khare, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, for his briefing and
to wish him every success in the discharge of his new
mission.

The year 2006 was a time of turmoil and conflict
in various parts of the world. On its stage, there was
ample space for the regrettable acts of violence that
broke out last April and May in Timor-Leste. It is true
that the situation is currently under control; however,
the crisis in that country cannot be resolved overnight.
It will require the long-term efforts of the people and
Government of Timor-Leste, and support from the
international community.

The solution to the crisis and the establishment of
the sustainable stability to which the Timorese people
aspire can be attained only if the Timorese pursue the
path of national dialogue and political reconciliation.
My delegation therefore welcomes the establishment
by President Gusmao of the Dialogue Commission and
the role it has played in promoting national
reconciliation. We sincerely hope that the Commission
will lead the country out of the impasse that plagued it
last year, accomplish the mission for which it was
established, and promote inclusive political dialogue
with a view to restoring a cooperative relationship that
will guarantee the achievement of national objectives.
It is also our hope that the Dialogue Commission will
assist the Timorese in regaining their confidence in
their various national institutions.

Resolving the crisis will also require
accommodating demands for political accountability
and justice for the events of 2006. In that regard, the
work of the Independent Special Commission of
Inquiry is of extreme importance. Overall,
strengthening the Timorese judiciary is an essential
condition for the establishment of the rule of law.

The crisis of internally displaced persons was one
of the unfortunate outcomes of the violence that broke
out last year. It remains a major problem, since there
are about 150,000 internally displaced persons who
need to be urgently resettled.

The security situation in Timor-Leste in general,
and in Dili in particular, calls for an effective security
sector. The Timorese national police needs to be fully
reconstituted and developed. In the meantime, the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) continues to play an indispensable role in
supporting the security sector and promoting the rule
of law in Timor-Leste. It is therefore essential to
maintain sufficient numbers of UNMIT police.
Last year's events almost jeopardized the
presidential and parliamentary elections in Timor-
Leste. Given their continued importance, the elections
must remain a priority of the current year. The
adoption by the Timorese Parliament of the laws on the
National Commission on Elections is an important first
step in that process. The United Nations can
undoubtedly provide indispensable assistance in
support of the electoral process. In his statement, the
Prime Minister expressed the need for sufficient
security forces in the lead-up to the elections. We share
that view.

Good-neighbourly relationships among countries
are the pillars of constructive regional cooperation. We
therefore welcome the strengthening of friendly
relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia, as well
as the steps taken by the two countries to promote such
relations through the exchange of high-level visits.

In conclusion, we take this opportunity to urge
the people and Government of Timor-Leste to
demonstrate the necessary discretion in addressing the
crisis that has plagued their country and to give
precedence to their national interests so that their new
country may continue to progress on the path of
building peace and promoting development and
prosperity. We support the extension of UNMIT's
mandate by an additional year.

