This debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict is taking place at a critical moment for humankind, which is facing an invisible threat that is already having a devastating impact worldwide. The pandemic poses an enormous additional challenge for millions of human beings living in situations of armed conflict. If we are to effectively combat the pandemic, we must support the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. It is for the sake of humankind. We welcome the fact that some have not ignored the call and are focusing efforts on saving lives. Unfortunately, others have not only ignored it but have even taken advantage of the distraction provided by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis to escalate conflicts and ensure the restocking of weapons. That is absolutely unacceptable, and the international community should strongly condemn that practice. Civilians in armed conflict are particularly vulnerable to the pandemic. COVID-19 could have apocalyptic implications in some States whose medical infrastructure has been devastated after years of fighting. We therefore reiterate our strong condemnation of all attacks on medical infrastructure and medical personnel. Such attacks are grave violations of international humanitarian law and constitute war crimes. Civilians risk being held hostage both to war and to a medical crisis. Strict observance of international humanitarian law and international human rights is therefore critical. Accountability mechanisms, including legal remedies, must also be bolstered. The Security Council must assume its responsibility to address impunity by exercising its power to refer cases to the International Criminal Court. Mexico also strongly calls for the non-use of explosive weapons in densely populated areas because of their direct impact and humanitarian consequences for civilians, as well as the damage they cause to the critical civilian and medical infrastructure needed to combat the pandemic. We recognize the heroic work and sacrifice of humanitarian and health workers in these particularly adverse circumstances. We will not tire of repeating that humanitarian assistance can never be held hostage to the political interests of the Council. We are concerned about the impact that additional restrictions on movement may have on the capacity of humanitarian and protection actors to fulfil their mandates, and about the potential implications for vulnerable groups, particularly women and children. We must not allow the fight against COVID-19 to also result in an increase in gender-based violence, sexual abuse and human rights violations. Mexico expresses its concern about the pandemic's potential impact on the work of peacekeeping operations. While it is necessary to take all precautionary measures to prevent the spread of the virus, it is essential that peacekeeping operations continue to carry out their essential tasks in the area of peace and security, especially those dedicated to the protection of civilians. That requires a certain margin of flexibility in the adaptability of mandates and the pending rotation of troops. Finally, we stress the importance of the effective implementation of resolution 74/274, recently adopted by the General Assembly for the benefit of civilians in armed conflict. It is critical that all the necessary measures be taken to avoid denial of access to essential drugs, vaccines, personal protective equipment and medical equipment to combat COVID-19. The Security Council cannot remain paralysed amid the suffering of millions of human beings in conflict situations, especially when it acts on behalf of the entire international community. As such, there is only one alternative - to act now.
