Mr. Elnor (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should like
at the outset to thank and congratulate you, Madam,
on your country's accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I also thank the Council
members that worked so hard in the consultations on
resolution 2179 (2014), which was adopted earlier,
in order to reach a balanced, positive text that will
promote the efforts being made to accelerate a political
settlement of the final status of Abyei in accordance
with the Protocol of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and subsequent agreements signed by the
parties, including the Agreement of 20 June 2011 and
the African Union road map that was endorsed by the
Security Council in resolution 2046 (2012).

We commend the provisions of resolution 2179
(2014) aimed at ensuring the timely settlement of
pending issues and the final status of Abyei through
negotiations that will obviate all unilateral actions.
We also commend the provisions concerning the
importance of conducting an intercommunal dialogue
in order to preserve the historic coexistence of the
communities of the Area. In that respect, we stress
once again the commitment of the Government of the
Sudan to the provisions of the 20 June 2011 Agreement
and resolution 2046 (2012) concerning the importance
of establishing administrative and security bodies,
including a legislative council and a police force, as
such mechanisms would pave the way for a political
settlement. In that respect, no attempt to circumvent
these steps or to promote other possible solutions would
achieve the desired political settlement, security or
stability.

We commend the efforts being made by Ethiopia
to establish security and stability in Abyei through its
contribution to the work of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei. We will spare no effort to
help Ethiopia to implement its mandate.

Regarding the statements contained in the report
of the Secretary-General before us (S/2014/709) about
the decision concerning the forthcoming elections in
the Sudan, we stress that as of now and until a final
settlement is achieved, Abyei is an integral part of the
Sudan. In that respect, it remains officially a district
to be discussed in the negotiations. No entity claiming
to represent Abyei unilaterally can help to promote
the intercommunal dialogue being called for by the
Council or to achieve a political settlement. As to the
force that is safeguarding the oil facilities in the region,
the substantial presence of some 1,000 armed elements
from the State of South Sudan in southern Abyei, as
mentioned by my brother the representative of the
Government of South Sudan, is a threat to stability in
the region.

In conclusion, I reaffirm the readiness of the
Government of the Sudan to pursue the negotiations.
We hope that the visit of President Salva Kiir to the
Sudan on Thursday will lead to measures that will help
resolve the issue. We stress once again that dialogue
and a political settlement are optimal solutions, and
that no other option can achieve stability in the region.

