Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, first I should like to congratulate you and
your country for having taken the initiative to conduct this
important debate and to thank you for allowing Switzerland
to address the Security Council.

As the depositary State of the Geneva Conventions
and their Additional Protocols, Switzerland attaches great
importance to compliance with the legal norms applicable
in armed conflict. Switzerland would like to recall that the
Conventions are universally applicable and that it highlights
the responsibility of States, in accordance with common
article 1, to respect and ensure respect for the Geneva
Conventions. Failure to respect provisions protecting
vulnerable groups frequently involves all the parties to the
conflict, State and non-State parties alike. The
responsibility of States, however, is of primary
importance, and the Security Council must take this into
account and act accordingly.

Children are doubly vulnerable in conflict situations.
They can be Victims of conflicts that affect them
physically and mentally while they are still developing
physically and mentally. Children continue to be recruited
and utilized in armed conflicts by Governments or armed
opposition groups before reaching 18 years of age. As
combatants, these children become legitimate targets
under international law. Moreover, because of their age,
they are particularly susceptible to indoctrination or drugs,
thereby often becoming tools of grave Violations of
international law. The plight of girls and boys who are
forced into prostitution, sexually abused, humiliated,
brutalized and frequently kidnapped or subjected to forced
displacement is also particularly alarming.
My country would like to emphasize in this regard
the importance of the initiatives undertaken by the United
Nations Children's Fund as well as by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, and calls upon parties
to conflict to comply with the recommendations made.
Switzerland has supported and will continue to support in
the future the work of the Special Representative, as well
as the work of the relevant agencies.

The increase in extreme and cynical forms of
violence, as well as the rapid breakdown of fundamental
values and the legal framework, must spur us to develop
a more sophisticated strategy of protection. What could be
some of the elements of such a strategy?

First, we must reinforce the legal framework as well
as the implementation mechanisms. Switzerland is
convinced that in order to ensure better protection it is
particularly important to raise the minimum age for
recruitment, whether voluntary or mandatory, to 18 years
of age for regular armed forces or armed opposition
groups, for direct or indirect participation in armed
conflict. This objective could be achieved through the
negotiations under way in the Working Group entrusted
with the preparation of an optional protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. My country has
supported raising the minimum age at previous meetings
of that Working Group and will continue to support it in

 

the January 2000 session in the hope that such a legal
instrument will be adopted.

Switzerland has also supported the activities
undertaken by the coalition to put an end to the utilization
of child soldiers since its establishment in Geneva in June
1998. My country is pleased that the efforts undertaken by
this group of non-governmental organizations has made it
increasingly possible to mobilize the international
community. Switzerland is gratified that the declarations
adopted at the Maputo and Montevideo conferences support
raising the recruitment age and the age of participation in
armed conflict to 18 years of age.

Secondly, growing attention on the part of the
international community is now focused on the social
reintegration of combatants who were recruited and utilized
under 18 years of age. Efforts must continue in that
direction. Switzerland is convinced that better coordination
efforts in this connection are also necessary. We think it is
particularly important that actors from the political,
humanitarian and development domains prepare joint
strategies in order to avoid overlapping and to create new
structures.

Thirdly, the Security Council, because of its particular
competence, could more explicitly support law and
fundamental values. Whenever it addresses parties to a
conflict, it could recall the applicability of international
humanitarian law, as well as humanitarian standards and
human rights. This is particularly important with regard to
access for humanitarian personnel. The Council could also
encourage the dissemination of the provisions of
international humanitarian law.

The Council could call upon the parties to refrain from
recruiting, in peacetime or wartime, children under the age
of 18 and, if necessary, to demobilize and reintegrate into
society this category of combatants. It could ensure that its
peacekeeping operations benefit from the knowledge of
experts on the rights of the child, and that dimension could
be fully incorporated into peacekeeping operations. The
Council could regularly request the Secretary-General to
provide information, analyses and proposals for action to
support children. It could encourage United Nations
agencies and States to initiate strategies, projects and
programmes specifically focused on the needs of children.

It could systematically draw the attention of parties
negotiating a peace accord to the importance of taking the
plight of children into account. More generally, it could
encourage States to prepare their armed forces to meet the
specific needs of particularly vulnerable groups, such as
children. Finally, the Council itself could conclude
without delay efforts already undertaken regarding
targeted sanctions in order to ensure that there are
humanitarian exceptions for vulnerable groups, children
being particularly affected by such sanctions.

Switzerland hopes that during this year of the
celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of the 1949 Geneva
Conventions, on the eve of the Twenty-seventh
International Conference of the Red Cross and the Red
Crescent, 10 years after the adoption of the international
Convention on the Rights of the Child, 2 years after the
adoption of the Ottawa Convention, 1 year after the
adoption in Rome of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court, that a new stage in the protection of
victims of armed conflict can be entered. This should be
done through the determined will of the international
community to speedily reach an agreement on how best
to protect children in armed conflicts.

