Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, President Michel Kafando, for his
valuable briefing at the beginning of this meeting.

We have followed with interest the political
developments in the Republic of Burundi in recent
months, the most important of which is perhaps the
constitutional referendum held on 17 May, with the
participation of most political parties. We also welcome
the current calm in Burundi at this time and we look
forward to 2020, when the presidential elections will
be held. It is our hope that they will be free, fair,
transparent and peaceful elections. We also hope that
they will be credible, include all constituents of the
people of Burundi and enjoy the participation of all
parties. In addition, we hope that they will be held in
full respect for the freedom of expression, the freedom
of the press and the participation of actors from the
civil society

We commend the efforts undertaken by the African
Union and the East African Community (EAC) to reach
a peaceful solution in Burundi through a comprehensive
dialogue based on the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement, signed on 28 August 2000, and the country's
Constitution. We also highly appreciate the efforts of
President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda and Mr. Benjamin
Mkapa as mediators in the process of political dialogue
led by the EAC. There is no doubt that the involvement
of the Burundian Government with international and
regional organizations such as the United Nations, the
African Union, the European Union and the EAC is very
important for providing the desired stability, which
is one of the factors leading to a sustainable solution
before the presidential elections. We are convinced
that the convening of an extraordinary summit of the
neighbouring States would make it possible to hold the
fifth round of inter-Burundian dialogue, which will in
turn facilitate the political process.

Regarding the humanitarian situation, we hope
that the humanitarian conditions and the human rights
situation will improve in the Republic of Burundi, as
they are a source of great concern for the international
community. Almost 180,000 people are internally
displaced and 3.6 million need humanitarian assistance,
while nearly 400,000 Burundians are refugees in
neighbouring countries. In that regard, I commend the
process of voluntary repatriation of more than 35,000
people following the signing of the tripartite agreement
among the Government of Burundi, the Government of
Tanzania and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. Mr. Kafando addressed that issue during
his briefing. We underscore the need to further support
the undertaking of joint efforts, the reintegration of
refugees into society, the provision of the necessary
environment and the return of the remaining Burundians
to their homes.

In conclusion, we call for accountability for those
responsible for violating human rights. They must
be brought to justice so that the Burundian people
can enjoy security and stability in an improved
humanitarian situation. It is important to ensure respect
for the rule of law in Burundi in line with human rights
and international humanitarian law.

