Mr. Sareer (Maldives): It is an honour to speak
before the Security Council today on an issue that is of
profound importance not only to the Maldives but also
to efforts to achieve international peace and security.

I would like to thank the Chinese presidency of the
Council for convening today's quarterly open debate on
the situation in the Middle East. I would also like to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his dedicated efforts to find a solution to the discordant
situation in the Middle East. With the increase in terror
and conflict in the region, peace may seem to some
a distant if not impossible prospect, but we should
envision its achievement as a journey of a thousand
miles that must be taken one step at a time.

Let us look at Palestine, a nation embroiled in
conflict for decades. As of now, hope is dim for its
people. We reiterate our call for a two-State solution,
deemed to be the one and only viable way to achieve
enduring peace in the region. The Maldives once again

calls for full realization of the Palestinian people's
right to self-determination, their right to establish their
own State on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

As the death toll from the conflict in Syria now
approaches 500,000 lives, we have witnessed immense
suffering among the people on both sides ofthe conflict.
The sheer extent of the loss of human life - the lives of
men, women and children - must compel us all to work
relentlessly to explore every option for a sustainable
solution to peace in Syria. We must seek a political
solution for ending the bloodshed that is in line with the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. We would
like to underscore the importance of achieving an
inclusive political solution in Syria based on the Geneva
talks. As such, we urge the United Nations membership
to actively contribute to proposing solutions in the hope
of finding an avenue to peace.

The situation in Yemen continues to be very
worrying, since it also contributes to regional instability.
As more ill-fated civilians are caught up in the conflict,
we see displaced people fleeing the country for their
lives. We must strive to work for peace in Yemen, and
in the meantime we must ensure that humanitarian aid
reaches all who so desperately need it. The Maldives
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
and believes that it should not be associated with
any specific religion, race, culture or society. Islam
promotes peace and the protection and preservation of
life and unity. It also condemns violence. The Maldives
does not condone hiding behind religion as a pretext
for inflicting terror; it is not a means to a political end.

We see the Middle East as a breeding ground
for oppression, hatred and violence, which is the
underlying cause of the instability in the region. We
need leadership. We need political will. But above all,
we need courage - courage from the leaders of the
region and leadership from the members ofthe Council,
as well as the international community. We need the
tenacity to do what is right and to take the right steps
towards creating lasting peace in the Middle East.

