Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open meeting on
the situation in Timor-Leste. My thanks go as well to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, for his useful report.

We appreciate the report of Secretary-General
Kofi Annan of 6 November 2002 on the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET). It
provides a comprehensive account of the situation in
Timor-Leste six months after it achieved its
independence, as well as an account of the activities of
UNMISET. The Government of Japan welcomes the
fact that Timor-Leste is continuing to make steady
nation-building efforts. On the other hand, the country
still faces a number of challenges, including the
building of a self-sustainable nation, resolution of
refugee issues, national reconciliation, and the
strengthening of relations with neighbouring States, as
described in the Secretary-General's report.

It is said that heaven helps those who help
themselves; Timor-Leste is no exception. In the nation-
building process, the endeavours of the people of
Timor-Leste are of primary importance. It is first of all
necessary that they work towards reconstruction and
development while promoting national reconciliation
so that united efforts for the construction of a self-
reliant nation are possible. As long as they continue to
make such earnest efforts on their own behalf, it is
incumbent upon the international community to
continue to assist them, thereby consolidating the
achievements that have been realized through
assistance extended in the past.

Japan, for its part, has been the largest donor of
assistance to Timor-Leste, and intends to continue
providing such assistance to the fullest extent possible
for self-sustainable nation-building. At the donor
conference last May we pledged a contribution of up to
$60 million for the coming three years. Japan hopes to
make use of bilateral cooperation to realize this
contribution, and to this end met with international and
non-governmental organizations in Dili on 5 and 6
November to discuss future Japanese assistance for
Timor-Leste.

Based upon the deliberations at that meeting, the
following day Japan and Timor-Leste held an inter-
governmental policy consultation on economic
cooperation. During that consultation, Japan expressed
its intention to continue providing assistance, with an
emphasis on human resources development,
agriculture, infrastructure, and peace-building.
Furthermore, from the viewpoint of enhancing human
security, the Government of Japan is contributing
approximately $6 million in the areas of agriculture
and community reconstruction through the Trust Fund
for Human Security.

I wish to add that the Government of Japan
appreciates the activities of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation of Timor-Leste in
fostering reconciliation between former pro-
independence groups and former pro-integration
groups, and has contributed $530,000 to the
Commission. National reconciliation is of crucial
importance for the future of the country, and we will
continue to provide assistance in that area.

We welcome the steady progress that UNMISET
has made in implementing the mandates entrusted to it
by the Security Council in resolution 1410 (2002). That
progress has enabled it to meet the timetables set by the
Secretary-General in his previous reports. I am
informed that the engineering unit dispatched by Japan
is working effectively in cooperation with the people of
Timor-Leste. Japan would like to request the Secretary-
General to proceed with the implementation of
UNMISET's downsizing plan while evaluating the
evolving situation in the field carefully. In so doing, he
should continue to consult closely with troop-
contributing countries.

