Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, in this debate and
thank him for his statement. We also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for presenting the
latest report of the Secretary-General on Afghanistan
(S/2011/l20*).

We believe that a stable, peaceful and democratic
Afghanistan is crucial to the broader stability of the
region and therefore welcomes the relatively positive
developments that have taken place over the past few
months in Afghanistan. These include agreement on the
Kabul process, momentum on reintegration and
reconciliation efforts, and increased cooperation
between Afghanistan and its neighbours.

Despite these positive developments, Afghanistan
continues to face critical challenges in its endeavour to
achieve stability and development. Key among these is
the security situation, the worsening humanitarian
situation, human rights deficiencies and continuing
civilian casualties. Given the magnitude of these
challenges, South Africa believes that a comprehensive
strategy in incorporating security, humanitarian
assistance, good governance and socio-economic
development is required.

The continued role played by bilateral partners in
supporting the people and the Government of
Afghanistan remains indispensable. In this regard, we
would like to underscore the central role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in supporting the Government of Afghanistan and in
coordinating international assistance to the country.

South Africa remains convinced that the only way
to lasting peace is through political dialogue. Political
reconciliation and dialogue among the Afghan people
and leaders remain critical to the long-term stability of
Afghanistan. We believe that this dialogue should
include all those who are willing to contribute to peace
in Afghanistan. We are encouraged by the progress
achieved thus far in the peace and reintegration efforts
as reflected in report of the Secretary-General. My
delegation also shares the sentiment of the Secretary-
General that "[a]s reintegration initiatives continue,
confidence-building measures can help bring forward
and develop an intra-Afghan dialogue" (S/ZO]]/]20*, para. 82). In this context, we call upon the political
leadership of Afghanistan to utilize this momentum to
achieve national reconciliation.

We remain deeply concerned at the continuing
number of civilian casualties, as noted in the report
before us. While we commend the efforts of the Afghan
National Security Forces and international military
forces aimed at fighting the Taliban and other
anti-Government forces, we call upon them to
minimize the risk to civilians. My delegation is
particularly concerned about the plight of children
caught up in conflict in Afghanistan. These children
continue to be deprived of their most basic human
rights, including protection, education and assistance.

In this context, we are encouraged by the signing
of the action plan between the Government of
Afghanistan and the United Nations on the prevention
of recruitment of children and its commitment to
preventing the killing and maiming of children.
Similarly, Afghan women have a significant role to
play in the peace and stability of their country. Their
role in building a new Afghan society should be
welcomed and encouraged. We hope that the newly
elected National Assembly will address this matter as a
priority.

My delegation believes that there is an
inextricable link between development and security in
Afghanistan. We are pleased that the Afghan
Government has shown its commitment to addressing
the socio-economic situation that the country is facing.
We encourage the Government to increase its efforts
aimed at improving its institutional capacity to offer
viable alternatives to poppy cultivation and narcotics.

National ownership and leadership remain crucial
to political security and socio-economic progress in
Afghanistan. In this context, we commend the transfer
of some responsibilities to the Afghan Government, as
announced to the Council today by Mr. De Mistura.
The international community should continue to
support the country's transition from conflict to
prosperity. South Africa continues to support the
presence and role of UNAMA in Afghanistan. We join
other delegations in expressing our appreciation to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
his team for their dedication to and leadership of
UNAMA. We support the extension of UNAMA's
mandate for a further 12-month period, as
recommended by the Secretary-General.

