Mr. Lacroix: At the outset I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this meeting with the Force
Commanders of our peacekeeping operations. We have
the pleasure of welcoming the Force Commanders to
New York this week for our annual conference. This
occasion is an opportunity for very useful and valuable
exchanges with them. I think that it is particularly
relevant and important to hold this meeting under the
authority of the Secretary-General and in line with
the orientation that has been provided to us. We are
stepping up our efforts to make peacekeeping more
efficient and effective.

Before deferring to the Force Commanders, I would
like to express to them, their officers and soldiers our
gratitude for their service, and I would like in particular
to pay tribute to the sacrifices made by soldiers under
their command.

As you know, Sir, yesterday another two of our
peacekeepers from Chad were killed in northern Mali,
following other incidents both in Mali and in other
countries. Sadly, I also had the occasion to attend the
ceremony that paid tribute to the five peacekeepers who
were recently killed in the Central African Republic.
They accordingly deserve that we pay tribute to them,
but they also deserve our best efforts to ensure that our
peacekeepers are afforded the best possible conditions
in which to discharge their mandates and protect the
population, which they must serve now.

Without any further delay, I would suggest giving
the floor to the four Force Commanders. Each of
them will shed light on the specific aspects of their
respective missions. Lieutenant General Mgwebi,
Force Commander of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, will address the Challenges of conducting
military operations in a peacekeeping operation. Major
General Menon, Head ofMission and Force Commander
of the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force, will talk about the challenges of a mission
that does not fall under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations but is known as a Chapter VI
mission. Lieutenant General Keita, Force Commander
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
will address the challenges of robust peacekeeping.
We recently had the opportunity together to directly
witness those challenges. Lastly, Major General Uba,
Force Commander of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, will talk about the drawdown ofa peacekeeping
operation, which, as everyone knows, is the case for our
operation in Liberia.

