Mr. Castro Lopez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin with a few words of congratulations
for and gratitude to the Uruguyan presidency of the
Security Council.

Spain associates itself with the statement on the
protection of civilians to be made by the observer of
the European Union on behalf of its 28 member States.

I wish to devote this statement to attacks against
doctors and hospitals, with a message to the Security
Council on behalf of the five countries that promoted
resolution 2286 (2016).

On behalf of Egypt, Japan, New Zealand, Uruguay
and my own country, Spain. Five countries, from five
different regions of the world, came together a year ago
united by a common goal: to stop attacks against health
care in armed conflict.

Resolution 2286 (2016) is a unique resolution for
different reasons: the scope of the resolution, the role
of civil society, and the teamwork behind the scenes.
For the first time ever, the Security Council focused
on the increased difficulty of providing basic health
care in conflict situations all around the world. As
the Secretary-General has pointed out in his report
(S/2017/414), hospitals are treated today as part of the
battlefield rather than as sanctuaries.

Resolution 2286 (2016) did not merely seek to
condemn attacks against hospitals or recall international
humanitarian law provisions for protecting the
wounded and those who care for them; it also lays
out a series of practical steps to be taken by Member
States in order to prevent those attacks. The resolution
addresses such issues as humanitarian access, adequate
training in international humanitarian law, adequate
reporting, the fight against impunity and the need to
hold investigations when violations occur. Resolution
2286 (2016) is unique because of the role played by
civil society, from the early stages of its drafting to the
present day. It is a resolution inspired by those who risk
their lives to save others on the field on a daily basis.

We have all felt extremely concerned, frustrated
and disappointed whenever the parties to an armed
conflict fail to comply by international humanitarian
law. However, for thousands of doctors, nurses and
first-responders all around the world, frustration is not
the issue. It is their ability to work - and ultimately
their own lives - that are at stake here. That is why we
need to speak up and react whenever attacks take place,
demanding full, prompt and impartial investigations. In
the words of an Uruguayan poet, Mario Benedetti, few
things are more deafening than silence.

Finally, resolution 2286 (2016) was the product of
a joint effort by five elected members of the Security
Council from a purely humanitarian perspective. We
did not seek to take sides or point fingers. Our goal
was - and still is - to unite the Council and eventually
get it to act whereever and whenever an attack takes
place.

In that spirit, Egypt, Japan, New Zealand, Uruguay
and Spain stand together today to affirm that resolution
2286 (2016) can be only a first step in the right
direction. If we are to see positive results over time, we
need a strong engagement from all States Members of
the United Nations, particularly from the members of
the Security Council. We all need to lead by example,
implementing resolution 2286 (2016) and holding others
accountable when they fail to do so.

(spoke in Spanish)

I conclude by indicating that Spain will circulate
in the Chamber a note with its national contribution in
compliance with resolution 2286 (2016).

