Mr. Khalil (Egypt): I would like to congratulate the
Republic of Korea and you personally, Sir, for assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. I would like
also to express our appreciation to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Republic of Korea for
presiding over this open debate this morning. I would
also like to commend the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the representative
of the International Committee of the Red Cross for
their participation and important statements.

Increasing numbers of civilians continue to suffer
in armed conflicts around the globe. That is particularly
true for Africa and the Arab world, the regions to which
Egypt belongs. It reflects the fact that United Nations
bodies, especially the Security Council, should adopt
more effective measures in this regard.

Since our last open meeting in June on the protection
of civilians during armed conflict (see S/PV. 6790), a
number of alarming developments have taken place.

First, the human toll in Syria has grown
exponentially. In January, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights reported that the number of civilian
deaths had reached 60,000. Today, less than a month
later, she informed us that it is approaching 70,000.

Secondly, armed groups in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo captured a major city, Goma. The security
situation there was dramatically affected - there were
reports of looting and abuse - before their withdrawal
pending the negotiation of a comprehensive agreement
mediated by neighbouring countries, the African Union
and the Secretary-General.
Thirdly, in Mali, armed groups seized the strategic
city of Gao before being driven out by the French
intervention, coordinated with the Malian Government,
pending the complete deployment of the African-led
force approved by the Security Council. Again, human
rights abuses have been reported. We welcome the
arrival of human rights monitors in Mali in order to
investigate those claims. Their mere presence could
constitute a good deterrent for such acts.

Fourthly, in November, Israel launched another
brutal attack on Gaza, causing extensive loss of civilian
life and property. The ceasefire mediated by Egypt
helped to stabilize the situation and protect civilians on
both sides. So far, it is still holding. But its provisions
must be implemented in order to ensure a sustainable
improvement in the livelihoods of the Palestinian
population in Gaza and in the situation as a whole.

The United Nations Conference on an Arms Trade
Treaty in July failed to reach agreement on a final text.
We share the hope, expressed by the Secretary-General
in his report of last May (S/2012/376), for a future
Treaty that includes a provision that weapons should not
be transferred when there is a clear risk that they will
be used to commit serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. That would require
clear-cut criteria based on United Nations resolutions
and the extent of the country in question's cooperation
with the United Nations human rights machinery.

The international community in general, and
the Security Council in particular, must ensure
rapid and effective accountability for any violations
against civilians. Impunity aggravates violations and
increases bitterness and hostility between the parties
to a conflict. It complicates the achievement of national
reconciliation after a conflict is over. Commissions
of inquiry should get speedy, tangible and effective
results, including identifying and bringing to justice
those responsible for targeting civilians. The damage
incurred should be assessed and effective mechanisms
for redress and compensation put in place, especially
if the perpetrators of the violations are Member States.
The principle of protection should be extended to the
economic and social situation of civilians not involved
in combat. Accountability should be applied to States
that do not cooperate with the Human Rights Council
or that deliberately undermine its Universal Periodic
Review mechanism.

Egypt calls on the Security Council and the
United Nations bodies concerned, in particular the
Human Rights Council, to take decisive action to hold
accountable those responsible for the indiscriminate
attacks on civilians in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We also affirm the necessity for ending
Israel's illegal settlement activities, which constitute a
clear violation of international humanitarian law. We
welcome the completion of the report commissioned by
the Human Rights Council on the illegal settlements
in the occupied territories (A/HRC/22/63) and look
forward to effective action being adopted after its
consideration in the Human Rights Council next month.

Egypt stresses the importance of the contribution
that peacekeeping missions make to the protection of
civilians. We support providing such missions with the
mandates, personnel and equipment necessary to enable
them to become effective early-warning mechanisms
when violations occur. We also stress how important
it is that United Nations peacekeeping missions uphold
the principles of respect for host countries" sovereignty,
national ownership and culture.

We reaffirm the importance of compliance with
the provisions of international law and international
humanitarian law by all parties involved in conflicts,
whatever the nature of such parties. Every party in a
State must comply with the principles of distinction and
proportionality in armed conflicts. Every party must
refrain from targeting medical facilities and must grant
access for humanitarian assistance. The violation of
those rules by a party or a non-State actor should never
justify similar violations by other parties.

We share the concern expressed in the Secretary-
General's report about the increasing use of drones and
its implications for the nature of conflicts, the impact
on civilians and accountability. We welcome the start of
a process to prepare a report on the issue by the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms while countering
terrorism.

Finally, we look forward to more attention being
paid in future to the new and emerging challenges
attached to the protection of civilians during armed
conflicts, in addition to the current core challenges
identified in the Secretary-General's report. We urge
pre-emptive approaches be adopted, including a focus
on the just and comprehensive resolution of protracted
conflicts that threaten to erupt in regular rounds of
violence that mostly affect innocent civilians.

