Mr. Awaad (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Egypt has followed with grave concern the development of
events in the Central African Republic since the beginning
of the first military mutiny in 10 April 1996. That mutiny
and the events that followed it during the months of May
and November of 1996 led to a grave political split which
had serious economic and social consequences and from
which the people of the Central African Republic continue
to suffer.

The movement of the group of States of the
Ouagadougou summit of December 1996 and the
establishment of an International Monitoring Committee
under the chairmanship of the former President of Mali,
General Amadou Toure, to contain the crisis and bring it to
a peaceful settlement have had a tangible, positive effect on
the political situation in Bangui, as a political dialogue has
begun between the two parties to the conflict which has
built confidence between them. This effort was concretized
in a manner that expressed the serious intent of these States
to deal with the crisis in Central Africa. I mean by this
their decision last 8 January to deploy an African force in
Bangui which would have the responsibility of supervising
the surrender of arms of the former mutineers, integrating
them into the national army and monitoring the compliance
of the parties to their commitments under the Bangui
Agreements, one of which is to cease acts of violence.

It is a source of satisfaction for us that the Inter-
African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB) has achieved tangible success
in the discharge of its mandate. I cannot fail to express here
Egypt's deep appreciation for the important role played by
His Excellency President Omar Bongo of Gabon, as well as
for the technical support rendered by France for the success
of these efforts.

The regional intervention in the Central African
Republic proves once again that Africa does not lack the
machinery necessary to contain the crises which take place
in its States, both on the sub-regional and continental levels.
It also constitutes, in our opinion, a successful example of
preventive action that deserves all international support and
encouragement. In this regard Egypt did not hesitate to
respond to the request of General Amadou Toure to sponsor
the draft resolution before the Council. Naturally, we will
vote for it.

Egypt remains fully convinced that an appropriate
measure of economic and human development is the sole
guarantee for the non-repetition of the crisis in Central
Africa. In this regard I would like to express our support
for the constructive role played by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) in the development,
social and political fields. We believe that the
continuation of this support will encourage the
Government of President Patasse to continue to pursue the
courageous political orientation it has chosen. It is our
hope that the Bretton Woods institutions, in cooperation
with UNDP, will prepare a comprehensive plan for
economic reform that will enable the Government of the
Central African Republic to initiate real genuine
development for its people.

It was a source of satisfaction for us that the
Security Council consultations led to a positive response
to the requests of President Omar Bongo contained in his
letter to the Secretary-General dated 14 July 1997: first,
to approve the mandate of MISAB; and second, to give
it the authority necessary for its role in Bangui. It is our
hope that the draft resolution that we are about to adopt
today will be a political message that will encourage the
parties concerned in Central Africa to achieve national
reconciliation and to settle their differences through
negotiation.

