Ms. Zerrougui: I come to the Council today with a
heavy heart for the children affected by armed conflict
around the world. Although we continue to see progress
in better protecting children, new crises are rapidly
overshadowing these gains. Some of these crises are
covered in the report before the Council (S/2014/339),
while others have begun or intensified since the report
was submitted. The Council has been briefed on Syria
repeatedly, and the situation there remains grave for
children. Members have also recently travelled to South
Sudan and Somalia and witnessed for themselves the
conditions there. Children in these and other conflicts
are paying a high price.

The events that are unfolding in Iraq have led to
increased grave violations committed by all parties to
the conflict. I am appalled by the total disregard for
human life shown by the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) during its rapid expansion within Syria
and from Syria into Iraq. The images that we see through
media reporting of indiscriminate and brutal killings
of civilians, including children, leave us speechless
and horrified. Although the highly unstable security
situation in the region slows our monitoring, we know
that up to 700 children have been killed or maimed
in Iraq since the beginning of the year, including in
summary executions. I remain deeply concerned over
recent reports of ISIL targeting minorities, including
children and women, in the growing area under its
control in Syria and Iraq. ISIL has tasked boys as
young as 13 to carry weapons, guard strategic locations
or arrest civilians. Other children are used as suicide
bombers.

Sadly, we have also received reports of militias
allied to the Iraqi Government using children in the
fight against ISIL, and the whereabouts of numerous
children jailed on security charges by the Government
are currently unknown following militias storming
these facilities in July.

ISIL is not the only perpetrator of child rights
violations; rather, it is part of a broader regional
challenge that includes Boko Haram's expansion of its
area of operation. Boko Haram has been listed this year
for the killing and maiming of children and attacks on
schools and hospitals, and the United Nations is currently
setting up the monitoring and reporting mechanism to
better gather and verify information concerning grave
violations against children in northern Nigeria.

Targeted attacks on schools, students and teachers
by Boko Haram led to the deaths of at least 100
schoolchildren and 70 teachers in 2013. Health workers,
including polio vaccinators in the north-east, have also
been targeted. The abduction of the girls from Chibok
in April horrified the entire world. Over 200 girls are
still in the hands of Boko Haram, and I call on the
Government of Nigeria and its partners to take any
and all measures to bring the girls back. We are now
receiving reports that Boko Haram has recruited and
used boys and girls as young as 12 years of age in its
attacks, including in raids on schools. I am also worried
by reports about grave violations perpetrated by armed
elements allegedly associated with Government forces
in northern Nigeria. I look forward to the Government's
announced investigation into these incidents, as
perpetrators, no matter who they are, must be held
accountable for their acts.

I would be remiss ifI did not address the horrific
toll that the conflict in Gaza has taken on children. We
have seen intense fighting that has far exceeded the
casualties of the previous escalations in 2008-2009 and
2012, combined. I am horrified by the fact that, since the
beginning of July, more than 500 Palestinian children
have been killed and at least 3,106 injured or maimed
by Israeli forces - two-thirds of them under the age of
12 and one-third have been permanently disabled. At
least 244 schools, including 75 schools belonging to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), have been shelled
by Israel's armed forces, and one school was used as
a military base by the Israel Defense Forces. As the

school year has started and 110,000 people remain
displaced, many in school facilities, access to education
for the children of Gaza is severely affected and will
remain limited for the foreseeable future. To add to this
tragedy, medical personnel were also killed during the
shelling, and half of Gaza's hospitals were damaged,
preventing children from obtaining urgent medical
care.

There are victims on both sides, and I am equally
disheartened by the killing of one Israeli child and the
injury of six others since the beginning of July as a
result of rockets fired by Hamas. The indiscriminate
firing of rockets against civilian areas also resulted in
the damage ofthree schools in Israel. In addition, the use
of three vacant UNRWA schools by Palestinian armed
groups as weapons stores in Gaza is unacceptable.

We cannot afford impunity in the face of such grave
violations of international law, which in some cases
may amount to war crimes. The events in Gaza must
be thoroughly investigated and identified perpetrators
from all parties to the conflict must be held accountable.
I cannot stress enough the urgent need to work towards a
lasting peace. A ceasefire is only a temporary measure,
and we have been here before. The international
community must put its weight behind addressing the
root causes of this conflict. As the Secretary-General
himself has said, we cannot afford to have another
cycle of violence. People in the State of Palestine and
Israel deserve a durable peace that respects the rights
of all parties and places high value on the rights of the
children.

Many other situations witnessed grave violations
against children in 2013 and face similar challenges
today. Instability and rising tensions in Libya,
Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, Mali and
South Sudan continue to threaten the well-being of
the weakest and require our outmost efforts to protect
them. The intensification of activities by armed groups
gives rise to military responses that sometimes mirror
the tactics of the groups being fought, including the
use of methods of warfare with little or no respect for
civilians. We must remind Governments, which are
sometimes under extreme pressure, of their obligations
under international humanitarian law in the conduct of
operations and under international human rights law at
all times.

The fight against impunity remains one of the
key aspects of our efforts not only to react to but to
prevent grave violations against children. We must
make better use of the tools at our disposal in ensuring
that perpetrators face prosecution - by including
them in sanctions regimes, by redoubling our efforts in
enhancing national capacities in the judicial sector and
by strengthening the framework of international justice,
including referring perpetrators to the International
Criminal Court.
To raise attention and address those harrowing
challenges facing children in conflict, the Security
Council has given my Office, the broader United
Nations, concerned Governments and partners the tools
to reduce violations or end them entirely. Chief among
those tools are Security Council-mandated action
plans with State and non-State parties that recruit and
use children, kill or maim children, attack schools
and hospitals or perpetrate sexual violence against
children. Of course, the implementation of those action
plans would not be possible without the efforts of all
our partners, including UNICEF, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department
of Political Affairs DPA and their child-protection
advisers on the ground.

Six months ago, I launched the global campaign
Children, Not Soldiers, jointly with UNICEF, to work
towards the goal of no children in Government forces
by the end of 2016. In that time, the campaign has
received an almost overwhelming amount of support,
first and foremost from the countries concerned
and from the Security Council, which endorsed the
campaign in resolution 2143 (2014), but also from
regional organizations, non-governmental organization
partners and Member States. I am particularly happy to
welcome Forest Whitaker, UNESCO Special Envoy for
Peace and Reconciliation, who has joined our efforts
under the Children, Not Soldiers campaign. I want to
extend my gratitude to all.

The Government of Chad, with the full support
of the United Nations, has already fulfilled all the
requirements under its action plan to end and prevent
the recruitment of children in its armed forces, and has
been delisted from this year's report of the Secretary-
General. In May, Yemen became the seventh country
concerned by the campaign to sign an action plan with
the United Nations. During my visit in June, South
Sudan recommitted to the action plan signed in June
2012. Progress was also achieved in Somalia. During
my recent visit, Somali authorities showed strong
will to move forward on the implementation of the
country's action plan. Important progress continues in
Afghanistan, Myanmar and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

The vast majority of the parties listed are non-State
actors. To date we have concluded an equal number of
action plans with State and non-State actors. Non-State
actors continue to approach my Office and our partners
on the ground to conclude action plans to end violations
against children. A recent example is the commitment
to end child recruitment communicated to my Office
and to the Council by the Free Syrian Army in Syria.
Riek Machar of the Sudan People's Liberation Army
in Opposition also signed a commitment with me in
May. We are witnessing progress with non-State armed
groups in Darfur, and I am hopeful that we will be able
to conclude the compliance activities of our action
plan with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front in the
Philippines as soon as possible. I am encouraged by
such progress. The Council's constant encouragement
in that regard is a boon to our efforts.

I cannot overemphasize the importance for
specific attention on the plight of child victims of
armed conflict in peace processes and agreements.
Children are the future of a society. Longstanding
peace will never be achieved without giving children
the means, skills and education to rebuild a society
and institutions torn by armed conflict. Although the
primordial aim of a cessation of hostilities must be
a swift end to fighting - and children are often the
first to profit - the more substantial stages of peace
negotiations can be challenging when it comes to grave
child-rights violations. We must do more to include
special provisions in peace agreements for children
affected by conflict.

Today's armed conflicts increasingly involve
schools and health facilities in the direct line of fire.
The Security Council recognizes that important aspect
in its resolutions 1998 (2011) and 2143 (2014). To
implement the tools provided to us in those resolutions,
I have jointly published the Guidance Note on Attacks
against Schools and Hospitals, together with UNICEF,
UNESCO and the World Health Organization. With
that guidance, our field practitioners will be better
equipped to monitor and report, engage in advocacy
and work with parties to conflict to end and prevent
attacks on schools and hospitals.

A key strategy of my mandate as Special
Representative has been to deepen my engagement with
regional organizations. My Office has a longstanding
relationship and has developed a series of guidelines in

conjunction with the European Union. I have continued
to actively engage with the African Union. I am happy
to note that, in addition to the partnership agreement
signed last year, the African Union has just announced
the establishment of a special envoy on children and
armed conflict. With the escalation of conflict and its
impact on children across the Arab world, I have sought
to strengthen ties with the League of Arab States, and
we are developing a cooperation agreement to enhance
our common work. My Office also continues to engage
with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to further
mainstream child-protection standards among the
forces of its member States and partners.

No one in the Chamber today who has read the
Secretary-General's report and heard of the latest
developments in the conflicts before the Council can
consider children as a "collateral" issue. Indeed, we
now know that, in a large majority of conflicts around
the world, children are targeted and used deliberately.
Conflict confronts them in their homes, at school,
in hospitals and when they seek to run away. That is
why we, and the world with us, expect so much of the
Security Council, and why the Council can, and must,
place children at the centre of each and every peace and
security action it takes - from peace agreements to
mission mandates to accountability for crimes. I count
on the Council. But, more important, the child victims
around the world count on the Security Council.

