Ms. Power (United States of America): I had
not intended to speak today. I thought this would be
one of the occasions when we would go into closed
consultations and talk to one another rather than to the
gallery. But I feel compelled, owing to the statement by
the Russian representative and the attack on the United
Nations, which has been trying in good faith to reach
people in desperate need and which I think has not gone
far enough in calling out a permanent member of the
Security Council. It has been trying around the clock
to work with the armed groups, with countries that
have attempted to exert influence, and with the Russian
Federation, and was never really given notice as to what
the Russian Federation's plans were. Russia decides
that it is going to have a pause, decides the pause is
over and presents faits accomplis to the United Nations
and the international community, even though it is the
people of the United Nations who are there, vulnerable,
on the ground, trying to make deal happen for the sake
of the most vulnerable.

I would like to respond with a few comments.
I believe that what we just heard with regard to the
New Zealand draft resolution (S/2016/846) is that if a
draft resolution could be produced that ratifies what
the Russian Federation is doing, it would be happy to
support it. The representative of New Zealand should
bear that in mind. I would like to say - because one of
the things that the Under-Secretary-General mentioned
was the shelling ofwestern Aleppo out ofeastern Aleppo
and that was also one of the things that the Ambassador
of the Russian Federation went on at some length
about - that we condemn the shelling of civilian areas
in western Aleppo. It is outrageous. Is Russia prepared
to condemn any aerial bombardment of eastern Aleppo?
Does Russia believe that all the children who are being
killed in eastern Aleppo are themselves members of
Al-Qaida? Is that what happens - that you come out of
the womb and you are an Al-Qaida member, right from
the beginning?

Of course, Russia cannot condemn the shelling

and systematic aerial bombardment of eastern
Aleppo, because Russia is carrying out that systematic
bombardment of eastern Aleppo, and because Russia
has brought to bear in the conflict weapons that even a
brutal Syrian regime had never used before - bunker-
buster weapons that are designed to hit huddled families,
and hospitals that have had to be rebuilt several stories
down in basements. They are designed to target people
burrowed into the ground. They are not designed for
terrorists but to militarily conquer eastern Aleppo by
making civilians relent and cry uncle.

What is so remarkable and troubling about the
presentation we heard today is that what Russia really
wants from the United Nations is credit. Congratulations,
Russia, you have stopped using incendiary weapons
for a couple of days. Thank you for not using cluster
bombs in civilian areas. Thank you for staying the hand
of brutality with regard to bunker-buster weapons. No
one gets congratulations and credit for not committing
war crimes for a day, or a week. That is not how the
international system is structured, and nor how it
should ever be. If we look for an indicator of Russia's
intentions, as we heard from Under-Secretary-General
O'Brien, there is the leaflet that Russian and Syrian
planes passed out. What is said in the Council sounds
so benevolent that one would think Russia is like the
Red Cross.

And then there is the leaflet, which is what they
dropped into the actual theatre where desperate civilians
are living. I will read out from the leaflet, which states,

"This is your last hope. Save yourselves. If you
do not leave these areas immediately, you will be
annihilated. We have opened a safe exit passage
for you. Make a quick decision. Save yourselves.
You know that everyone has given up on you. They
have left you alone to face your doom, and help is
available from on one."

Would the Russian Ambassador state for the record
that Russia had nothing to do with these leaflets, which
came out of Russian and Syrian planes? I ask those
on the Council who support the Syrian regime if this
is a leaflet behind which they would also throw their
weight? Russia cannot have it both ways, pretending
to care about the well-being of the people in eastern
Aleppo, while at the same time threatening to annihilate
those who remain in their homes.

The representative of Russia made an announcement
with regard to six humanitarian corridors and urged
people, including those who were armed, as well as
medical evacuation units, to take those corridors. We
worked very hard with the United Nations and others
to try to use whatever influence we could to make
that happen. Here was our challenge. The families of
those who needed medical evacuation or, as was said
today, "the so-called wounded" - they are not the so-
called wounded; they are the wounded by your bombs,
Sir - notwithstanding their grave and potentially fatal
injuries, were terrified. They were terrified ofentrusting
their fates to the people who had been bombing their
neighbourhoods. That is an unfortunate fact, but it is
not a crazy one. How would we have reacted if we had
been there and subjected to the siege; if Russia and the
Syrian regime had refused to allow food in since 7 July;
if a leaflet threatening annihilation had been sent; and
if we had been told, "Here are your six corridors. Come
trust us. We have a humanitarian objective; we want to
help you with your medical issues."

We threw our weight behind it because we were so
desperate, as well, to get these people out and we wanted
to support the World Health Organization and the
United Nations in their on-the-ground tactical efforts.
They do not become "so-called wounded" just because
they are terrified of ending up like the people in the
Caesar photographs. They are wounded, desperate and
terrified of being pulverized by the Russian Federation
and the Syrian regime.

Today, we have spoken a lot about both sides of
Aleppo, but Under-Secertary-General O'Brien also
referenced the shelling in Idlib. I would ask the members
of the Council who have not already done so - and it
is very hard to make oneself do this - to look at the
photographs of what happened in Hass today. Look at
the kids carrying their backpacks - frozen - as they
attempted to go to school before being hit either by the
Russian Federation or the Syrian regime. More than
a dozen parachute bombs fell on a school today. It is
not history. It is not Srebrenica 20 years ago. It is not
Rwanda 22 years ago. It is Grozny, but it is today and
in eastern Aleppo.

The Ambassador of the Russian Federation said
that if we needed to be preached to, we would go to
church. Given what is happening, I think that it might
be useful if more people went to church.

