The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council this year, I should
like to extend my very warm wishes for a fruitful new
year to all members of the Council, the United Nations
and the Secretariat.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome the new
members of the Council: Angola, Chile, Germany,
Pakistan and Spain. We all look forward with
confidence to their participation in the work of the
Council. We are convinced that their experience and
wisdom will be of invaluable assistance in the
discharge of the Council's enormous responsibilities.

I take this opportunity also to express the
Council's deep gratitude to the outgoing members -
Colombia, Ireland, Mauritius, Norway and
Singapore- for their important contribution to the
business of the Council.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President

The President (spoke in French): Equally, I take
this opportunity to pay tribute on behalf of the Council
to His Excellency Mr. Alfonso Valdivieso, Permanent
Representative of Colombia to the United Nations, for
his service as President of the Security Council for the
month of December 2002. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Valdivieso for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Children and armed conflict

Report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2002/1299)


The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Austria, Bahrain, Burundi, Canada,
Colombia, Costa Rica, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Greece, Indonesia,
Israel, Japan, Liechtenstein, Malawi, Monaco,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, the Philippines, Rwanda,
Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Switzerland and Ukraine, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pfanzelter
(Austria), Mr. Saleh (Bahrain), Mr. Nteturuye
(Burundi), Mr. Laurin (Canada), Mr. Valdivieso
(Colombia), Mr. Stagno (Costa Rica), Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo),
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador), Mr. Atta
(Egypt), Mr. Hussein (Ethiopia), Mr. Vassilakis
(Greece), Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia), Mr. Mekel
(Israel), Mr. Saiga (Japan), Mr. Schurti
(Liechtenstein), Mr. Lamba (Malawi),
Mr. Boisson (Monaco), Mr. Swe (Myanmar),
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia), Mr. Sharma (Nepal),
Mr. Manalo (Philippines), Mr. Gasana (Rwanda),
Mr. Rowe (Sierra Leone), Mr. Kim (Slovenia),
Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) and Mr. Kuchinsky
(Ukraine) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Olara Otunnu,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.

It is so decided.

I invite the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to
take a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund.

It is so decided.

I invite the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2002/ 1299, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.

I shall now make a few preliminary comments.

The report before the Council today has been
submitted pursuant to resolution 1379 (2001), adopted
by consensus at the initiative of my country just over a
year ago. This important report should be followed up.

Following the adoption of resolution 1379 (2001),
we are now in the implementation phase. It is
scandalous that children should be recruited and used
in armed conflict, in the light of which outrage is
insufficient. We must act. The report of the Secretary-
General calls on us to do so by taking stock of progress
made last year and by submitting, at the Council's
request, a list of parties to armed conflicts that recruit
or use children. I hope that our discussion today will
allow us to define clear guidelines for the follow-up to
the report. In this respect, I would recall that
consultations are under way with a view to the
Council's adopting a follow-up resolution.

I welcome the Secretary-General and call on him
to address the Council.


