I thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to address the Council in the presence of His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, whose country currently holds the rotating presidency of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). My statement is aimed at taking stock of the support that the international community, and more particularly the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), have provided over the past few months to operationalize the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel. As members are aware, at the request of the Council the Secretariat has just carried out an assessment of MINUSMA's support to the Joint Force. The conclusions of the assessment are taken into account in the Secretary-General's latest report on MINUSMA of 2 June 2020 (S/2020/476). Since the last meeting of the Security Council on the Sahel on January 15 (see S/PV.8703) and despite the current context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the fight against terrorism and the matter of development in the Sahel region continue to mobilize the international community at the regional, continental and international levels in order to stem the violence and create a conducive environment for peace and prosperity. Efforts to mobilize additional resources continue, while the African Union and regional organizations continue to provide political support to the G-5 Sahel's fight against terrorism and poverty. Since last year, there has been tangible and encouraging progress in the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel, notably through the reform of its permanent secretariat and the development of management and decision-making tools. At the operational level, progress has been made in strengthening the Joint Force, through force generation efforts, the revision of its strategic concept of operation and the operationalization of the Sahelian Threat Analysis and Early Warning Centre. In addition, the establishment of a joint command mechanism in Niamey has strengthened coordination with other international forces. All of those efforts have resulted in the Joint Force launching a major military operation, known as Sama, which is currently under way and progressing well. Against that background, MINUSMA's support to the Joint Force through the provision of water, rations and fuel, as mandated by the Security Council, has also been critical. In the past months, the consumption and disbursement rate of the support provided by the Mission - so generously funded by the European Union - has increased from 21 per cent to almost 50 per cent. I am pleased to note that, on 3 June, the European Union Ambassador to Mali and Special Representative Annadif handed to General Namata Gazama, Commander of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, its new temporary headquarters. The support of MINUSMA and the European Union ensured a rapid completion of the temporary structures. The provision of life support consumables by the Mission has been proved particularly useful, and at times critical, to sustaining the Joint Force. However, and as outlined in the reports of the Secretary-General on the Joint Force (S/2020/373) and on Mali, the limitations of the current support model present significant obstacles. Transporting rations and fuel to Joint Force contingents remains the biggest challenge. MINUSMA has done its utmost to accommodate requests within the framework of its mandate and the technical arrangement. The Mission has added additional drop-off locations for life support consumables within Mali as close to the Joint Force's areas of operation as possible. However, MINUSMA is operating at maximum capacity and cannot go further in its support to the Joint Force with the mandate and resources with which it has currently been bestowed. As requested by the Council, the Secretariat carried out an assessment. It concluded that international support to the Joint Force remained crucial, but that the current support model was not suited to addressing the Joint Force's transport and equipment shortages. In that regard, the assessment defined different options, ranging from a comprehensive support package to some more modest adjustments to the existing system. The comprehensive support package includes a dedicated, separate United Nations support office providing full logistical and operational support, funded by United Nations assessed contributions or at least supported through a dedicated trust fund. Those would be temporary arrangements to allow the G-5 Sahel Joint Force to build its own capacities. A second category of options aims at addressing immediate challenges in the short term. The options include strengthening the G-5 Sahel Joint Force's capacity to procure and provide life support for its contingents, as well to conduct medical evacuations outside of Mali; readjusting the current support model to allow other partners to contract their own freight-forwarding companies for the delivery of life support closer to the Joint Force's areas of operations; authorizing MINUSMA to undertake the delivery of life support supplies beyond its area of operations; expanding MINUSMA engineering support. In line with the outcome of the assessment, I would like to iterate once again the Secretary-General's call for a comprehensive support package, funded by assessed contributions. That would not only allow for predictable and sustainable support, it would also make it easier to pursue a long-term strategy to phase out the support and render the Joint Force autonomous. In addition, it would free up MINUSMA to dedicate itself completely to supporting the peace process and the stabilization of central Mali. Expecting MINUSMA to do more in addressing transportation gaps would require expanding the Mission's mandate. Any authorization for MINUSMA to do more in support of the Joint Force would require additional resources and consistent and continuous fundraising. The generous financial support of the European Union has been critical to sustain the support MINUSMA has provided to the Joint Force so far, and I express my profound gratitude to the European Union in that regard. I call on the international community and the other donors to come forward and support this important cause. The G-5 Sahel Joint Force is on the right track, but there is still a long way to go. Strengthening the Joint Force is only one strand in the comprehensive international approach required to tackle the root causes of instability in Mali and the Sahel region. Improving governance, eradicating poverty and protecting the human rights of all citizens, including the most disenfranchised, remain critical and more needs to be done to ensure that such efforts are given the same weight as military operations. As a result of the political commitment at the highest level of its contributing States, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force has laid the groundwork to integrate international human rights law and international humanitarian law obligations into the planning, conduct and review of military operations. However, efforts remain necessary to fully uphold this commitment. Preventing, mitigating and addressing violations during operations are crucial, and the United Nations remains committed to continuing its support to the G-5 Sahel in addressing challenges, in close coordination with other stakeholders. Strengthening the police component of the Joint Force would be an important step not only in improving the oversight of military operations, but also in sustaining efforts by linking them to State-building, support of the justice sector and prison reform and efforts under the human rights compliance framework. I welcome the launch of the Partnership for Stability and Security in the Sahel in that regard. I also urge the Joint Force and the G-5 Sahel member States to spare no effort for the full establishment and implementation of the different pillars of the human rights compliance framework. The past six months have been particularly challenging. The COVID-19 outbreak has added another layer of complexity to the already highly complex and challenging security situation in the Sahel. We are seeing attempts by terrorist and other groups in the region to capitalize on the pandemic in order to undermine State authority and destabilize Governments. Attacks on national and international forces, as well as civilians, who continue to bear the brunt of the instability, continue unabated. Innocent lives are lost every day. Schools remain closed, and many are denied access to the most basic social services. Even in the best circumstances, it will take years to rebuild affected communities in the Sahel and sustained efforts to ensure that nobody is left behind. In the face of such loss and devastation, we cannot be passive. The international community can be successful in the fight against terrorism only if we stand united and follow a comprehensive, joint approach. Despite the difficult start to this year, there have been some positive developments that give us hope. I welcome the establishment of the Coalition for the Sahel following the summit in Pau in January, which provides a broader framework to coordinate security, development and governance initiatives in the region. It will remain important that we continue to lend our support to regional initiatives, including the Economic Community of West African States and the African Union. In conclusion, let me reiterate that we have a shared responsibility for the Sahel. We must each deliver our part of a promise to help provide much-needed relief and empowerment to the populations across the region who need it most. Let us together strive for a solution that is the most effective and practical and that makes it possible to bring about lasting change, to the benefit of the most disenfranchised.
