Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I commend Special
Representative Filho, Ambassador Ndong Mba and
Ambassador Vieira for their insightful briefings on
the most recent developments in Guinea-Bissau and
their tireless efforts to bring peace and stability to the
country. I thank Ms. Tavares Pinto for highlighting
the role of civil-society organizations and women's
groups in facilitating a dialogue between the main
political actors. I also warmly welcome the presence of
Prime Minister Gomes at this meeting. We endorse the
Secretary-General's semi-annual report (S/2018/771)
and would like to follow up with some observations.

We welcome the encouraging steps taken by
all parties to end the protracted political stalemate
in Guinea-Bissau, including the approval of the
Government programme and the adoption of a budget.
We greatly appreciate the good offices of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and the mediation efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States, whose
collectiveeffortshaveledtothosepositivedevelopments.

There is now a need for expeditious preparations
for the upcoming legislative and presidential elections.
We welcome the commitments by international
partners to providing the necessary technical, logistical
and financial support for the electoral process and
call on the Government of Guinea-Bissau to make
progress on the measures needed for the timely,
credible and fair conduct of the elections. We also call
on all parties to promptly take the necessary steps to
implement the remaining provisions of the Conakry
Agreement, including the adoption of a stability pact
and constitutional review. Political stability can be
achieved only through the continuing implementation
of political reforms aimed at strengthening governing
bodies, and in order to develop guiding principles for
those reforms the country needs an open and inclusive
nationwide dialogue.

In addition to that, we need to work on establishing
the most effective possible measures for ensuring the
country's stability and resilience through increased
support to existing development plans and the United
Nations peacebuilding plan, with a special focus on
education and health care. Ensuring the participation
of women and young people at every stage and level of
the political process is equally important. We call on all
donors to provide the necessary funds for implementing
all such measures.
Another matter of concern for all of us remains
the perils of drug-trafficking and transnational
organized crime, with their multidimensional impact
on the economy, overall security and community and
individual well-being. National engagement is critical
to implementing the various international programmes
and projects aimed at strengthening the security,judicial
and law-enforcement sectors. We therefore call on the
Guinea-Bissau authorities to continue strengthening
the country's national institutional framework and
response to these perilous threats, in close cooperation
with UNIOGBIS, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and INTERPOL.

In conclusion, we would like to extend our full
support to the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and reaffirm our readiness to
cooperate closely with all the relevant parties to support
the peacebuilding and consolidation efforts in Guinea-
Bissau.

