Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by congratulating Venezuela on its
accession to the presidency of the Council this month
and by thanking the Venezuelan delegation for its
considerable efforts and transparency in organizing the
Council's work in February. I would also like to thank
the delegation of Uruguay for its work in presiding
over the Council last month. I take this opportunity to
congratulate our sister nation Egypt on its membership
of the Council. We wish the Egyptian Ambassador and
his team every success in their work in service of Egypt
and the Arab world. I also congratulate Japan, Senegal,
Ukraine and Uruguay on their election to the Security
Council.

The Iraqi delegation would like to express its great
appreciation for the efforts of the Jordanian delegation
in representing the Group of Arab States in the Security
Council during the past two years. I am heartily grateful
to Mrs. Kawar and her team for their work on behalf
of the Arab region, which is currently going through
difficult times. And I thank Chad, Chile, Lithuania and
Nigeria for their efforts on the Security Council over
the past two years.

We offer our sincere condolences to the Egyptian
delegation, and indeed to all the staff of the United
Nations, on the passing of former Secretary-General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali.

I would like to thank Mr. Jan Kubis, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
and his team for their efforts. They have rendered great
service to Iraq at a very difficult time.

The war against international
terrorism - which includes combatants from more
than 100 countries - together with the fall in oil
prices, the rebuilding of infrastructure and the
restoration of basic services for the displaced in
the cities that have been liberated from Da'esh, all
represent significant challenges for Iraq. Iraq now has
some 3 million internally displaced persons who left
the towns occupied by Da'esh in the wake of its acts
of terrorism and are now in urgent need of assistance
from the international community and international
organizations if they are to be able to deal with these
problems and their consequences. What is especially
needed is the provision of essential services for the
refugees and the displaced, including women, children
and ethnic and religious minorities, as well as the
establishment of conditions that will enable them to
return home and ensure their safety in the liberated
towns.

We are grateful to the United States and the
countries that have committed to helping to finance
stabilization programmes for Iraq's liberated regions.
On behalf of my delegation, I would also like to thank
all the member States of the international coalition,
the countries of the European Union and other nations
that are not members of the coalition for the part they
have played in fighting terrorism and for the military
and logistical support they have given the Iraqi
security forces, while respecting Iraq's sovereignty and
territorial integrity. They have coordinated their action
with the security forces and have avoided bombing
civilian targets, in accordance with the message we
delivered through the Security Council in 2014. We
would also like to thank the Security Council for
urging the international community to strengthen its
assistance to the Government of Iraq in its efforts to
combat Da'esh and the armed groups affiliated with it.

We would first like to ask the Security Council
to encourage countries to implement resolutions 2170
(2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015), including those
provisions having to do with border controls and
halting the flow of fighters, as well as those related
to the prevention of access to arms, the Internet and
so forth. We also request that the Council demand
that Turkey withdraw the troops whose presence is a
violation of Iraqi sovereignty. The Government of Iraq
was not consulted about their entry into Iraq, which is a
flagrant violation of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, the provisions of international law and
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

The Government of Iraq pays tribute to the efforts
and the bravery of the Iraqi security forces and the tribal
combatants who are fighting together with them under
a unified central command. We pay tribute to them
for their military successes, including the retaking of
the western, northern and southern areas of the city of
Ramadi, and their continued and unflagging efforts
to liberate the eastern part of the city in order to be
able to return those displaced from it. These joint and
united forces continue to labour to fully retake the city
captured by Da'esh.

Iraq has continued to work to strengthen its ties to
other Arab countries and its neighbours, particularly
Kuwait, Jordan, Iran and Saudi Arabia. I should also
point out that we are in constant contact with the
Syrian Government. Iraq remains as fully engaged on
the judicial as on the military front. It is committed to
achieving progress on the Kuwaiti issue. The Secretary
responsible for this case, along with all ofhis employees,
has been transferred to the Ministry of Defence. All
the archives, bodies, equipment, databases and files
have also been transferred to the Ministry of Defence
along with him in order to guarantee that the work on
this issue continues. It was also done to guarantee the
continuation of hearings in order to obtain information
on the disappeared Kuwaitis and those disappeared
from third-party countries.

On 10 January, the Committee met with Mr. Falah
Daham, a witness from the Doha region in Kuwait,
in order to collect the information he possessed. The
Ministry for Foreign Affairs has continued to publish
announcements in the local press, without ceasing, in
order to encourage citizens to come forth and provide
any information they may have on the location of mass
graves, archives or any other Kuwaiti property.

Kuwait and Iraq are in constant communications in
order to update the project of delineating the borders.
The most recent event in that context was the high-
level meeting of the Iraq-Kuwait Joint Ministerial
Committee, which was held in Kuwait in December
2015. The participants in the meeting addressed a
number of issues, especially those of common interest
economically, politically, socially and environmentally.

Iraq is faithful to its commitments, especially
with regard to the protection of the residents of Camp
Hurriya. The Iraqi Council of Ministers is responsible
for working with Ms. Jane Holl Lute, the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General for Relocation of
Camp Hurriya Residents Outside of Iraq, who is
responsible for their assistance. She has visited a
number of different countries to convince them to take
in and host the residents of the Camp. We are working
with the Special Adviser to find a permanent situation
for the residents of the Camp.

Finally, we would like to thank Mr. Jan Kubis and
his team for their assistance and for their very helpful
advice provided to the Iraqi Government as well as for
the UNAMI activities in Iraq to create a unified, stable
Iraq without terrorists.

