Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The Government of my country has read the
forty-first monthly report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/623). We note that certain parts ofthe report are
somewhat different from previous reports. Nonetheless,
we regret that, yet again, the authors of the report
have overlooked the real reasons for the deterioration
of the living conditions of Syrian citizens. The report
also ignores the real obstacles that are preventing
humanitarian assistance from reaching those who need
it. Foremost among them are the following.

First is the extremely critical security situation as
a result of the terrorism of Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front
and associated groups, entities and individuals. In
addition, there has been infighting among these armed
terrorist groups for a while now. They are the ones who
are impeding humanitarian convoys access, mining the
roads used by convoys or failing to agree to monitor
crossing points.

Secondly, coercive unilateral economic measures
are being imposed by the United States, the European
Union and other States. These measures affect first
and foremost the Syrian people and, as a result, have
seriously impacted humanitarian conditions in Syria,
including basic services, such as health care, water,
electricity and education. The logistical difficulties
are enormous and prevent us from implementing the
humanitarian plans. For example, the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent has very few trucks and lacks fuel, not
to mention the air strikes carried out by the United
States targeting power stations, water stations and
other infrastructure.

Thirdly, the Governments of donor countries
have reneged on the pledges about which they brag
at international conferences from which the Syrian
Government is completely excluded, even though it
is the primary party concerned. This is why current
humanitarian financing is only 21 per cent of what is
needed. This is a major obstacle, yet it is completely
ignored by the authors of the report.

Fourthly, certain regional and international parties
are continuously intervening in Syrian affairs in a
negative way, with a view to achieving their destructive
agendas, prolonging the Syrian crisis and obstructing
efforts aimed at reaching a peaceful political resolution
through a Syrian-led political process, without foreign
intervention, which the United Nations has repeatedly
endorsed. I know whereof I speak. As representatives
are aware, I was away for three months during which
time I was deeply involved in the Astana and Geneva
processes. I know very well who was impeding the
agreements in Astana and Geneva.

Today we are meeting to discuss the forty-
first report. We have been engaging in this monthly
exercise for three and a half years now. We continue
to read reports that are clearly lacking in expertise and
professionalism. We have also listened to malicious
briefings, once from Amman and others from Beirut
and Geneva, yet we have not heard no briefing from
the United Nations representatives in Damascus. These
reports contradict the noble humanitarian objectives
that are supposed to be achieved through a process that
can succeed only with cooperation, coordination and
humanitarian partnership that are free from any political
consideration, between the Syrian Government, on the
one hand, and the United Nations, on the other.

I would like to refer to what Ms. Mueller said a
while ago from Amman. In all her briefings, she has
never mentioned the least form of cooperation with the
Syrian Government. Not once has she mentioned any
cooperation whatsoever with the Syrian Government.
She mentioned aid that she had provided to 8 million
people. In other words, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) had helped 8 million
people, but where did this happen? Did it happen on
Mars or perhaps on Jupiter? She noted that she had
provided humanitarian aid that reached millions of
different people. Perhaps on the planet Venus, where
there is no Government. She did not say that she had
carried out these positive activities in cooperation
with the Syrian Government. OCHA would not have
been able to do that without the cooperation of the
Syrian Government. However, she did not mention a
word about any cooperation of the Syrian Government
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and other United Nations agencies.

This what we mean when we say there has been
lack of professionalism and maturity with regard to the
United Nations reports on the humanitarian situation in
Syria. We want a humanitarian partnership between our
Government and the Office. OCHA cannot replace the
Syrian Government. We will not allow that to happen
. Ms. Mueller also said: "[W]e and the Syrian people
look to the Security Council [to ensure] that civilians
are protected". Who gave Ms. Mueller the right to speak
on behalf of the Syrian people? How could she overstep
her mandate and say that she and the Syrian people ask
the Security Council to provide protection for civlians?
How dare she say that before the Security Council?

I am sure that, regrettably, the monthly reports
have deliberately been diverted from their objective.
These reports are misused. Instead of trying to help us
to overcome the difficulties that prevent humanitarian
aid from reaching those who need it, these reports are
used to slander the Syrian Government and to apply
pressure to the Syrian Government and its allies in the
fight against terrorism. They are just a cover to channel
humanitarian aid convoys to armed terrorist groups
instead of reaching the Syrian people who need them,
with a view to prolonging the crisis and boosting the
morale of terrorists who use civilians as human shields.

Ms. Mueller cast doubt even on the fact that
terrorists are using civilians as human shields, when
she said that terrorists had allegedly used civilians
as human shields". "Allegedly". Can she really say
these are allegations after all these scandals in Mosul,
Aleppo, Homs, Palmyra and Raqqa. Ms. Mueller is
still unconvinced that Da'esh used civilians as human
shields. She has allegations. She received allegations.

The Syrian Government spares no effort to
assume its responsibilities to improve the living
conditions of Syrian citizens without discrimination.
However, United Nations officials with mandates in
the humanitarian process, particularly in OCHA, have
persistently refused to enter into a genuine humanitarian
partnership with the Syrian Government. They have
opted for the logic of anonymity, for demolishing
the bridges of mutual cooperation and trust and for
questioning its credibility as a humanitarian partner
whose cooperation is inescapable in order to implement
the humanitarian response plans.

In that regard, with the permission of the Under-
Secretary-General and Ms. Mueller, I would like
to present documented information for the official
record. We as a Government take responsibility for
this information, to the effect that there are officials of
international and United Nations agencies working on
the ground in Syria who prefer to distance themselves
from the contents of the monthly reports of the
Secretary-General with respect to the activities of their
agencies in Syria. Those agencies have confirmed to
us that they had not provided the reported information
to OCHA. Those agencies have even rejected the
inclusion of this information in the monthly reports in
such a negative and fragmented way because it does not
reflect the true nature of the coordination and effective
cooperation with the Syrian Government on the delivery
of humanitarian assistance. That is what we hear from
United Nations representatives in Damascus.

Moreover, those international and United Nations
officials have affirmed that some OCHA officials
encourage those agencies to not cooperate with the
Syrian Government. OCHA seems to be saying that
it does not need the Syrian Government in order to
carry out its humanitarian work, as if the Office were
working on another planet or doing its humanitarian
assistance work on Mars. It goes without saying that
this contradicts the obligations of OCHA towards the
Syrian Government under Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014). In that regard,
my Government draws the attention of the authors
of the report to the fact that the criticism of national
reconciliation sends a message of support to terrorists
and their financiers because this reconciliation is
intended to end the suffering of millions of people
who have been used as human shields by terrorists for
several years now.

The national character of such reconciliation is
based on the following. We offer the opportunity to all
armed persons to regularize their situation, surrender
their weapons and either remain with their families
in their homes or to leave the area included in the
reconciliation agreement and relocate elsewhere. We
have made this offer without the slightest pressure on
the civilians living in those areas. That has allowed a
number of families to return to their homes and to live
normal lives. Does that cause concern to the authors of
the report? Is it not something that they should instead
encourage and even be positively involved in?

With respect to criticizing the reconciliation, the
authors of the report had no qualms about rejecting
any direct accusation of the aircraft of the so-called
international coalition led by the United States. The
coalition uses incendiary weapons, causing the deaths
of thousands of innocent civilians, as well as the
destruction of infrastructure, including dams, bridges,
hospitals, schools, development institutions of the
Syrian people and the economic resources which it
needs for reconstruction. I note in particular wells, and
gas and oil infrastructure.

I would also like to mention the massacres of
civilians in the cities of Mayadin and Al-Bukamal in
May. I would also mention attacks in the villages of
Sur and Dablan, the region of Mayadin, the village of
Ziban on the outskirts of Deir ez-Zor in late June, Tal
al-Shayer on 19 June, Zayanat village on 4 July, and
the village of Kishkish, in southern rural Hasakah
province, on 12 July. Those are just a few examples.

I should like to put a question to the authors of
this report and to all of United Nations officials on
Syrian soil. Are not these losses in human life, which
run into the thousands, as well as the losses to Syrian
infrastructure, which have cost us billions of dollars,
the result of the barbaric bombings of the so-called
international coalition and a cause of the suffering of
the Syrian people? Should not those figures be included
in detail in the monthly reports? Should not the United
Nations take the initiative to pay compensation to
Syrian civilians who have lost their homes, their farms,
their factories and their schools, which the children who
have been killed can no longer attend? Who will pay
the cost of all the losses inflicted by this international
coalition on Syrian power and water stations, dams,
bridges and oil and gas facilities?

The Government of Syria would like to ensure
that the realities concerning the implementation of
the distribution plan for humanitarian aid are clearly
understood, especially for some of the more unstable
regions. To that end, my Government has sent many
messages to the Secretary-General, the Security Council
and the United Nations Office in Geneva, presenting
statistics and precise figures on the humanitarian
convoys, with the help of our national humanitarian
partners. However, the authors of the report and the
representatives of OCHA continue to tamper with those
numbers under an agenda that seeks to pressure my
Government and in fact blackmail it. We want to know
how it is that the authors of the report speak of only two
humanitarian convoys since the beginning of this year,
when the facts and figures clearly show that 48 such
convoys have been able to reach their destinations since
the beginning of 2017. That is an enormous difference.
The report says that two convoys have reached areas
that are very hard to reach, to the benefit of 412,580
families. We say that there were 48 such convoys. I
repeat, 48 humanitarian convoys, not two as stated in
the report.

The report also mentions 11 besieged areas. The
Government of my country reaffirms that terrorist
groups are responsible for the siege of these towns.
Those groups are besieging these towns inside and
out, preventing access to them, using civilians in those
areas as human shields, and denying civilians access
to food, medical and humanitarian aid. In fact, they
are selling those items to civilians at exorbitant prices,
which many cannot afford.

What happened in eastern Aleppo is still fresh in
our minds. We all remember that after the city was
liberated, thousands of tons of food and medical supplies
were discovered to have been stored in areas controlled
by terrorist groups in eastern Aleppo. That scenario
is happening again today in other areas, especially in
eastern Ghouta, outside Damascus. In spite of all that,
the authors of the report, shockingly, have apparently
seen none of what has been happening in these areas,
except what is negative and questionable, while turning
a blind eye to what is real and positive.

There have also been accusations that the Syrian
Government has been confiscating medical equipment.
In this regard, the Government of my country stresses
that the items that have been confiscated are either used
for complex surgeries sent to areas where there are
no hospitals and no specialized medical personnel to
perform such surgeries, or that the number of civilians
in those areas and the amounts of medical equipment
sent to them are sometimes disproportionate. I note in
this regard that the Syrian Government has sometimes
responded to calls to evacuate the injured from regions
considered by the United Nations to be besieged or
hard to reach, removing them to Government hospitals
where the medical infrastructure is better and they can
receive the care they need.

On the other hand, the staff of OCHA have
procrastinated and delayed implementing the
procedures they need to take in order to dispatch the
humanitarian convoys. They have even refused to
send these convoys to many areas that deserve aid and
need help. They have focused on areas where armed
terrorist groups are located and abandoned the regions
where those groups are absent. For instance, the Fu'ah
and Kafraya areas have both been under siege by the
Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist groups for the past
three and a half years. Despite that, the United Nations
has stopped sending humanitarian convoys to either
town - and I am talking about 7,000 Syrian citizens
who are in need of that aid. That has been the case ever
since the so-called Four Towns Agreement came to an
end several months ago. I would therefore like to ask the
Security Council, which is convened today to discuss
the humanitarian situation in my country, Syria, to take
every measure necessary to end the suffering of those
two villages, which are under siege by armed terrorist
groups seeking to commit genocide by shelling, sniping
and starvation, similar to what we saw in the 15 April
bombing of Rashidin, in which, Council members will
recall, more than 120 women and children were killed.

In conclusion, I must emphasize that the noble goal
ofthe humanitarian operation in Syria is to save the lives
of millions of Syrians suffering from the effects of the
crisis and the terrorist war that has been waged on my
country for the past seven years. Its success therefore
depends on establishing a genuine humanitarian
partnership and measures that engender mutual trust
and transparency between the Syrian Government and
the United Nations. I hope that when the next report
is published, the Security Council will be able to hear
from representatives of United Nations agencies who
are actually on Syrian territory.

