Mr. Simonovic (Croatia): The United Nations
Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja
and Western Sirmium (UNTAES) mission is about to be
terminated, as envisioned two years ago, and with almost
all of its objectives fully completed.

This joint success of UNTAES and the Government
of Croatia can serve as an example for other present and
future peacekeeping endeavours around the world. The
conflict in Eastern Slavonia was resolved peacefully and
control of previously occupied territory has reverted to the
legitimate authorities. The reintegration process included
not only administrative aspects, but all important human
elements, reflected in, for instance, the Government's
reconciliation programme.

An important reason for the success of this mission
was the appearance of a credible threat of force in the
peace process in 1995. What followed was Croatia's
conscious decision to avoid the direct use of this force in
the case of Eastern Slavonia, opting instead for the
peaceful method of reintegration, with the assistance and
support of the international community. Two issues
played an important role in our decision: first, the human
costs of a military operation would be significant for all
sides involved; and secondly, Croatia's firm commitment
to long-term peace and stability in the broader area. We
had also taken into account that the Serbs who rebelled
against Croatia did so due to external factors and that
many of them preferred to live in Croatia as loyal
citizens, sharing equal rights and duties.

An equally important reason for the success of the
mission was the commitment of the international
community to work in cooperation with the Government
by providing some of its vast resources and knowledge in
the area of conflict resolution and by giving UN TAES an
active and dynamic mandate. The matrix of success was
completed when the Security Council added to the clarity
of the mandate by appointing Transitional Administrators
with skills in assertive leadership. We commend both
General Klein and Ambassador Walker for their superb
performance.

 

The success of UNTAES can be seen in many areas,
but we believe that success is best reflected by the
following: the documents programme; government spending
in the region; the reconciliation programme; public
overtures to the residents of the region; and the notable
number of returns.

The Croatian Government has issued over 154,000
citizenship certificates in the region. This number exceeds
the present population estimates for the region by more
than 30,000, which indicates that former rebels now living
in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina also received documents in the region. Only
888 applications for citizenship were rejected.

The Government has dedicated enormous resources to
the region, despite its strict fiscal policy of non-inflationary
spending and despite numerous obstacles. For example, it
is not receiving any tax revenue from the region; it has had
to cope with huge, extraordinary costs related to the care of
hundreds of thousands of its own displaced persons and
Bosnian refugees; and, finally, it is still incurring
extraordinary social costs common to all transition
economies. The financial support from the international
community has been marginal. Croatia has spent $1.7
billion for the reconstruction of reintegrated territories. Less
than 3 per cent has come from the international community,
as Mr. Walker pointed out in Geneva yesterday.

In spite of the fact that the wounds inflicted by war
were still fresh, the Government adopted a reconciliation
programme. The National Council established to implement
the reconciliation programme has been very active and
productive.

The Government has also made numerous public
overtures to the former rebels. High Government officials
have been active and visible in assuring the former rebels
that, having accepted its citizenship, they have a place in
Croatia. The President of Croatia alone has made eight such
public appeals over the past two years.

Croatia is also a success story in regard to the return
of internally and externally displaced persons to their
homes. All together, 28,000 persons formerly affiliated with
the rebel/occupying forces have returned: 9,500 from the
region and 18,500 from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Moreover, 6,000 victims of
aggression have returned to the region; a larger return can
be expected in the spring.

Croatia welcomes the draft resolution before the
Council today. The draft resolution is clear in that the
Transitional Administration in the region and the
UNTAES mandate will terminate on 15 January. This
clarity can only help the reintegration process.

The draft resolution also provides for assistance in
the area of police monitoring, as requested by the
Croatian Government. Croatia has made this request for
monitoring consistent with its policy of openness. Croatia
is probably one of the most transparent countries in the
world. It has opened its doors to over 2,000 international
organizations and over 300 organizations which monitor
and report, in one way or another, on human rights in
Croatia.

In spite of the many positive elements it contains,
we believe that the draft resolution overlooks two
important issues. First, it does not give proper focus with
respect of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. Paragraph 11 calls specifically only
on Croatia to cooperate with the Tribunal. Although the
draft resolution deals with the region, which was occupied
for a period of time by Serbia and Montenegro, whose
armed forces were involved in grave war crimes, it fails
to mention the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Three
Yugoslav army officers have been indicted by the
Tribunal for crimes committed in the region, and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia refuses to extradite them.

In addition, the draft resolution fails to reflect that
the former rebels are reintegrating not only into Croatia,
but also into the vibrant Serb community in Croatia. A
substantial segment of the Serb community has remained
to live in Croatia, sharing the destiny and hardships of all
other citizens of Croatia. The former rebels should also
look to this group as a bridge for full reintegration into
Croatian society and public life.

With the ending of the UNTAES mandate, Croatia
ends one important period of its history and begins
another. The present period has been characterized by
State-building, affirmation of long-denied identity and
mere survival. Now we are entering a period of
development where quality of life for all its citizens takes
centre stage. We will continue to count on the
international community for support in this important
regard. However, we hope that the character of
cooperation can take a new form. For example, in the
area of human rights, we hope that the policy of
monitoring can be supplemented with concrete technical
assistance.

 

I should like to conclude by expressing once more
Croatia's gratitude to the international community, and
especially to the men and women of UNTAES, for the
positive role it has played in Croatia. We hope that the
experience in Croatia can serve as a model for future
United Nations operations, and my Government would be
pleased to contribute its newly gained knowledge in this
regard.

