Mr. Jandrokovic' (Croatia): In considering the
situation in the Middle East over the course of this
year, my delegation has continued to be guided by one
word: "hope". Indeed, 2008 seems to be a year of hope
for peace in the Middle East. While there was nothing
a year ago, now we have the Annapolis process under
way, solid and substantive. The parties are negotiating
regularly and at all levels. There have been challenges,
and there will be further challenges. But that should
not be used to distract or derail the talks.

The efforts that the parties are investing in the
process should be praised. The international

community, including the Council, should do its utmost
to support them in making the compromises required to
achieve the shared goal of arriving at an agreement in
accordance with the agreed terms of reference by the
end of this year. And even if the process takes longer
than foreseen, that will in no way diminish the
commitment of the parties, nor will it diminish the
hope for peace.

We have listened with attention to the speakers
this morning. Over the past months, we in the Council
have been closely following the process and have
repeatedly voiced concerns over the gap persisting
between the vigorous political engagement and
developments on the ground. We recognize the need to
make tangible progress on the ground by implementing
mutual Road Map obligations and by refraining from
confidence-eroding steps, which could negatively
affect the dynamics of the peace talks.

The issue of settlements is a sensitive and
difficult one, and it is being addressed by the parties
within the framework of bilateral talks. The settlement
activities have also been addressed by key international
actors, including the Quartet. The Quartet will meet
again in a couple of hours' time, followed by an iftar
with Arab partners, hosted by the Secretary-General.
The Quartet meeting is taking place at a critical
moment and offers an opportunity to review and take
stock of the process in all its aspects. It should be an
opportunity to send a clear and effective message of
encouragement and guidance to the negotiating parties.

Croatia is mindful of the challenges that the
parties and the peace process face, but we should not
lose sight of the overall framework of the process or of
timing and contextual considerations. We believe that
none of the obligations arising from the Road Map can
be read in isolation from the others: they are mutual
obligations, arising for both sides, and need to be
assessed together, in their totality.

We understand that both sides are making an
effort to improve conditions on the ground and that
much more can be done. We are pleased by the signals
indicating that the downward slide of the past few
years has been halted in the West Bank. We appreciate
the reform efforts that the Palestinian Authority is
making under the able leadership of Mr. Fayyad, and
we hope that that momentum can be continued and
augmented through consistent donor support.

The ability of the Palestinian Authority to build
credible institutions and to manage security and law
and order is of key importance for both sides. Not only
is it an essential element of Palestinian State-building;
it is also a legitimate expectation of the Israeli side.
Israel must have confidence that the two-State solution
will not compromise the safety and security of its
citizens. That can be achieved only if there is a viable,
responsible and democratic Palestinian State by its side -
a State that is willing and able to combat terrorism and
anarchy.

This is a crucial time for the peace process; we
should be careful not to abandon or destroy it. The
objective is clear and well established: a two-State
solution with a safe and secure Israel and a democratic,
viable and peaceful Palestinian State, living side by
side within secure and recognized borders.

