Mr. Teesalu (Estonia): Allow me to express my
sincere gratitude to the Dominican Republic, this
month's President ofthe Security Council, for convening
an open debate on such a highly relevant topic.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Climate change has severe security implications.
We are clearly seeing the existential threat it poses
to the very survival of many small island developing
States. Knowledge surrounding the threat of climate
change to small island developing States and other low-
lying coastal areas dates as far back as 1990, but we
have yet to take concrete steps to change the course of
these developments. The accumulation of the effects of
climate-related disasters will inevitably have a direct
impact on people's livelihoods, which will be especially
devastating in already fragile areas.

The slow onset sea-level rise may seem like
something in the distant future, when in fact the
devastating impacts of climate change are already felt
today. For instance, in the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel
region, the effects of climate change are multipliers of
poverty, instability, hunger and violence.

Recent scientific data show that the effects of
climate change are taking place much faster than
previously thought. The world's leading climate
scientists have warned that only a dozen years remain
for global warming to be kept to a maximum of 1.5°C. In
order to effectively respond to security threats, we need
to strengthen climate resilience, disaster preparedness
and disaster response. That can be achieved only
through coordinated action, both on a domestic as well
as on an international level.

My country, Estonia, has traditionally not been at
the forefront of major climate disasters, but shifting
climate patterns have lately had a considerable effect
on our agriculture and forestry sectors. As a response
to that, we are developing expertise on how to combat
forest fires, and we are supporting similar projects
in the region. Even though such cooperation projects
might provide only a small-scale example, they still
illustrate very well how the experience we are gaining
by increasing resilience to climate change impacts can
benefit our partners in enhancing their own resilience.

Climate change and its effects are without a doubt
extremely complex, which in turn means that we need
to strive for a holistic approach and comprehensive
strategic planning to ensure our preparedness for such
effects. It is essential to make continuous efforts to
integrate climate change across sectors in national and
regional planning. To ensure ownership and the full
implementation of such plans, all interest groups of
society need to be included in the process, including
especially women and youth.

Furthermore, the linkages between climate change
and poverty, food, water and energy security, migration
and conflict need to be made more explicit in order to
influence national policy agendas. In this regard, the
Security Council can and should take a more systematic
approach to considering the climate-change factor
as a cause of and multiplier in conflict situations.
Estonia fully supports the Secretary-General's focus
on prevention. In this regard, taking into account and
including a focus on the negative effects of climate
change in Security Council-mandated missions
can make a difference in the outcome of conflict-
resolution processes.

Finally, we in Estonia, being at the forefront of
innovation and digitalization of the society, believe
that climate resilience is an area in which the tools of
modern technology can be used, as proved by early-
warning systems. Our long-term strategy foresees
promoting the development of innovative technologies,
products and services that reduce emissions. We aim to
invest more in new solutions that support a low-carbon
and more energy-efficient and climate-resilient world.
Our cooperation efforts focus especially on the situation
of the most endangered countries: the least developed
ones. We are proud also to be contributors to and
collaborators in projects that enhance responsiveness
and adaptation to climate change in the Pacific small
island developing States.

In conclusion, allow me to assure the Council that
Estonia is fully committed to the fight against global
climate change. This will also be one of Estonia's
priorities should we be elected to the Security Council
for the period 2020-2021. We firmly believe that it is
our responsibility to take effective action to combat
climate change, including its direct implications for
peace and security.

