Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, as well as Ms. Raemer for their briefings.
We welcome the consistent practice of receiving two
written reports per year.

The date of 23 December marks the third
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016)
and there is no reason to be optimistic. The situation
on the ground is bogging down, making a solution
seem more distant than ever. We regret to note that the
negative developments on the ground go hand-in-hand
with the questioning of the fundamental legal principles
on which the settlement of the conflict is based.

One of the fundamental legal principles is the
illegality of the settlement policy. The Belgian and,
more broadly, the European position is clear in this
respect. Settlement-building is a flagrant violation of
international law, including resolution 2334 (2016).
It makes the prospects for a two-State solution
more remote.

However, we must note that, since the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016), the settlement policy has been
pursued at a steady pace in the West Bank, targeting
particularly symbolic locations, such as the old city
of Hebron or East Jerusalem. The settlement policy
is implemented through actions like demolitions and
evictions, the total number of which have sharply
increased over the past two years, according to the
2019 figures. We call on Israel to end this policy.
In that context, we also emphasize the importance
of preserving the status quo of the holy places in
Jerusalem. We reiterate our deepest concern at the
declarations relating to a possible unilateral annexation
of all or part ofthe West Bank. Such annexation is illegal
under international law and will not be recognized
by Belgium.

Finally, we reiterate our deep concern at the
worrisome increase in demolitions and the confiscation
of infrastructure and humanitarian projects in Area
C. We urge the Israeli authorities to put an end to that
practice and to restore or grant compensation for the
damage incurred.

The security situation in Gaza remains extremely
fragile. We recall the critical obligation of parties to
respect the rules of international humanitarian and
human rights law. We call on all parties to continue to
exercise the utmost restraint in order to avoid another
violence episode. Thorough investigations must be
carried out with respect to accusations of international
humanitarian rights violations.

We reiterate the importance ofrespecting the right to
peaceful protest and the responsibility of the organizers
to ensure the peaceful conduct of such demonstrations.

There will be no lasting solution in Gaza without
the return of the Palestinian Authority. In that view,
we reiterate our call on the Palestinian factions to
engage in the reconciliation process in good faith. We
encourage Palestinian leaders to work to build strong,
inclusive, accountable and democratic institutions,
based on respect for the rule of law and human rights.
It is important that elections take place throughout
Palestinian territory in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and in the Gaza Strip. We call on all parties,
including Israel, to facilitate the process to this end.

We remain convinced that there is no other option
than a negotiated solution, based on the coexistence
of two States, with the city of Jerusalem as the capital
of both States, in accordance with internationally
agreed parameters. Belgium will continue to work to
that end in order to meet the legitimate aspirations of
the Palestinians and the Israelis.

