Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank and
congratulate you, Mr. President, for convening this
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) for their
participation in our discussion and for their
comprehensive briefings.

The impact of the HIV/AIDS epidemic on
international peace and security is an issue to which
Portugal attaches the utmost importance. Like others,
we believe that it is the responsibility of the Council to
increasingly address the new challenges that undermine
world peace, security and stability - be it the traffic in
drugs, people and guns; certain consequences of
climate change, from food security to loss of territory
and forced migration; development issues, as discussed
under the presidency of Brazil; or the subject we are
addressing today: enduring large scale epidemics as a
challenge to international security.

In this context, I wish also to mention
tuberculosis, which is so often associated with AIDS
and which kills hundreds of thousands every year. I
take this occasion to extend a warm welcome to the
Secretary-General' s Special Envoy to Stop
Tuberculosis, President Jorge Sampaio, who has joined
us today. Allow me to commend UNAIDS and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) for
their progress report entitled "On the Front Line", not
only for the clear picture it gives us of the progress
made in the implementation of resolution 1308 (2000)
but also for the recommendations it includes, which
provide us with a road map towards a more
comprehensive response to HIV and AIDS.
Over the past three decades, HIV and AIDS have
taken more than 25 million lives and infected
60 million people around the world. Not only has it
been a major threat to life and human health, but it has

also seriously impacted the economic and social fabric
of many countries in different regions, putting at risk
their stability. Resolution 1308 (2000) was indeed a
milestone in the international response to the epidemic,
as it acknowledged its uniquely devastating impact on
all sectors and levels of society, and its threat, if
unchecked, to the stability and security of many
countries. Furthermore, it centred on the potential
damaging impact of HIV/AIDS on the health of
peacekeeping personnel, including support personnel,
and called for concrete measures and international
cooperation with the objective of better preparing them
for their participation in peacekeeping operations.

Unfortunately, we are still confronted today with
an increasing number of cases of sexual violence in the
context of conflict, at a time when conflicts are
themselves growing in number and intensity. When
combined with HIV/AIDS, such situations become
particularly explosive ones. Indeed, when those two
elements are brought together, they have the potential
to generate devastating consequences for whole regions
and States, striking the most vital elements of society:
their youth, and in particular women and children,
especially when rape is used as a weapon of war and
intimidation.

As we know, there is a high prevalence of HIV
among women who have been victims of sexual
violence. We cannot disregard this fact and its lasting
consequences when we address peacebuilding
strategies in post-conflict societies. Furthermore,
conflict normally fosters the displacement of civilians,
especially women and girls, increasing their exposure
to HIV. In this context, we believe there is a need to
implement effective integrated programmes that
address sexual violence, HIV prevention and AIDS
treatment in conflict and post-conflict settings.

Portugal commends the collaboration between
DPKO and UNAIDS in addressing HIV and AIDS
awareness among peacekeeping personnel, and
believes that the United Nations should take the lead in
setting the highest possible medical standards in
protecting both United Nations personnel and the local
population from this epidemic. In this regard, we
welcome the measures undertaken by DPKO aimed at
improving the awareness programmes for peacekeepers
and peacebuilders, and, in particular, having HIV and
AIDS advisers and focal points in United Nations
missions. We believe that DPKO and UNAIDS efforts
will have to be further complemented by ensuring that
the medical guidelines for operations are fully
implemented.

It is important that countries increasingly
harmonize predeployment and in-country awareness
programmes, as it is important to raise awareness of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding personnel of the
medical risks in the mission area, as well as their
capacity to deal with them. Likewise, the adoption of
the comprehensive strategy to eliminate sexual abuse
in the framework of United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations was a major step in the right
direction. I do not doubt that an effective response to
HIV and AIDS through the prevention of sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations will
greatly contribute to increasing the capacity of United
Nations missions in their tasks of protecting civilians
and furthering human rights.

(spoke in French)

World leaders will gather here in New York over
the next three days to evaluate the progress made since
the historic General Assembly special session on
HIV/AIDS held in 2001. In spite of all the positive
developments that we have seen in the global reduction
of the incidence of HIV and increased access to
treatment, we must recognize that the progress is still
rather fragile. It is up to the international community to
reflect on our experience and on the lessons that we
can and must learn, and to strengthen our efforts to
ensure that in 2015 universal access to prevention and
treatment are guaranteed. That will require a strong
political commitment, which is the way for us to
maintain the international response to HIV as a priority
and the only way for us to fulfil the Secretary-General'
s vision of a world free from new HIV infections, free
from discrimination and free from AIDS deaths.

