Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): 1 would like
to thank the Spanish presidency for convening today's
open debate on reforming the working methods of the
Security Council, for which my delegation would like
to make the following proposals.

First, an analysis ofcurrent conflicts and geopolitical
tensions demands that we not only conduct a review
but institute an immediate, appropriate, strategic and
transparent implementation of the necessary reforms.

Second, the Security Council should accord the
Assembly greater importance and be ready to learn
from its Member States' collective wisdom. That can
be achieved through closer cooperation on the part of
the Council with the Presidents of the Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council. The latter could be
transformed into a global development council, to be
developed collectively, working towards the centenary
of the United Nations, under a new plan for a 2045
global strategic initiative, a vision proposed by the
President of the Republic of Kazakhstan, Mr. Nursultan
Nazarbayev, last month in his address to the General
Assembly during the general debate (see A/70/PV.13).

Third, holding more open meetings will improve
synergy, transparency and cooperation. There should
be genuine, meaningful interaction among Member
States rather than prepared statements that are read out.

Fourth, for new non-permanent members to
perform effectively from the start, we propose that
during the interim period after their election but before
they take their seats, they be allowed to attend meetings
of the Council and its subsidiary bodies, as well as
informal consultations of the whole, in order to become
acquainted with their new roles.

Fifth, regarding the election of the next Secretary-
General, my delegation believes that the slate of
candidates should be shared with the General Assembly
so that it can have a greater say in the selection of the
Organization's highest position.

Sixth, the rule of law should govern not only
internal relations within countries but should also be
used to ensure more agreement among Members of the
Council, who should abide by it, transcending their
national interests. In that regard, my President has
also proposed that in 2016 the United Nations convene
a high-level international conference designed to
reaffirm the basic principles of international law.

Seventh, the use of the veto should be exercised
with the greatest caution, particularly in certain
circumstances that call for clearly defined guidelines.

Eighth, any sanctions should be imposed by the
Security Council, with a proper assessment of their
impact, and should not be imposed unilaterally.

And finally, what we need most is not just reform but
a change in attitude. The national interests of Member
States must be balanced with greater objectivity and a
global perspective.

