This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, or the Dayton Agreement. As one of the guarantors of the Dayton Agreement, Russia fully supports the basic principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the equality of the three constituent peoples and the two entities with broad powers. In the year of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Dayton Agreement, we call on our partners in the Security Council to make an unambiguous statement in support of those provisions. The document, which is fundamental to Bosnia and Herzegovina, has remained relevant ever since it was signed in 1995. It envisages administrative arrangements and the balance of interests of the three peoples, which are perfectly effective when properly observed. The desire to destroy such a system could have dangerous consequences not only for the Balkans, but also for Europe as a whole. The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is perfectly stable; it poses no threat to international or regional peace and security. However, inter-ethnic relations demonstrate a negative trend. The level of trust and the quality of the internal political dialogue have deteriorated significantly. This is primarily due to the fact that some Bosnian actors have aspired to reshape the Dayton architecture to make the State more centralized and unified. Some international stakeholders support that process. No external political statements can serve as the basis for undermining the balance of ethnic interests in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is enshrined in the peace agreement. The existing order can be changed only if the three peoples and the two entities reach an agreement without any external interference. The peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina determine their domestic and foreign agenda by themselves. The local authorities are exclusively responsible for the situation in the country, in accordance with the concept of local ownership, which we assume the international community still shares. Therefore, any reform of election law and the judicial system should take into account the interests of all of peoples in the country. We expect that the upcoming local elections, to be held on 15 November and 20 December, will take place peacefully in line with the existing rules. We call upon all the participants, including the Central Election Commission, to act responsibly and work in the interests of all peoples in the country. The international community should carry out a sober assessment of the developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina on the basis of the real situation rather than the individual policies of Member States with respect to the legitimate aspirations of all peoples, and should refrain from exerting pressure on their legitimate representatives. With regard to international law, the use of unilateral actions as a political tool is unacceptable. We are counting on constructive international efforts in order to promote national reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We regret that High Representative Inzko's briefing yet again, for the twenty-fourth time in a row, painted a subjective picture of the situation in Bosnia Herzegovina that is far from reality. It is clear that the High Representative is trying to assign all the responsibility for the failure of the inter-ethnic reconciliation to the Bosnian Serbs and Croats. They are depicted as violators of the Dayton Peace Agreement. The High Representative is trying to scare the international community while ignoring the real situation in the country. We suggest that members of the Security Council acquaint themselves with the alternative viewpoint presented in the report of the Government of the Republic of Srpska. Once again, we ask the High Representative to endeavour in the future to make his reports more balanced and objective and to refrain from an overly broad interpretation of his mandate, in particular with regard to the Euro-Atlantic agenda. We recall that the issue of Bosnia and Herzegovina's cooperation with NATO is not within the remit of the Office of the High Representative, but is rather, in accordance with the division of powers, a prerogative of the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the opinions of the entities and constituent peoples should be duly taken into account. Mr. Inzko offered a tendentious and biased assessment of the situation in the country. We are again convinced that there is no added value in maintaining this mechanism of international protection in sovereign and independent Bosnia and Herzegovina. The time is right to consider the conditions and criteria for closing the Office. We propose exchanging opinions on this issue during the meeting of the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board, which is scheduled for 1 and 2 December. We believe that the complaints of the High Representative about the staff reduction and budget cuts in the Office of the High Representative are unfounded. The role of the international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina has changed dramatically and the concept of local ownership does not imply external interference in local affairs. Therefore, any kind of special tools for the Office of the High Representative are out of question. The staff and financing of the Office of the High Representative should continue to be downsized. We intend to further promote the implementation of the peace agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which retains its potential, and to strengthen bilateral cooperation with all peoples in the country. Bosnian Herzegovina has every chance of becoming an area of successful political, economic and cultural interaction among a wide range of stake holders. In view of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Dayton Agreement, we are planning to convene an Arria Formula meeting at which the legitimate representatives of all three constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina will be given the floor. We expect that this event will give us an opportunity to better understand the significance of the peace agreement and how important it is to fully implement it in the context of the current situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and assess the political and historic relevance of Dayton for both Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Balkan region as a whole. Second statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia To be frank, I do not quite understand what part of my statement surprised my German colleague so much. Our position with regard to the Office of the High Representative is consistent, and it is not the first time that we have expressed it. Indeed, our statement today was mild as compared to previous statements. We fully believe that the Office of the High Representative has outlived its usefulness and is not contributing to the country's development. On the contrary, it hinders the country's development in many respects. That is why we have long raised the issue of the need to progressively move towards closure of the Office of the High Representative. I think that the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board will address this issue at its meeting on | and 2 December. On the subject of bias and lack of balance, I would recommend that my German colleague not only to listen to statements by the High Representative, but also read the report that was drafted for today's briefing (S/2020/1052, annex). Then it will be clear what motivated us to speak of unbalanced assessments in the report of the High Representative. I am glad that my German colleague has pointed out that it is unacceptable to glorify war criminals. I would be grateful if he were to be consistent with respect to some of his colleagues in the European Union (EU) and of some countries wishing to join the European Union that are home to blatant and flagrant glorification of collaborators and war criminals. For some reason, neither our EU colleagues, nor, in particular, my German colleague draw attention to that. Third statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia I thank High Representative Inzko for his comments. I would like to make one point clear - our criticism of the Office of the High Representative is not criticism of the High Representative personally, but rather of the role which in our view the Office plays in Bosnia and Herzegovina. No one denies the fact that the country is encountering problems. We spoke of this in our statement. The question is - what are the roots of those problems? Of course, we can delve into history and recall how it all started and how it ended. Of course, Dayton was a breakthrough that prevented the worst-case scenario. But now it is time for Bosnia and Herzegovina to stand on its own feet and move towards development. We only request the High Representative to make sure that his role in this process does not create challenges, increase tensions and raise questions among the representatives of the entities that are most often criticized - the Serbs and Croats. As for the reports, the reports themselves are not the problem. There have been precedents in which certain entities that are not constituent States have shared some assessments with the Security Council. That is a normal practice, especially since Republika Srpska is a party to the Dayton Agreement and, as such, has a right to express its viewpoint on developments in the Federation. These assessments should be duly considered. As Council members may note, it is no coincidence that we proposed the convening of an Arria Formula meeting on the occasion of the anniversary of the Dayton Agreement. The Security Council often discusses Bosnia and Herzegovina, but those meetings mostly provide general assessments of the actual developments in the country, many of which raise concerns for both sides. I think that it would be wise to provide an opportunity for the representatives of the three constituent peoples to present their assessments to members of the Security Council. That can be done in an Arria Formula meeting, the date of which we will announce later.
