Mr. Ipo (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today's meeting on the political
process in the Syrian Arab Republic and thanks
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy ofthe Secretary-
General for Syria, for his informative briefing and for
his efforts in the service of peace.

Cote d'Ivoire notes with satisfaction the signing in
Sochi on 17 September, under the auspices ofthe Russian
Federation and Turkey, of the agreement providing for
a demilitarized zone between the territories under
the control of the Syrian armed forces and those held
by armed groups. My delegation is pleased that the
deadline of 10 October for the withdrawal of all heavy
weapons from the zone has been met. Compliance with
this agreement by all stakeholders will unquestionably
prevent a large-scale offensive that could lead to a new
humanitarian tragedy in a country devastated by more
than seven years of armed conflict. According to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
13.1 million Syrians are in need of humanitarian
assistance, 5.6 million Syrian refugees are living outside
the country and 6.1 million are internally displaced.

My delegation believes that the effective
implementation of the agreement on the demilitarized
zone could create the conditions for a resumption of the
intra-Syrian dialogue and help to advance the peace
process, which is the only way to achieve a peaceful
and lasting solution to the crisis in Syria. In this
context, Cote d'Ivoire supports the Special Envoy's
proposals and welcomed the meetings held at his
initiative on 11 and 12 September, with the guarantors
of the Astana process, and on 14 September with senior
officials from Egypt, France, Germany, Jordan, Saudi
Arabia, the United Kingdom and the United States of
America. They represented an opportunity to discuss
the establishment of the constitutional committee
responsible for drafting the new Constitution of the
Syrian Arab Republic and defining the modalities
for free and transparent elections, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015), on the road map for the Syrian
political process.

Cote d'Ivoire also takes note of the joint statement
of Egypt, France, Germany, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the
United Kingdom and the United States of America,
the small-group members, made at the margins of the
seventy-third session of the General Assembly. The
statement, which calls for convening a credible and
inclusive constitutional committee as soon as possible,
once again demonstrates the international community's
interest in the smooth conduct of the Syrian political
process. In that context, Cote d'Ivoire invites all Syrian
parties to give priority to the dialogue for a negotiated
solution to the current impasse. We also reaffirm our
commitment to the principle of accountability so that
armed persons or groups guilty of serious violations of
international humanitarian law and of human rights can
be brought before the competent international courts.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire calls for unity in the
Security Council with a view to contributing effectively
to the settlement of the Syrian crisis, which has gone on
for too long.

