Mr. Inzko: Before I start, I would like to
acknowledge that a number of Central European
States - including Poland, the Czech and Slovak
Republics and others - are currently celebrating the
100th anniversary of their modern existence. My own
country, Austria, will commemorate this date next
Monday in a solemn ceremony in the State opera house.
Only two days ago, Presidents Macron and Steinmeier
commemorated the end of the First World War, which,
as Council members know, started with shots in
Sarajevo in June 1914.

France and Germany, which once seemed eternal
adversaries, are now among the main pillars of the
European Union. This is a lesson for the people of the
Western Balkans that it can be done, lasting peace is
achievable and reconciliation must be possible. The
countries of the Western Balkans should emulate the
German/French ideas of common history books, youth
exchange programmes, common Government meetings
between neighbouring countries and a common
television programme, such as the French/German Arte
programme. This could be called Arte Balkans.

The defining political event of the past six months
in Bosnia and Herzegovina was the 7 October general
elections. While international observers characterized
the poll as genuinely competitive, the preceding months
saw a worrying escalation in divisive public rhetoric,
including hate speech and voter intimidation. Moreover,
the immediate post-election period has been fraught
with complaints of election irregularities. Public
trust in the integrity of the electoral system seems to
be at an all-time low, and restoring this trust through
meaningful improvements must be addressed by the
new authorities as an urgent priority.

Looking ahead, the announcement of final,
certified election results is expected today, after which
the period of forming parliaments and Governments
will begin. Overall, the main ethnically defined parties
seem to have won the most support in the parliaments,
although in the Federation, certain multi-ethnic parties
appear to have improved their results remarkably since
the last elections. As no party has a clear majority, it is
too soon to speculate on which coalitions will ultimately
be formed at various levels of authority.

While the process of constituting parliaments and
governments is just beginning, the future members of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency are already
known: Sefik Dzaferovic' of the Party of Democratic
Action, Zeljko Komsie of the Democratic Front,
and Milorad Dodik Alliance of Independent Social
Democrats. Mr. Komsie's defeat of the outgoing Croat
Presidency Member Dragan Covie has led a number of
officials from the Croat Democratic Union of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and from neighbouring Croatia to
declare the election illegitimate and even illegal or
anti-Dayton, despite the fact that it was carried out
according to the same rules used in every election
since 1995.

While some may have the political goal of wishing
to change the current system, this cannot be used to
deny the legality of a process conducted in line with
the law and the Peace Agreement, nor can it be misused
to justify future boycotts or blockages. The election
of Mr. Dodik as the Serb member of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency has also raised questions,
given his past numerous statements against the State
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Additionally, since the
elections, he has made some provocative public
statements about the Bosnia and Herzegovina flag and
the taking of the oath.

Nevertheless, I strongly believe that it is not helpful
or appropriate to judge the new Presidency before they
have even taken office. They will have significant
challenges ahead, and I for one will give them the
benefit of the doubt in their ability and willingness to,
as the oath of office requires,

"to respect the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, implement the General Framework
Agreement for Peace and its Annexes in their
entirety, protect and promote human rights and
fundamental freedoms, and protect the interest and
equality of all peoples and citizens".

Despite the difficult environment, integration with
the European Union (EU) has remained a bright spot in
the political landscape over the past six months. This
is one area where leaders with often competing visions
of the country can find common ground. In this regard,
it is noteworthy that following the submission of an
initial 3,300 answers to the European Commission
questionnaire during the previous reporting period, the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities are now working
on answers to some 650 follow-up questions received
in June.

Despite this good news, other developments over
the past several months have highlighted serious
deficiencies in the rule of law. As I have said in past
briefings, a lack of respect for the final decisions of
the judiciary remains a problem. This was seen in
the continued failure to implement the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court's decision in
the Ljubic' case, while local elections in the city of
Mostar have not been held since 2008 due to another
unaddressed Constitutional Court decision. Thus, for
10 years no elections were held in the city of Mostar.

In this regard, I must call attention to the
authorities' ongoing failure since 2009 to implement
the rulings of the European Court of Human Rights
in the so called Sejdie and Finci and related cases,
leaving in place severe discrimination against some
citizens in exercising their right to stand for public
office in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency and
House of Peoples. Similarly, a number of cantons in the
Federation still have not met their legal obligation to
harmonize their Constitutions and to ensure the full
equality of Serbs as a constituent people. This too is
unacceptable, because in this case we also have a
Constitutional Court decision that Serbs are, of course,
a constituent people wherever they live.

In addition to the issue of unimplemented court
decisions, Bosnia and Herzegovina is also facing a
problem with deep-rooted public disappointment in the
criminal justice system's seeming incapacity to tackle
corruption and deal with organized crime. For example,
in Banja Luka, daily public protests have continued
over seven months, including a demonstration with
tens of thousands of citizens in the days before the
elections, over what activists allege is a cover-up by the
authorities in the suspicious death in March of David
Dragicevie. This case of that young student has to be
solved urgently, andI will report to the Security Council
again on it. This and a similar cases in Sarajevo have
raised public outrage, and they are unfortunately not
the only such cases. They are symptomatic of the state
of the rule of law and the profound disappointment of
citizens therein.

Besides the elections, another defining political
issue of the past six months has been the dramatic rise
in migrant arrivals in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
authorities' response. We have not had such dramatic
numbers in past years as we have seen this year. Given
Bosnia and Herzegovina's complex constitutional
structure and internal political tensions, we need to be
aware that this issue could deteriorate in a number of
ways - as a humanitarian crisis, in the first instance;
from a security point of View; and in terms of the
political stability of the country.

Regrettably, the reporting period has continued
to see a tendency on all sides for some politicians to
deny or relativize war crimes and even to glorify war
criminals. In this respect, keeping in mind the fact
that two international tribunals have confirmed that
genocide was committed in Srebrenica, I consider
the repeal by the Government of the Republika
Srpska of its earlier 2004 report, which had officially
acknowledged the involvement of Republika Srpska
military and police forces in the July 1995 events, to
be a significant step backwards for reconciliation. As
Council members know, the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), which was created
by the Security Council 25 years ago, in 1993, has
declared that genocide took place at several locations,
and that decision of the ICTY is now being questioned.
This also stands in contrast with neighbouring Serbia,
whose Parliament adopted an historical declaration
condemning the crimes committed in Srebrenica in
2010, a declaration that has remained unchanged and
in force.

In conclusion, I would like to make a few
recommendations not only to be taken up by the
incoming Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities, but
also to be supported and encouraged by the wider
international community. First, measures need to be
undertaken immediately to strengthen the rule of law.
Secondly, official institutions need to be supported
and strengthened in their functionality, independence
and stability. Stability is very important to Bosnia
and Herzegovina and its future. Thirdly, economic
development needs be kick-started. And finally, these
reforms need to be addressed with a sense of urgency
in the light of the huge departure of young people from
Bosnia and Herzegovina, amounting to some 20,000 to
30,000 a year.

Despite the absence of these issues from the
campaign platforms ofmany ofthe leading parties, once
they take power they will not be able to ignore them.
Those who declare EU membership as their goal will
need to find compromises, support the functionality of
the institutions and accelerate the pace of reform. We as
an international community can best support the citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina by promoting a Vision of
the country that recognizes that its integration with
Euro-Atlantic structures will also require its leaders
to work on integrating its people. After the elections,
Bosnia and Herzegovina's political leaders will have an
opportunity for a fresh start for the country, its entities
and cantons but, above all, its wonderful citizens.

