Mr. Ban: Let me begin by echoing the words of my
colleague, the Chair of The Elders, Mary Robinson, and
thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address
this gathering.

As a former Secretary-General, I have the utmost
respect for the institution of the Security Council and
the principles and values it is designed to uphold. When
the Council can cooperate and speak with a strong
common voice, its decisions can have a decisive impact.
That strong, common voice is needed more than ever at
this current time, when the deceptive allure of populism
and isolationism is growing across all continents, from
North and South America to Africa, Asia and Europe.

Faced with the complex, multifaceted and gravely
serious challenges, from nuclear proliferation to climate
change, and a radical transformation of our economic
and social paradigms, it is perhaps understandable
that many people from everyday walks of life feel
overwhelmed and seek solace in simplified narratives
of a bygone golden age when they had a sense of being
in control of their individual and national destinies.

What is profoundly irresponsible, however, is
for politicians - especially but not exclusively in
democratic societies - to collude in or deliberately
stoke those illusions for their own aims of securing
and sustaining power, in full knowledge that no one
country, however powerful, will be able to meet those
global challenges on its own. That is why I believe it
is absolutely essential for global peace and security
that the States Members of the United Nations, and
especially those that have the honour to serve as
members of the Security Council, understand and
meet their responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations and act in the service of all humankind
rather than the narrow fields of national, ideological or
sectarian interests.

The Council needs to be bold and assert its
collective voice to meet common challenges, while
heeding the words of my illustrious predecessor as
Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold:

"It is when we all play safe that we create a
world of utmost insecurity. It is when we all play
safe that fatality will lead us to our doom. It is in
the dark shade of courage alone that the spell can
be broken."

The Council has always been intended as a forum
for collective engagement in the broader interests
of peace and security, as well as an opportunity for
member States to reflect their capitals' perspective on
the issue under discussion.

In the humble View of The Elders, based on our
substantial collective experience of working for and
within the international system, the working methods
of the Council could be improved to encourage Council
members to agree on a joint common position to
address conflicts in their early stages. The Council
should explore ways to be more efficient and effective
and to assert its collective voice through timely
and strong statements. Whether it is a presidential
statement or a press statement, it requires a consensus
view. However, that is unrealistic and illogical when
a binding resolution of the Security Council requires
only nine affirmative votes without vetoes. It needs to
speak for and to the whole of the United Nations, rather
than being constrained by the respective agendas and
priorities in the national capitals of its member States.

Building on the remarks of President Robinson, I
would like to highlight three more areas where I feel
the Council can show effective leadership to support
the work of the Secretary-General and improve general
conditions for peace and conflict resolution.

First is the importance of prevention. The
Secretary-General's emphasis on the priority to be
given to prevention is very welcome, and Member States
must ensure that the work of the United Nations for
prevention and peacebuilding is properly supported and
funded. Council members should do more to support
the Secretary-General in using his good offices to
help prevent and reduce the threat of conflict. Council
members should also recognize that the Council's work
on peace and security is undermined when its members
subvert the United Nations own peace envoys and peace
processes. The human cost of those machinations is all
too painful to see, with Libya and Yemen standing out
as just two grim examples.

Secondly, I turn to regional institutions. Strong
multilateral regional institutions are essential for the
maintenance of peace and security, both as forums for
dialogue and as mechanisms for economic and political
cooperation between States. Positive examples include
the European Union and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. By contrast, the absence
of dialogue among States or inclusive forums for
dialogue in the Middle East is one of the reasons for the
persistence and recurrence of conflict there.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend our
host, the State of Kuwait, for its ongoing commitment
to and support for the values that have historically
underpinned the Gulf Cooperation Council. I would
urge all other members ofthe Gulf Cooperation Council
to act in the same spirit to restore that body to its vital
role as a guarantor of regional stability, governed by
mutual respect for national sovereignty and a shared
understanding of common challenges.

The role of regional organizations in preventing
and resolving conflict should be strengthened, not only
in the Middle East but across the wider world. Greater
coordination between the Security Council and regional
organizations would also be beneficial.

Third is the nuclear threat. The risks of nuclear
conflict are higher than they have been in several
decades. As Mary Robinson so rightly said, nuclear
weapons and climate change pose two of the most severe
existential threats to life on Earth as we know it. When
it comes to nuclear non-proliferation, the international
community is confronted with two serious challenges,
namely, the Iranian nuclear development programmes
and the need to secure the complete denuclearization of
North Korea.

Regarding the Iranian nuclear issue, I am deeply
concerned by the United States decision to withdraw
from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, because
it not only weakens the regional stability of the Middle
East but also sends the wrong signal to ongoing
negotiations over North Korea's nuclear issues.
Unfortunately, the negotiations between the United
States and North Korea have come to a deadlock since
the failure of the Hanoi summit last February. I support
the United States Government's efforts to realize the
complete denuclearization of North Korea. In that
context, we should maintain and faithfully comply with
the sanction measures imposed by the Security Council
on North Korea. I sincerely hope that all the States
Members of the United Nations faithfully implement
the sanction measures.

On the other hand, according to the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
World Food Programme, actual food shortages in North
Korea might reach around 1.5 million tons. Considering
the fact that North Korea has suffered chronic food
shortages over the past two decades, the situation seems
to be worsening, with no support from the international
community. In view of that, the Government of
the Republic of Korea has announced that it would
contribute $8 million to United Nations agencies to
help North Korea address the current humanitarian
situation. I sincerely hope that the currently deadlocked
negotiations will resume among the parties concerned
as soon as possible.

But beyond those two regional issues, there is also
the very real risk that the whole architecture of arms
control and nuclear non-proliferation that was built up
during the decades of superpower confrontation may
collapse through a combination of neglect, hubris and
ill-founded threat analysis. That issue goes to the very
heart of the Security Council. Its permanent members
are all nuclear-armed States, and they therefore possess
a uniquely heavy responsibility to develop effective
processes of non-proliferation and disarmament.

Yet the failure of the five permanent members to
make progress on their disarmament commitments
under article VI of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) risks undermining the
NPT, which has been a highly effective multilateral
mechanism for preventing proliferation. It is in the
interest of the five permanent members to get serious
about disarmament if they wish to maintain the near-
universal international commitment to preventing
nuclear proliferation, particularly in the lead-up to next
year's NPT Review Conference. The consequences of
failure do not bear contemplation.

I hope that in our contributions, The Elders have
highlighted opportunities for progress, as well as
challenges to be overcome. We look forward now to
a stimulating interactive discussion with the Council
members, and express gratitude again for the privilege
to take part in this debate.

