Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Please accept our good wishes to you, Mr. President, on your country's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March. My delegation is pleased that China is President of the Council as South Sudan shows positive developments in the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict. China's constructive engagement with the region and the African Union to encourage the leaders of South Sudan to work together is appreciated by the people of South Sudan, and my delegation is ready to closely cooperate with you during your presidency. Allow me also to congratulate the new members who joined the Council earlier this year. In particular, we would like to wish a productive and successful tenure to Tunisia and the Niger. We would like to welcome Mr. David Shearer and thank him for his briefing and his service to the people of South Sudan. I also welcome our sister Betty Sunday. I would like to assure the Council that the role of South Sudanese women is irreversible. As my brother from South Africa said, peace is dawning in South Sudan. There is also the dawn of friendliness in the Council. I agree with the representative of the United Kingdom, as 35 per cent is indeed the floor. That percentage will be increased as we move forward. I would like to thank all members of the Council for their statements today, which have demonstrated a positive response to developments in South Sudan. I have been vindicated because I have always told my leaders that it is not what the Security Council does, but rather what we do in Juba. Our actions are then reflected in the Security Council. I thank all members for their statements and encouragement. We hope to continue on the same path. My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's report on the situation in South Sudan, covering the period from 1 December 2019 to 15 February 2020 (S/2020/145). As always, we pay close attention to the Secretary-General's observations and recommendations. The leaders and the people of South Sudan value his support, encouragement and positive advice. As has already been reported, there have been historic developments in South Sudan since the report was written. We are grateful that the Secretary-General we able to include in his report the historic and momentous decision of President Salva Kiir Mayardit to return South Sudan's federal system to 10 states, plus three administrative areas, on 21 February. Since that decision, the five Vice-Presidents have taken an oath of office and Mr. Riek Machar has returned to reside in Juba permanently. The parties signatory to the agreement have been in continuous negations to find a formula on how to divide the ministerial portfolios equitably. The people of South Sudan are on standby to hear the imminent announcement of the new Cabinet of national unity any time between now and Friday. With regard to the issue of sanctions, many Council members today mentioned the peace dividend. The new Government of National Unity should not have to start its mandate with the dividend of sanctions as the way forward. The Government is a new one, and the international community should be in a position to grant it some leeway to move the people of South Sudan forward. If it is tied down with sanctions, I am afraid that its progress will be slowed. However, that decision lies with the Council. As we celebrate the glimmers of positive developments in South Sudan, daunting challengesremain. Our statement today would be remiss if we did not repeat our appeal to the international community to provide much-needed assistance and support to the people of South Sudan in order for the peace agreement to hold in the long run. The coming Government of National Unity will need technical, material and specialized expertise in order to establish liveable cantonment sites and to ensure the orderly and peaceful return of internally displaced persons and refugees from our neighbouring countries. Our appeal to peace-loving members of the international community is simply this - if they have stood with the people of South Sudan during the past six difficult years, this is the most opportune time to double or triple their care and support for the people of South Sudan, for the sake of lasting peace and unity in South Sudan. As a sign of the good things happening in my the Council, I agree with my friend the Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany. We welcome his country's engagement. We are not asking anyone to move on to the next flavour. We still need Council members to be engaged and to see to it that we are on the right path. They are most welcome, and we want to thank Germany for starting to submit its grants for development projects. That is what will keep the peace on track in South Sudan. When you have something dear to hold on to, you are not likely to destroy it so easily. We again thank Germany and hope that all Council members will contribute to the development of South Sudan in the near future.
