Mr. Motoc (Romania): Allow me to say first that,
as an acceding country to the European Union,
Romania aligns itself with the statement to be made
shortly on behalf of the Union by the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom. My remarks
will therefore be brief.

Before anything else, I wish to join other
speakers in welcoming the presence of Ambassador
Alvaro de Soto in the Council for the first time since
his assumption of his new assignment as United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process. Being well aware of his vast experience, my
delegation is fully confident in Ambassador De Soto's
ability to successfully discharge the new important and
challenging mandate entrusted to him. We extend our
gratitude for the comprehensive and in-depth
presentation he has just offered to the Council.

Sadly, over the past weeks, acts of violence
between Israelis and Palestinians have once again
multiplied and escalated. People have died and suffered
on both sides. Terror has struck again and claimed
innocent lives. Israelis and Palestinians should spare no
effort in advancing together towards the realization of
the two-State vision. That can be achieved only if the
parties proceed without delay to the full
implementation of their obligations under the road
map. Taking effective action against terrorism and
dismantling the associated infrastructure should be top
priorities for the Palestinians. To that end, they must
pursue and accelerate the reform of their security
services, taking full advantage of assistance provided
by the international community.

Correspondingly, Israel must cease its settlement
activities, which are contrary to its obligations under
the road map, and avoid taking measures that could
prejudge the final result of negotiations, especially
with regard to territorial issues, including those in
connection with Jerusalem. From that point of view,
the construction of the barrier remains of great
concern. While undoubtedly playing an effective role
in protecting Israeli land and nationals, the erection of
the barrier inside the Palestinian territories cannot be
regarded as being in compliance with the relevant
provisions of international law.

The Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and parts of the
West Bank, which will start soon, is a courageous
move and we once again commend the Israeli
leadership for its resolve in overcoming all obstacles to
that plan. Its successful implementation will provide a
good opportunity to ease the burden of unsettled issues
in the Israeli-Palestinian dispute and therefore serve
the general purpose of advancing towards peace. For
that to happen, the parties concerned must cooperate
and coordinate closely before, during and after the
disengagement, especially with the aim of creating the
conditions necessary for post-withdrawal economic
recovery in Gaza.

Dialogue is the essential ingredient in reaching
any political objective. We encourage leaders on both
sides to continue to pursue their contacts and broaden
the agenda of the meetings taking place at various
levels. The final goal should be the resumption of
peace talks in order to reach, through negotiations and
in accordance with the provisions of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the conflict in
the Middle East. Romania is actively involved in the
pursuit of that agenda for peace, as shown by the
outcomes of the recent visit Foreign Minister
Ungureanu made to Israel and the Palestinian
territories.

Concerning other developments in the region,
namely in Lebanon, the full implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004) is a prerequisite for enabling
Lebanon to fulfil its longstanding aspiration to full
political independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We call upon all parties concerned to
cooperate fully in that process and, inter alia, to
support the activity of the independent international
investigation commission looking into the
assassination of former Prime Minister Hariri.

