Mr. Bolton (United States of America): As
requested by Security Council resolutions 1546 (2004)
and 1637 (2005), I am pleased to report to the Security
Council on behalf of the 29 countries making up the
Multinational Force (MNF) on the Force's progress
towards fulfilling its mandate.

This reporting period has borne witness to a
striking development. On 7 June, MNF and Iraqi forces
killed Al-Qaida in Iraq terrorist leader Abu Musab Al-
Zarqawi and one of his key associates, Sheikh Abd Al-
Rahman, in an air strike against an identified isolated
safehouse. Tips and intelligence from Al-Zarqawi's
own network led forces to Al-Zarqawi and several of
his associates, who were conducting a meeting.
Although the original leader of Al-Qaida in Iraq is now
dead, he has been replaced, and the terrorist
organization still poses a threat, as its members will
continue to attempt to intimidate the Iraqi people and
threaten the Iraqi Government as it moves towards
greater stability and prosperity.

The Iraqi people overwhelmingly reject violence
as a means to drive political change. The international
community continues to stand with the people of Iraq
in their determined drive for a secure, stable and
democratic country. We honour the memory and
sacrifice of all who have lost their lives in the struggle
for a federal, democratic, pluralistic and unified Iraq.

There have been historic developments since our
last report, some of them unfolding even as we meet
today. Iraq's leaders and the Iraqi people reached a
critical milestone in Iraq's political development on
22 April, when Iraqi political leaders announced the
selection of senior members of a new Government,
including the Prime Minister-designate, President, two
Deputy Presidents and Speaker of the Council of
Representatives. That key event was followed on
20 May by the approval by the Council of
Representatives of nearly all of Prime Minister
Maliki's Cabinet. The final three ministers were
approved on 8 June. Prime Minister Maliki and his
Council of Ministers brought into office with them the
hopes of all Iraqis, as well as the good wishes of the
international community. So significant was the
combination of forming a fully democratic Government
and the well-deserved end of Al-Zarqawi that President
Bush this week visited Baghdad to demonstrate our
commitment to those who support peace and
democracy and oppose the terrorists.

The extremists and terrorists remain capable of,
and intent on, carrying out attacks against Iraqi
civilians, officials and security forces, with the goal of
destabilizing the legitimately elected Government of
Iraq and denying the Iraqi people the democracy that
they have chosen through free and fair elections.

During this period more than 81 per cent of
attacks were concentrated in four of Iraq's 18
provinces- Baghdad, Al Anbar, Salah ad Din and
Ninawa. Since our last report, Diyala province and
Ninawa province were among the four most attack-
prone provinces. Twelve provinces, containing more
than 50 per cent of the population, experienced only 6
per cent of all attacks. Nine provinces have averaged
one or no attacks per day since February.

In addition to the threat from terrorist groups
such as Al-Qaida in Iraq, militias and other groups
continue to challenge the rule of law at the local and
regional levels. Attacks on Iraq's infrastructure
continue to adversely affect oil revenues and the
availability of electricity. However, the number of
infrastructure attacks has declined since August 2005,
suggesting that efforts by the MNF and the Iraqi
Security Forces (ISF) to secure Iraq's infrastructure are
meeting with some success. The Multinational Force
will continue to work with the Iraqi Government and
other international partners to strengthen further
infrastructure security.

The Iraqi Security Forces continue to grow,
improve and conduct more and more independent
operations each day. Multinational Forces continue to
train, mentor and equip the ISF and to hand over battle
responsibilities to Iraqi forces as proficiency allows
and conditions permit. Transfers are evaluated area by
area and region by region, and are incremental to
ensure an effective and successful handover of security
responsibilities.

As of 29 May, 111 Iraqi army, strategic
infrastructure and special operations battalions are
conducting counter-insurgency operations. Seventy-one
of those battalions are operating in the lead with
coalition support and several are operating
independently. All 28 Iraqi National Police battalions
are operational, with two of those battalions also
operating in the lead with coalition support. Iraqi
Security Forces assuming security and control of their
own areas of responsibility increased to two division
headquarters, 16 brigade headquarters and 63
battalions. Those areas include more than 30,000
square miles of Iraq. By the end of the summer, 75 per
cent of Iraqi brigades and battalions will be leading
counter-insurgency operations with coalition support.

A strong Iraqi Security Force presence continues
in Baghdad. Iraqi forces now total over 265,000
Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Interior personnel
trained and equipped for counter-insurgency
operations. That includes over 117,000 Ministry of
Defence personnel, over 103,000 police and over
45,000 other Ministry of Interior forces.

Recent examples of how Iraqi Ministry of
Defence and Ministry of Interior forces are progressing
in the ability to provide security to the Iraqi people
include the following. In late March, 196 Iraqi police
officers, known as the sons of Al Anbar, successfully
graduated from the Baghdad police academy. Upon
their return to Ramadi, where they protect the people
of their home province, they were enthusiastically
greeted by Iraqi and multinational forces. "We are the
future of Iraq, each and every one of us", proclaimed
one new graduate. "We will make a difference for our
sons and daughters."

In April, the 1st Brigade, 4th Iraqi Army
Division, began the first phase of assuming
responsibility for security in Salah ad Din province.
The event was commemorated with a ceremony
attended by Multinational Force and Iraqi officials. The
1st Brigade has progressively taken a larger role in
security for the province by assuming responsibility for
security in residential areas including Samarra and
Tikrit.

In April, soldiers from the 4th Company, 2nd
Battalion, 4th Brigade, 8th Iraqi Army Division
conducted Operation Cobra Strike with MNF forces.
Cobra Strike was a mission to locate the suspected
leader and financier of a terrorist cell working in the

06-3890]
area. Iraqi leadership planned the scheme of
manoeuvres for the operation. MNF forces were on
hand in an advisory role.

In May, the 3rd Battalion, 3rd Brigade, 3rd Iraqi
Army Division assumed the lead in security operations
in and around Sinjar, in western Ninawa province,
marking another example of the steadily-increasing
Iraqi army role in providing security to the people of
Iraq.

In May, the first class of 20 Iraqi soldiers
graduated from the Iraqi army basic medical course,
certifying them as Iraqi medics who will serve with the
Iraqi military throughout western Al Anbar province.
The goal is to have 150 trained Iraqi medics by year's
end to serve with the army, partnered with the MNF
forces throughout the province.

United Nations contributions are vital. We urge
the United Nations to continue to fulfil its mandate
under Security Council resolution 1546 (2004).
Considerable work remains. We look forward to
UNAMI's expansion of its presence in Iraq, especially
to Basra and Erbil.

The Multinational Force, notably the Georgian,
Romanian and South Korean contingents, continues to
provide security for the United Nations in Baghdad,
Basra and Erbil, respectively. The troops provide static
site security, reconnaissance, security patrols, convoy
escorts, checkpoints and when necessary, MEDEVAC
and emergency evacuation. Also, Fijian troops provide
static and close-in protection for United Nations
personnel and facilities in Baghdad.

The measure of success will be the dawn of the
day when the Iraqi people are fully able to secure their
own safety, freedom and prosperity. Training Iraqi
security forces to assume primary responsibility for
security is essential. The completion of the
Government formation process under the popularly-
ratified constitution heralds the beginning of a new era
in Iraq's history. Prime Minister Maliki's Government
faces great challenges. We hope that he will work to
promote national dialogue and inclusion, as well as to
strive tirelessly to deliver improvements in security,
stability and quality of life to the Iraqi people.

The international community and Iraq's
neighbours, especially Syria and Iran, must do more to
stop foreign fighters from entering Iraq. Additionally,
they must do more to answer the Security Council's

06-3890]
call in resolution 1546 (2004) to end material and
financial support for individuals and groups that
oppose the new legitimate Iraqi Government.
Moreover, we call upon the entire international
community to support Iraq's sovereign Government
and to redouble its assistance efforts.

In conclusion, the MNF and combined MNF-ISF
operations continue to provide the security necessary
for Iraq's new democratically elected constitutional
Government to succeed. We are pleased to note
Foreign Minister Zebari's 9 June letter (S/2006/377, annex) to the Security Council, expressing the Iraqi
Government's support for the MNF'S continued role in
providing for security and stability in Iraq. The MNF
remains committed to its responsibilities and to
achieving ultimate success.

