I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important open debate. Malaysia aligns itself with the statements submitted on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (annex 20) and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (annex 47). Allow me at the outset to commend the Security Council for the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and a global ceasefire, on | July. As one of the co-initiators of the joint statement on a global ceasefire that garnered 172 signatories of United Nations Member States and non-member observer States, Malaysia hopes that all provisions of the resolution will be fully implemented by all parties. The occupying Power, Israel, has continued to openly declare its intention to annex significant parts of the occupied Palestinian territory in the West Bank. Malaysia's position on this matter is crystal clear. Annexation is unlawful. It violates the Charter of the United Nations, the Geneva Conventions and the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, by which the acquisition of territory by war or force is inadmissible. The annexation will only exacerbate Israel's mass human rights and international humanitarian law violations against the Palestinians. Israel's inhumane and discriminatory policies and practices in favour of illegal settlers would continue to harm our Palestinian brothers and sisters. More Palestinians will face, in addition to the illegal property demolition and confiscation as a result of illegal settlements, greater restrictions on their natural resources, water and agricultural land. In short, annexation would do untold damage to Palestinian livelihoods and development. The international community cannot remain indifferent and silent over the latest aggression by Israel against the occupied Palestinians. Malaysia calls on the international community, in particular the Security Council, to fulfil without delay its Charter responsibility towards the Palestinians. The Security Council must condemn and reject the Israeli annexation plan and ensure that the plan will never be implemented. There is no military solution to the Palestinian question. The provocative actions taken by Israel will only aggravate the situation. Malaysia therefore strongly urges the Israeli Government to desist from pursuing a military solution. A just, comprehensive and lasting solution is possible only through a negotiated political settlement - a process that the international community, and this body, must actively pursue. That must include the complete withdrawal of Israel from Palestinian land occupied since 1967, including the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif. We also reaffirm our support for establishing an independent State of Palestine, with Al-Quds Al- Sharif as its capital. Only the implementation of all international resolutions on the Palestinian issue can guarantee lasting peace between Israel and Palestine. We call once again on Israel, the occupying Power, to comply with resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 2334 (2016) and all other relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly. Malaysia will also continue to stand in solidarity with the Government and the people of Palestine, including in their efforts to fight the COVID-19 pandemic. To assist Palestinians in its efforts to prepare for and respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, we contributed a million face masks, 500 face shields and 500,000 rubber hand gloves to the Palestinian Government. We also pledged a financial contribution to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East last month, in support of the Agency's work and operations, and we call on the international community to strengthen the support to the Agency. Resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains key to sustainable peace in the Middle East. But one thing is certain: a sustained peace between Palestine and Israel cannot be realized if further annexation is allowed to take place. Thus, accountability and an end to impunity must become an immediate priority for the international community. As Members of the United Nations, we have a solemn political and moral responsibility to defend the rules-based international order and immediately address such threats to international peace and security. The international community must continue to uphold the legitimate right to self-determination, which has constituted one of the very core principles of the United Nations since its creation 75 years ago. Malaysia stresses the need for the Council to act urgently in the light of the deteriorating situation on the ground to address the root cause of the conflict and finally put an end to the longest occupation in modern history.
