Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to address the
Security Council. Canada would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary General,
Mr. Yamamoto, for his insightful briefing.

I would also like to welcome Ms. Sima Samar, Chair
of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission.
Canada is a long-standing believer in the work of the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission and
supports its programmes.

I take this opportunity to extend our sincerest
condolences to the people of Afghanistan, and
especially to the families and friends of the victims of
the horrible attack on a Kabul hospital. This is another
unfortunate reminder of the difficult security situation
in the country.

Canada fully supports an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process
and acknowledges the efforts made to date by the
Government of Afghanistan. The continuity of the
National Unity Government and its reform agenda
are fundamental to peace, stability and progress in
Afghanistan. Canada commends the progress that has
been made on electoral reform and anti-corruption
efforts, and supports continued reform. Canada is also
pleased that parliamentary and district council elections
are scheduled to be held in 2018.

(spoke in English)

Secondly, Canada is deeply concerned over the
continuing deterioration of security in Afghanistan,
with higher civilian and aid worker causalities
reported in early 2017 than for the same time frame in
2016. We are dismayed by the toll on civilians. Their
displacement, increased vulnerability and losses are
unacceptable. In particular, we are concerned about
the impact of instability and insecurity on women and
children. We echo the statement issued by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan that all
parties to the conflict need to take urgent steps to
halt the killing and maiming of civilians. We look to
Afghanistan's neighbours to continue to work with
the Government of Afghanistan to better coordinate
and manage the return of Afghan refugees in order
to support increased regional stability and decreased
violence within the country.

Thirdly, Canada would like to commend the
Afghanistan Government for launching in December
its strategy and action plan for the elimination of
violence against women for the period 2016-2020. Last
year, President Ghani inaugurated a dedicated fund
to sponsor emergency services for women survivors
of life-threatening acts of violence, and Canada
encourages the Afghan Government to make this fund
and the implementation of the law on ending violence
against women a priority.

Canada's programming supports women's
inclusion and empowerment through Afghanistan's
development, as well as a wide variety of efforts to
address violence against women. Examples include
our assistance in implementing the law on the
elimination of violence against women; delivering
services for survivors of gender-based violence; and
providing education, awareness-raising and capacity-
building on women's rights and gender-based violence.
Canada's programming is also supporting women to
take on decision-making roles in their households
and communities, and to build livelihood skills and
capacities for economically marginalized women.

preaee, security and development are to take root The President: I thank our briefers and all
participants for their contributions to an interesting
debate. I look forward to returning to the issue of
Afghanistan with a vote on the renewal of the mandate
andthe economy.Canada stands Withlhe AfghanPeOplm of United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan

in Afghanistan, women must join men at the centre of

decision-making at all levels cfAfghan politics, society
especially Afghan women and girls, as they strive for a "5X1 week.

more secure, prosperous and peaceful future. The meeting ruse at 1.10pm.
