Mr. Fassier (spoke in French): I have two brief
comments to clarify the nature of the support we need
to carry out the project to create a Special War Crimes
Chamber in Sarajevo.

The High Representative, Paddy Ashdown, and
the President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia, Judge Meron, both have
emphasized that this project cannot come to fruition
without appropriate support from the international
community.

In this connection, we have two requests to make.
The first request pertains to the donors meeting that we
will hold on 30 October at The Hague. The overall
budget we need is 30 million euros over five years. In
order to get the project started, it would be ideal if we
could get two thirds of that amount, or 20 million
euros. Nevertheless, we could begin to launch the
project with 15 million euros. But if we go below 15
million euros, the project will not see the light of day.
That is why we need the Council's support in order to
convince the capitals of Member States to transform
their unanimous political support into concrete
commitments, in terms of figures, at that conference, in
order to reach the necessary threshold of 15 million or,
if possible, 20 million euros.

My second remark is a request that relates to the
importance of the many cases that will be dealt with in
Sarajevo, coming either from the chambers - indeed,
the agreements signed last February by Claude Jorda
and myself arranged for the transfer of about 15
indicted individuals from the chambers - or from the
Office of the Prosecutor, in the case of about 50
individuals now being examined.

Given these circumstances, we would like the
Council to be able to convince the States Members of
the United Nations to give, in due course, the Sarajevo
War Crimes Chamber exactly the same support that
they already providing to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia with respect to the
detention of individuals on trial and participation in
witness protection programmes.

