Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We have
just heard the good and positive news from Mr. Thabo
11-37934
Mbeki of a temporary agreement with respect to the
administration and security of the Abyei Area.

I am pleased on this occasion to welcome the
conciliation efforts of Mr. Mbeki and Mr. Haile
Menkerios and their joint efforts to achieve these
temporary arrangements for the Abyei Area. Moreover,
I would like to thank Mr. Meles Zenawi, Prime
Minister of Ethiopia, for his effective role in achieving
this agreement. Our thanks and appreciation extend to
those three African brothers, who have shown their
tireless commitment. The announcement leads us to
believe optimistically that the pending issues will be
resolved. As I mentioned earlier, the Government of
the Sudan is sincere in its determination to resolve all
pending issues.

Mr. Mbeki described to the Council the good
news in the area of resource-sharing, and he announced
that the parties are close to an agreement on this issue.
In the context of the economic and oil issues, we have
also heard excellent news, namely, that the parties have
reached major solutions and that those agreements will
be finalized very soon. Moreover, on the security
situation, especially in the border area, the parties are
very close to a solution that will be announced in the
very near future. We wish them every success in that
endeavour. We look forward to a resolution of that
issue as well as the pending issues related to the Abyei
Area.

While I will not go into further detail, I would
like to underscore a few points. The Government of the
Sudan welcomes the work of the United Nations and
the Security Council and requests that reactions related
to the issues be tempered and slowed down somewhat,
so that efforts under way may put an end to all of the
pending issues.

With respect to Southern Kordofan State, I am
speaking on the basis of my personal and direct
contacts, and not on the words of Mr. Menkerios.
Although the Government has not yet accepted the
agreement to permit humanitarian access to Southern
Kordofan it is perhaps on the verge of doing just that.
In line with Mr. Mbeki's comments, tomorrow or the
day after tomorrow, consultations and contacts will
take place among the various parties in Southern
Kordofan State to achieve a solution of this pending
issue. I can reaffirm to the Council that the
Government of the Sudan, just as it has achieved an
agreement on the Abyei Area, is determined to achieve
11-37934
an agreement on Southern Kordofan State and all other
pending issues.

Permit me to stop here, with many thanks.

