Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Stephen
O'Brien for his briefing.

The conflict in Syria has resulted in massive
civilian casualties, and China sympathizes deeply
with the suffering of the Syrian people. We strongly
urge all the parties in Syria to reach a settlement
through dialogue and consultation. Recently, while the
intra-Syrian ceasefire has been holding, thanks to the
concerted efforts of the international community, in
some regions it allows for no optimism. China welcomes
the important role that the Astana dialogue is playing in
maintaining the ceasefire and hopes that the new round
oftalks will help to consolidate the current momentum.

We commend the efforts of United Nations aid
agencies to continue to scale up their assistance and
send out more convoys to various parts of Syria. We
urge all the parties in Syria to work diligently to
implement the ceasefire agreement and take appropriate
measures to actively coordinate with the United Nations
humanitarian assistance efforts while providing speedy,
safe and unimpeded humanitarian access so as to create
the necessary conditions for United Nations action and
for reaching a political settlement of the issue.

China welcomed the recently held Brussels
conference on Syria and looks forward to seeing
concrete results from it as soon as possible. If the
country's humanitarian situation is to be mitigated, the
international community must remain committed to
a political settlement in Syria. A new round of peace
talks will take place in Geneva in mid-May. All the
relevant parties must remain firmly committed to their
diplomatic efforts and continue to support both the work
of Special Envoy de Mistura and the United Nations as
a primary mediator. All of the parties in Syria must
participate constructively in the talks and on the basis
of the principle that the dialogue and negotiations
should be Syrian-led and Syrian-owned, with the aim
of gradually reaching a complete and lasting solution
that is acceptable to all parties.

The terrorist attacks on Syrian territory are a
serious setback to international assistance efforts.
China condemns the recent terror attack in Al-Rashidin
that targeted the evacuation of civilians. We urge for
the intensification of international coordination in
countering terrorism, unifying standards and firmly
combating all the terrorist organizations on the
Council's list. China has supported efforts to mitigate
the humanitarian situation in Syria and arrive at a
political settlement of the crisis, and we are prepared to
continue playing a constructive role in a full, fair and
appropriate settlement without further delay.

