Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
Allow me at the outset, Sir, to say how pleased the
Tunisian delegation is to see you presiding over the
Security Council. Your ability and experience, combined
with an in-depth knowledge of international problems,
particularly in Africa and the Middle East, are guarantees
of effective action in support of peace and security in the
world. My congratulations go equally to your predecessor,
Ambassador Nabil Elaraby of Egypt, who did excellent
work in the Council last month.

The implementation of the Lusaka Protocol has today
reached a crucial stage, which calls for intensified efforts
with a view to ensuring the success of the peace process in
Angola. It is true that progress has been achieved. The
cease-fire is generally being respected. However, we cannot
fail to note that difficulties persist in the implementation of
that Protocol. The operations for the quartering of troops
unfortunately continue to encounter delays which can have
only negative implications for the peace process, thereby
prolonging the suffering of the population. At the present
stage, the aim should be to strengthen trust between the
parties and encourage a climate of cooperation and national
reconciliation.

New measures have been a taken to that end, such as
the adoption of a framework agreement on military matters;
the promulgation on 8 May of the Amnesty Law; the
beginning of the process of incorporating military elements
of UNITA into the Angolan Armed Forces; the completion
of the quartering of the rapid reaction police; and the
second phase of withdrawal of the Angolan Armed Forces
from advanced positions. All these measures, set out in
the Secretary-General's report of 27 June 1996, should
inspire UNITA to extend its full cooperation in the
implementation of the agreements reached.

The effective and complete quartering of combatants
and the unification of the armed forces are all the more
important because the pursuit of other operations,
including the demobilization of troops and their
incorporation into civil society, as well as demining,
depend upon them.

In that respect, we welcome the action pursued by
the United Nations to resolve the problems posed by the
demobilization of troops, whose repercussions on security
and the economic and social situation are clear. Likewise,
we cannot fail to express our deep satisfaction at efforts
to accelerate the demining process in Angola.

The role of UNAVEM. III in the peace process is of
the greatest importance. My delegation would like on this
occasion to pay tribute to the personnel of the United
Nations Mission, who are working under difficult and
often dangerous conditions.

We hope that the Angolan parties will make further
process on the road to peace, thereby enabling the United
Nations forces to discharge their tasks under better
conditions in order to fulfil their mandate as scheduled by
February 1997. It is clear that the reconstruction of the
country and the improvement of the living standards of
the population are essential elements in the peace process.

In this context, the reforms which the Government
of Angola is striving to introduce to remedy the economic
problems of the country deserve effective support from
the international community. In that respect, accelerating
the peace process calls for a sustained commitment by
investors and donors to continue and increase their
contributions.
For all these reasons my delegation supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend the
mandate of UNAVEM. III for three months, until 11
October 1996.

