Mr. Nesho (Albania): For quite a long time now,
the Security Council has been fully committed to
disarming Iraq of weapons of mass destruction.
Resolution 1441 (2002), unanimously adopted,
demonstrated not only the determination of the
international community to fully disarm the Iraqi
regime, but also its resolve to penalize a regime that
possesses weapons of mass destruction and thus
endangers peace and security in the region and even
beyond.

In spite of the considerable efforts and the
commendable work of the United Nations inspectors,
we are of the opinion that they cannot achieve the
required disarmament, because of the Baghdad
regime's lack of willingness to cooperate by disarming
immediately, actively and unconditionally.

The time for disarming Iraq is running out. The
new draft resolution to be presented by the United
States of America, Great Britain and Spain clearly and
firmly redefines the determination of the international
community to preserve peace and security in the world.
It ensures and maintains the authority of the
international community and of the Security Council in
their joint actions against such regimes, which present
a threat to our common future and values.

Therefore, Albania supports the determined
position of the United States of America and is in
favour of this draft resolution. Albania has been part of
the international coalition for disarming Iraq, and today
we reaffirm our participation in the future coalition of
the willing.

The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Albania, Mr. Ilir Meta, emphasized,
in his most recent statement:

"For many years now, this regime has
continuously ignored the efforts of the
international community, and of the Security
Council in particular, for a diplomatic and
peaceful solution, and has not collaborated in the
elimination of the weapons of mass destruction.
On this basis, we believe that intervention is
inevitable in order to avoid the worst scenario of
legitimizing a regime that would hold hostage
regional and global security and that would
challenge the authority of the Security Council as
well as that of the United Nations, of which our
country is a Member."

Peace and security cannot be achieved through
endless meetings and unproductive discussions
motivated by fear and uncertainty about the future, or
by standing by and not taking action. Extending the
process of the disarmament of Iraq will give its regime
an opportunity once again to defy the international
community and the United Nations, and, moreover,
would seriously call into question the very credibility
of this Organization. The United Nations should
shoulder its responsibilities and act accordingly.
Therefore, we must stand united and determined. In
conclusion, allow me to reiterate before this body that
peace is not the mere absence of war.

