I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report on the pending cases and the updates on the current situation in Libya. The Dominican Republic would like to express its condolences to all the victims and their families of the recent violence in Libya committed during the Libyan National Army's offensive last month. We strongly reiterate the importance of protecting civilians, civilian infrastructure, historical monuments and religious buildings. Health systems around the world are collapsing due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, yet hospitals in Libya are still being hit by indiscriminate attacks. That is intolerable. Those actions reveal the importance of strengthening the cooperation between States and the International Criminal Court (ICC). Criminals must know that their terrible actions have international legal consequences. We ought to highlight the deterrent effect of that international tribunal, especially at this time when multilateralism is facing grave challenges. The fight against impunity must never stop. The Dominican Republic applauds the efforts of the ICC on Mr. Al-Qadhafi's appeal case and takes this opportunity to reiterate its call on all Member States to collaborate with the ICC on all pending arrest warrants. Bilateral approaches by members of the Council are essential to moving forward in that regard, as is cooperation with the Libyan authorities, States parties, other Member States and other relevant entities to assist the Office of the Prosecutor in fulfilling its mandate. We deeply regret that Ms. Sergewa remains missing after being abducted by armed men. The Dominican Republic sees with great disappointment the escalation in disappearances of journalists, civil society activists, lawyers and State officials. We welcome the progress in the investigation of migrant-related crimes. Those responsible for the atrocious acts against migrants or others in Libya must be prosecuted and held accountable, whether by their national jurisdiction or by the ICC. The Dominican Republic echoes the call of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for a global ceasefire. Regardless of ideological affiliation, the people of Libya must stop fighting each other and start fighting their common enemy, namely, the COVID-19 pandemic. To conclude, the Dominican Republic reiterates its full support to the ICC, as part of the rules-based international order, in its efforts to guarantee compliance with international law.
