Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you, Sir, for having convened
this open debate on the working methods of the
Security Council. As stated in the concept paper that
quite rightly guides our debate (S/2013/613, annex),
this is an important matter of common interest. The
Security Council is a body of crucial importance to
the maintenance of international peace and security. It
is in everybody's interest that the Council efficiently
exercise the functions assigned to it by the Charter of
the United Nations. We welcome the awareness of that
fact on the part of the members of the Security Council,
as reflected in the note by the President dated 28 August
(S/2013/515).

There is no doubt that the authority and influence
of the Security Council would be enhanced if there
were more opportunities to include the wider United
Nations membership in its work. Spain believes that
this objective must be the guiding light for the Security
Council's activities.

In recent years, progress has been made in increasing
the Security Council's permeability. The contributions
of such countries as Portugal, Belgium, Japan, Slovakia,
Panama, Bosnia and Herzegovina and India have been
of great help. Costa Rica, Jordan and Liechtenstein also
deserve to be mentioned for the role they have played

in encouraging that collective reflection. I also take

the opportunity to recognize the Republic of Argentina
and its Permanent Representative, Mrs. Maria Cristina
Perceval, for the way in which she has led the work
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions.

The members of the Security Council have
committed themselves to implementing the measures
contained in presidential note S/2010/507. As we have
stated on previous occasions, we are reasonably pleased
with the implementation of measures concerning the
monthly programme of work of the Security Council,
such as the publication of the tentative forecast, the
briefings by incoming Presidents or the periodic updates
of the programme of work. We are perfectly aware of
the fact that, for reasons of urgency, sometimes the
most sensitive dossiers must be dealt with in meetings
that cannot be announced far enough in advance. The
Security Council must be able to react promptly to the
most urgent threats to international peace and security.

This year we have witnessed an updating of the
practice of holding a wrap-up session at the close
of the month. As stated by one representative of a
Council member, these sessions are like a two-faced
Janus, keeping the Council's focus on the recent past
in order to draw lessons for the immediate future. We
thank Pakistan for resurrecting this practice, which
had hardly ever been used until this year. We also
heartily congratulate South Korea, Rwanda, Togo, the
United Kingdom and Argentina on having continued
this practice. In September, the Australian presidency
opted for an interactive end-of-month meeting with
representatives of States not members of the Security
Council. We believe that is also a valid option for
responding to the growing need for transparency.

Spain supports the practice of holding
horizon-scanning meetings at the direction of the
Secretariat. I would suggest that such meetings, which
are held at the beginning of a country's presidency of
the Council, be conveniently opened to all Member
States.

The measures included in your concept paper,
Mr. President, have our principled support. Moreover,
I would like to highlight as a matter of particular
interest the need to continue to promote the following
measures: an increase in the number ofpublic meetings;
the enhancement of a transparent and inclusive
process of negotiation within the Council; an increase
in the interaction between the Council and troop-
and police-contributing countries; and more time
dedicated to interaction and dialogue with regional and

subregional organizations. The final goal, as already
stated, is to increase the transparency of the work of the
Security Council. The work of this organ must follow
procedures that contribute to reinforcing its authority
as a sine qua non for gaining the support of the entire
international community. The working methods should
therefore serve that higher goal; otherwise, they will
undermine the political and moral authority of the
Council.

I will conclude with on a sensitive question related
to the topic of today's debate: the use of the veto. Spain
supports the limitation of its use. Specifically, we urge
that a practice be introduced whereby the reasons for
its use be explained when that occurs. More important
still, we advocate for members to refrain from its use
in cases of serious crimes such as genocide, ethnic
cleansing, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
We therefore welcome the call by France to develop
a code of conduct for moving towards that goal. The
Council can rest assured that we remain fully ready to
contribute to such measures.

