Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank and congratulate the
Ambassador of Venezuela and his entire team for
the significant work they have carried out this month
and for a very productive presidency. With a smile,
you, Mr. President, have imposed on us an intensive
programme of work with a record number of items under
"Other matters", including four that were discussed
yesterday. We thank you, Sir.

We had a busy agenda, but I will address some
issues of particular importance, among many others,
without mentioning other issues, such as that of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, for example,
which we discussed yesterday. I hope we will quickly
be able to move to a vote on that matter on the excellent
draft resolution that has been put forward.

With regard to Africa, I would like to make a few
comments on Burundi and the Central African Republic.
The Council's visit at the end of January and the visit
of the Secretary-General to Bujumbura on 22 and
23 February helped to strengthen the international
community's momentum to demand that the actors
in Burundi put an end to violence and begin a true
inter-Burundian dialogue without delay. We hope that
the high-level visit of the Heads of State of the African
Union yesterday and today will help secure concrete
commitments, especially from President Nkurunziza,
in that regard.

It is essential for us that the Council do everything
in its power to avoid a situation in which the Burundi
crisis becomes a civil war or worse. The deployment of
a United Nations police contingent is a key element in
that regard. We regret that an agreement still has not
been reached on our draft presidential statement on
that subject. We will continue to tirelessly push in that
direction with a spirit of responsibility and vigilance
to support the efforts of the African Union. Depending
on the results of the visit of the African Union Heads
of State, we will resume the initiative to support
their actions.

With regard to the Central African Republic, we
welcome the adoption, on 9 February of resolution
2264 (2016), which increased the number of
correctional officers deployed to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), will help
to strengthen our fight against impunity. The holding
of the presidential election is a real collective success
story for people of the Central African Republic, but
also for MINUSCA, Operation Sangaris and all those
who supported the country's recovery. The electoral
process will reach its conclusion and should allow a
transition to take place on 31 March. Once the transition
is complete, the Security Council must remain seized of
the matter to support the Central African Republic to
ensure its stability and reconciliation.

I would also like to mention the pressing issue of
this day, the question of Syria. France supports a process
that will lead to tangible results for the Syrian people,
not a process for its own sake. We must only mention
the obvious, as recalled by the Secretary-General in
his letter of 17 February, that if Syrians do not see
any results in their daily lives, negotiations will not
be credible and they will remain an abstract - that is,
absurd - piece of theatre. That is the guiding principle
of our approach and that is why we have consistently
condemned attacks against civilians and called for
the immediate lifting of all sieges and for permanent,
secure and unconditional access for humanitarian
assistance to all persons in need.

We also welcomed the cessation of hostilities
agreement reached by the United States and Russia,
on 12 February, as a significant contribution to the
resolution of the Syrian conflict. France will fully
support the adoption this afternoon of the draft
resolution endorsing the parameters of that cessation
of hostilities agreement. However, if the role of the
Security Council is to support, without hesitation,
anything that can lead to a sustainable reduction in
violence, it must also involve an effort to ensure that
we have the collective means to fully implement such
an initiative.

We must also keep in mind that, although the
cessation of hostilities is welcome, it is only a first
step in reducing violence. The key will be the ability
to achieve, through the inter-Syrian negotiations
coordinated by the Special Envoy, the implementation
of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex), as only a real transition will lay
the foundation for a real end to the crisis in Syrian.

With regard to the peace process, we hope, with our
initiative, to change the status quo - which is in fact
a regression that increasingly weakens the two-State
solution and which threatens to lead to an explosion
on the ground. France is moving forward methodically
with its initiative by initially bringing together the
members of the International Syria Support Group and,
in time, the parties in the framework of an international
conference. While we do not believe that the conditions
exist for positive action by the Security Council, but we
remain determined to ensure that the Council can play
the role it should play when the time comes.

We will act in full transparency and in close
consultation with all the parties concerned. Our
approach is constructive and collective so that we
can find a way out of this very harmful situation. We
also will seek to build on the efforts of the different
partners, in particular the Quartet, whose statement
of 12 February is in accordance with our efforts. The
appointment of a special high-level envoy, Mr. Pierre
Vimont, our former Ambassador to the United States
and former Executive Secretary-General of the
European External Action Service, will allow us to
begin to hold extensive consultations. I will regularly
inform the Council of our progress on that front.

With regard to Libya, there have also been a number
of significant developments in February. Steps have
been taken towards the establishment of a government
of national unity. Members of the Presidential Council
reached an agreement on 15 February to propose a
second, narrower, consolidated list of members of the
Government. France, with other partners, welcomed
that announcement. While a majority of members in the
House of Representatives signed a statement endorsing
the Government, this is a decisive moment. The
endorsement of that list and the definitive establishment
of a Government of national unity are essential to
address the worrying humanitarian and economic
crises in the country and to confront the threat of
Da'esh. We fully supported the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Martin Kobler, in his efforts.
We will continue to fully support the political process
so that the Government of national unity can be set up
as soon as possible. The Security Council consultations
that will take place on 2 March are expected to reaffirm
our collective support for United Nations mediation and
the ongoing process.

Lastly, the briefing of the Council planned
for Monday with the participation of the German
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe presents the opportunity to
recall the central role played by the United Nations in
the resolution ofthe crisis in Ukraine, as well as the need
for the full implementation of the Minsk agreements.
In that regard, France has regularly recalled that the
agreements are the only possible framework for a
negotiated solution.

I will conclude by again thanking the Venezuelan
presidency and by wishing Angola, which takes over in
a few days, the best of luck.

