Mr. Cekuolis: I would like to thank the Slovak
presidency of the Security Council for convening
today's meeting and for inviting me to this debate on
the role of the Security Council in supporting security
sector reform. We welcome your invitation,
Mr. President, because it is once again an
acknowledgement that the traditional division between
security issues, on the one hand, and development
issues, on the other, is both artificial and unsustainable.
Indeed, this is the perspective under which the
Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Groups
on Africa have operated. Within the context of the
mandate to promote an integrated approach to relief,
reconstruction and development and to encourage the
mobilization of resources, both Advisory Groups -
those on Guinea-Bissau and on Burundi - have called
for more attention to be paid to security sector reform
as a way of addressing one of the key structural causes
of conflict in many fragile countries - that is, the
involvement of security forces in political matters. The
experiences of the Ad Hoc Advisory Groups have led
them to conclude that the role of security forces, in
particular their internal role, and the process of security
sector reform are key ingredients of the post-conflict
peacebuilding agenda. Without a secure environment,
recovery, reconstruction and sustainable development
are not possible.

That is why the Ad Hoc Groups, in their meetings
in the countries concerned, have always seen the
military as key interlocutors for dialogue. It is that
interaction, as well as their dialogue with other
stakeholders, that has led them to support the call for
security sector reform. Indeed, the Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Guinea-Bissau joined its voice with that of
the Security Council during their joint mission to
Guinea-Bissau in June 2004, in calling for urgent and
immediate assistance from the international community
to finance a comprehensive restructuring package for
the country's armed forces - because of concerns
regarding poor conditions of service, ethnic divisions
in the military and the availability of small arms in the
country. In its resolution 2005/2, the Economic and
Social Council also welcomed the recommendation by
the Security Council to establish a voluntary
emergency fund, to be administered by the United
Nations Development Programme, to support efforts
related to the planning and implementation of military
reform.
It is fair to say that the Economic and Social
Council considers that the lack of progress on security
sector reform in post-conflict countries will continue to
contribute to political instability and uncertainty, and
thereby hamper development. Moreover, progress on
poverty reduction will make the task of security sector
reform easier, as demobilized soldiers and
ex-combatants will be more willing to give up their
guns. For that reason, special attention must be given
to demobilized soldiers and ex-combatants in national
poverty reduction strategies, as well as within the
context of the development cooperation activities of
the donor community.

As the United Nations system develops its
capacities in support of security sector reform, the
Economic and Social Council - within the context of
its coordinating role in the economic, social,
environmental and humanitarian fields - will continue
to encourage and promote a coherent and coordinated
approach based on a shared understanding of the
system's comparative advantage relative to other
multilateral, Government and civil society actors. In its
sessions, the Economic and Social Council will do its
part, within its mandate, to continue to support the
efforts of the Security Council to promote security
sector reform.

