Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Zahir
Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his excellent and
comprehensive briefing, which provides greater clarity
and a better understanding of the question of Kosovo.
Indeed, his briefing demonstrated the need to tackle the
political challenges in order to sustain and strengthen
the progress made to date in Kosovo and for the benefit
of the population. We also thank Mr. Ivica Daeie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citaku, Ambassador
of Kosovo to the United States, for her intervention.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea conveys its
condolences for the recent murder in broad daylight
of Mr. Oliver Ivanovie, leader of the Civic Initiative
"Serbia, Democracy and Justice" party, and strongly
condemns that horrendous crime. We join our voice to
that of the political leaders of Belgrade and Pristina, the
Secretary-General and members of the international
community calling for the investigation of that crime
and for that sad event not to derail the peace process
in Kosovo. We commend the recommendation of
Ambassador Citaku, who said in her intervention that
no effort would be spared to identify the perpetrators
and to bring them to justice.

Equatorial Guinea is very clear about its position on
the Kosovo issue and understands that the legal basis for
a just resolution of the question of Kosovo is resolution
1244 (1999). Equatorial Guinea always advocates for
direct, fair, frank and inclusive negotiations to resolve
any dispute, and the position of Equatorial Guinea on
the Kosovo issue remains the same. We support the
efforts by the interested parties to find an appropriate
solution that is acceptable for all through dialogue
and negotiations, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and in
the context of the relevant Security Council resolutions.

The question of Kosovo is complex because of
sensitive issues such as national reconciliation, which
involves the welfare of the people and the protection of
the rights of all populations and communities in Kosovo.
The opposing parties must refrain from any action
that could exacerbate tensions and, instead, prioritize
actions that promote peace and trust. That would
undoubtedly result in the pursuit of a final resolution
that is satisfactory to all. The Security Council should
remain seized of the Kosovo issue and, in that process,
should encourage the parties to prioritize a direct and
constructive dialogue, while respecting the agreements
already reached.

Equatorial Guinea commends and appreciates
the tremendous work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo since its
establishment and the support that it provides to the
communities of Kosovo, the regional and international
actors and the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe with a view to implementing
the mandate of resolution 1244 (1999).

Respect for diversity and the participation of
all communities, women and young people in the
institutions and peace processes are critical elements to
ensure a sustainable peace process. In that regard, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea would like to encourage
the efforts in Kosovo in those areas and the role of
UNMIK and the United Nations family in Kosovo
in supporting such elements. We also encourage the
deployment of all necessary efforts to resolve the
problem of the internally displaced persons in Kosovo.

Guaranteeing security and stability in the area
requires ongoing efforts to ensure the protection of
human rights and to strengthen the rule of law. For
that reason, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea shares
the concern of Mr. Tanin over the recent crimes and
violence in various parts of Kosovo. Such events make
it necessary to step up efforts to improve the rule of
law, strengthen the judicial institutions and promote
development, peace and security in Kosovo.

Although the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina facilitated by the European Union had to be
suspended, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea hopes
that it will resume as soon as possible and that both
sides work in a spirit of mutual understanding and trust
to protect the rights and interests of all communities.

Regional cooperation and good-neighbourly
relations are crucial for the region. That is why the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea hopes that UNMIK and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
will ensure the rule of law in Kosovo and, as we have
already noted, play a very positive role in order to
achieve a final resolution that is satisfactory to all.

I conclude my statement by congratulating and
paying well-deserved tribute to Special Representative
Zahir Tanin for his noble work in Kosovo.

