Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I should
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Ghassan Salame' for his briefing. We also
welcome the participation in this meeting of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Libya, Mr. Mohamed Siala.
China listened carefully to the statement made
by civil-society representative Ms. Al Tubuly. The
conflict in Libya has been going on for more than
eight years, leading to great suffering for the people of
Libya and its neighbours in the region and threatening
international peace and security. The parties in Libya
should prioritize the overall interests of the country and
its people and seek a peaceful solution to the issue of
Libya through political dialogue.

China would like to make the following points.

First, it is important to continue to engage in
dialogue in order to promote the political process.
It has always been China's belief that the issue of
Libya must be resolved politically. The international
community must respect the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Libya and adhere to principle
of the political process being Libyan-led and Libyan-
owned. China calls on all parties to the conflict in
Libya to establish a ceasefire as soon as possible, ease
tensions and return to the track of peaceful dialogue
and consultations, with a view to realizing lasting
peace and stability in the country.

Secondly, there is a need for increased coordination
to create synergies. China supports the good offices
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Salame, whose three-step action plan provides a viable
plan to resolve the conflict in Libya. Countries with
influence should play an active role and exert such
influence to help all parties in Libya address their
differences and increase mutual trust. They should also
provide constructive help so as to establish a ceasefire
and resume the political dialogue.

The African Union and the League of Arab States
have particular advantages in terms of mediation among
the parties to the conflict. We must support them in
their efforts and thereby create synergies with the work
of the United Nations.

Thirdly, there is a need to ensure that the issue
of sanctions is handled properly. Sanctions are not an
end in themselves but only a means that should always
be aimed at promoting a political solution to relevant
issues. Given current circumstances, the arms embargo
in Libya must be strictly implemented. At the same time,
there is a need to avert the negative impact of sanctions
in other areas on civilians in Libya and other third
countries. They should not harm the overall interests of
the country, hamper the daily lives of people or prevent
their humanitarian needs from being met.

Libya has expressed its concern over the continual
depreciation of its frozen assets and related losses. The
sanctions Committee should accelerate its efforts to
find appropriate ways to respond to Libya's legitimate
concerns. The Committee, together with the Secretariat
and the Panel of Experts, should strictly abide by
the mandate entrusted to it by the relevant Security
Council resolutions and discharge it in an impartial and
objective manner.

China has always been impartial in supporting the
people of Libya in their pursuit of peace and tranquillity,
and it has played a constructive role in the promotion
of a political solution to the issue of Libya. China is
prepared to continue to make positive contributions
to ensuring the restoration of peace and stability in
the country.

