Mr. Schulz (Germany): We welcome today's adoption of resolution 2507 (2020) to renew the sanctions regime in the Central African Republic and we thank the penholder for its perseverance in trying to consolidate and bridge the views shared by the Council members. We engaged in these negotiations with the aim of sending a signal of unity to the Central African Republic and its people. That is particularly important because this year, with the upcoming elections, will be crucial to the stability and future of the country. It is regrettable that this unity could not be fully reached in the end. We commend the Government of the Central African Republic for the hard work, commitment and results achieved over the past year. The Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic and the ongoing implementation efforts, as well as the overall political process, are encouraging and positive signs. We also welcome the country's continuing work with regard to security sector reform, the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation process and the management of weapons and ammunition. We would like to assure the Government of the Central African Republic of Germany's support, which we extend through the European Union and its Military Training Mission in the Central African Republic, but also as one of the biggest bilateral donors of humanitarian assistance in support of the people of the Central African Republic. Yet, we also see that there is still a lot of work to be done. We remain deeply concerned about the situation in the Central African Republic given the instability, violence and continuing attacks on civilians - as we sadly witnessed again just a few days ago in Bria. We remain convinced that the sanctions regime, including the arms embargo, is animportant element to accompany the Government of the Central African Republic on its way towards stability, peace and development. Guided by that understanding of the importance of the sanctions regime, as well as the need to send a clear and positive signal to the Government of the Central African Republic, we have shown flexibility in the negotiations, despite our concerns. Today's decision must also be seen against the background of the widespread availability and proliferation of small arms in Africa. Those arms are a major driver of conflict. Germany is committed to combating that scourge, including through our support for the African Union Silencing the Guns initiative. In that context, I wish to stress the importance of the responsibility that we have placed on the shoulders of the Government of the Central African Republic today, namely, to administer additional categories of arms and to live up to the highest standards in assuming that responsibility. We urge the Central African Republic to live up to the responsibility to tightly control any arms delivered to it, to use them only in strict compliance with all legal conditions, including international human rights and humanitarian law, and to prevent any risk of proliferation.We would like to underline that we see the efforts of the Central African Republic, hand in hand with its international partners, as part of an ongoing process. We therefore strongly encourage the authorities of the Central African Republic to continue their efforts in making further progress on the benchmarks, particularly with regard to security sector reform, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process and the management of weapons and ammunition.
