Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
Ms. Bintou Keita for her detailed briefing on her
recent visit to Darfur. We welcome her commitment
to the discussions on the eventual exit of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) from Darfur.

With regard to the situation at hand, we welcome
the reports of relative calm and stability in Darfur,
with the exception of hotbeds of tension in Jebel Marra,
where the conflict between the Government and the
rebel forces of the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul
Wahid persists. We are pleased by the recent reductions
in incidents of intercommunal violence and conflicts
generated by the destruction of crops. However, it is
worrying that the root causes ofintercommunal conflicts
remain unresolved, and that conflicts generated by land
disputes that affect internally displaced persons upon
return to their places of origin remain ongoing.

Also of particular concern are the diminished but
persistent attacks and threats against humanitarian
personnel and the denial of access to some areas,
specifically in Jebel Marra, to UNAMID personnel.
We encourage the Government of the Sudan to continue
to implement initiatives such as the disarmament of
the civilian population, as established in the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur.

On the other hand, we are optimistic about the
progress made in the peace process in Darfur, such as
the signing of a pre-negotiation framework agreement
between the Government, the Sudanese Liberation
Army-Minni Minawi and the Justice and Equality
Movement, the meeting for which was convened in
Berlin on 6 December 2018.

With regard to the Doha Document, we underscore
the urgent need to reinvigorate that implementation,
especially with regard to the return of displaced persons
and the reintegration of ex-combatants, as well as the
need to fulfil the international community's promises
of financial support, which is crucial for stability and
sustainable peace in the country.

However, we are concerned that, recently and as a
consequence ofthe eruption ofprotests on 19 December
2018, that process has been postponed. We are also
concerned by the latest reports of the Government's
actions, such as the announcement of a state of
emergency throughout the country, the dissolution of
the federal and state Governments and its implications
for the UNAMID restructuring process. We call on
all parties to commit to the peace process in order to
ensure a definitive ceasefire and full humanitarian
access to the population affected by the conflict.

Another aspect of particular importance to us is
violence against women and girls. Despite reported
declines in such incidents, it is concerning that the
protection of girls and women from sexual violence
remains a challenge to the peace process in Darfur.
The high levels of threat of sexual violence restrict
the freedom of women and girls in the vicinity of
refugee camps and areas of return for displaced
persons, especially in the Jebel Marra area, in the
context of clashes between Government forces
and the Sudanese Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid. We
encourage further discussions between the Government
of the Sudan and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
on the establishment of a cooperation framework for
prevention and response in those cases.

Moreover, Darfur has been described as the first
climate-change conflict. That is ofparticular importance
to my delegation, as it is one of the priorities of the
Dominican Republic. Darfur is a diverse ecological
zone that is affected by droughts and is a first-hand
witness to the advance of the Sahara desert. That
strengthening process of desertification and drought
has slowly eroded the availability of natural resources
that are essential for survival and peaceful coexistence.

Former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said that
the conflict in Darfur began as an ecological crisis
caused, at least in part, by climate change. According
to the United Nations Environment Programme,
temperatures will continue to rise in the coming decades
in the Sudan, which could lead to a 70 per cent decrease
in the cultivation of grains such as sorghum. We are
concerned about the implications that this drought-
conflict cycle may have at the community level and
the increase in communal conflicts over water scarcity.
Therefore, in addition to the concern we have already
expressed, we see that situation as an opportunity for
the Council to address, in a unified manner and with
a practical approach, the risks associated with those
climate phenomena and their role as multipliers of
fragility, vulnerability and generators of conflicts.

With regard to the current process of downsizing
UNAMID and limiting operations to the Jebel Marra
area, we understand that it should be operational and not
a reduction in the responsibility for monitoring human
rights and protecting civilians in Darfur. It is necessary
to ensure a smooth and seamless transition involving
local authorities, autochthonous administrations,
internally displaced persons, youth and women. Any
reduction should reflect genuine improvements in the
situation on the ground and assurances that the United
Nations country team will have the necessary resources
and support to fill the gaps that have arisen.

Furthermore, we should ensure that any handover,
future transfers or closures of support offices or team
sites are made in consultation with local authorities
and for the benefit of communities, with attention
to the human rights of individuals. In addition, the
Sudanese Government must fulfil its role as the
main party responsible for achieving peace, stability
and development for the Sudanese people, with the
cooperation of the United Nations and other entities.

The Government of the Sudan must take national
ownership of that process and make a commitment
to working constructively and effectively to fulfil the
parameters established by the Secretary-General and
ensure a successful transition. We call on it to consider
allowing the mission to return to its former areas of
operation should further conflicts erupt down the
road. It is also essential to ensure a transparent justice
process for the men, women and children who have
been victims of human rights crimes and violations
committed by both sides during the conflict. Their
voices must be heard. All allegations must be properly
investigated and those responsible brought to justice.

