Ms. Bird (Australia): At the outset, on behalf of
all Australians, I would like to express our deepest
sympathies to those affected by the devastating
terrorist attack in Christchurch. Events in New Zealand
are a painful reminder that our protective systems
must continue to be flexible and evolve to address the
ever-changing threat environment with which we are
all confronted.

Terrorists need money to carry out their
atrocities - money for weapons and explosives, for
supplies, for travel and for shelter. Terrorists, like
criminals, constantly adapt how and where they move
their funds in order to circumvent safeguards that
countries have put in place. The evolution of financial
payment systems, while fostering economic growth
and efficiencies, provides ever-more alternatives for
terrorists and their supporters to finance their senseless
attacks. Global bodies such as the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) agree that we urgently need to take
concerted action to strengthen global counter-terrorist
financing regimes to combat the financing of serious
terrorist threats and contribute to strengthening the
financial and economic system.

Australia has a robust and dynamic anti-money-
laundering and counter-terrorism financing system
built upon close relationships among law enforcement
and intelligence agencies, policymakers, industry and
our international counterparts. Australia is committed
to upholding our obligations under the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism, resolution 1373 (2001), the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant/Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regimes, as well as the Financial Action Task Force's
standards and best practices in this area. We are
continually reviewing our domestic laws to further
strengthen those systems and enhance compliance with
our international obligations and the FATF standards.

Partnerships at all levels are critical if we are to
respond effectively to evolving threats. In partnering
with the United Nations and the Financial Action Task
Force, we can uncover new methodologies and tactics
used by terror financiers and make them visible to the
private and non-profit sectors.

Increasingly, direct engagement between the
public and private sector is augmenting the intelligence
and risk picture. Public-private partnerships such as
Australia's Fintel Alliance are facilitating collaboration
and intelligence-sharing in near to real-time, providing

alternative options for disruption. The Fintel Alliance
allows law enforcement agencies and the private sector
to share high-priority information to identify targets
or disrupt potential transactions that could finance
terrorist activities.

Australia was delighted to co-host with France,
Indonesia, Peru and Tunisia an Arria Formula meeting
of the Security Council on 31 January, which explored
ways to strengthen our efforts to combat the financing
of terrorism. We look forward to continuing that
important work as host of the second "No money for
terror" ministerial conference to be held in November.
We intend to explore four proposed themes - analysing
the current threat environment associated with
terrorism financing, public-private partnerships, virtual
currencies and the misuse of non-profit organizations
for terrorist financing purposes. In hosting the second
conference, following on from France's hosting of the
first conference, Australia reinforces its commitment
to starving terrorists of the funds needed to carry out
their senseless attacks.

