The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.

The German Government is deeply concerned about
the further deterioration of the overall situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The continued strangulation of Sarajevo
can under no circumstances be justified. The latest news
about the situation in and around Sarajevo gives rise to
the fear that there could be a new round of intensified
hostilities in the days to come. In this context, it
continues to be important not to forget who is the victim
and who is the aggressor in Bosnia. The United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR), a peace-keeping
operation sustained by the international community at
great cost and with a heavy toll in human lives, is
confronted with an ever more aggressive environment and
with hostile actions, in particular from the Bosnian Serb
side.

The taking of UNPROFOR personnel as hostages is
a contemptible act. We also condemn the continued
strangulation of Sarajevo and the horrifying shelling of
safe areas, which on a single day in Tuzla led to the
death of 71 Bosnians, most of them young.

We support the continued presence of UNPROFOR
in Bosnia. We support the plans by the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, France and the
Netherlands to reinforce UNPROFOR with a rapid-
reaction capability of up to 12,500 additional troops to
assist the mission in carrying out more effectively its
humanitarian mandate. That is why my delegation voted
in favour of this text and joined in sponsoring it. It is a
necessary step to ensure that the rapid-reaction forces can
be brought to the theatre as soon as possible.

A stronger UNPROFOR will be in a better position
to defend itself, to fulfil its mandate and to protect the
suffering civilian population wherever possible. The
parties have to agree without further delay to a cease-fire
and a complete cessation of hostilities in the Republic of

Bosnia

and Herzegovina.

However, a stronger

 

UNPROFOR presence. and even a cessation of hostilities
to be achieved as soon as possible, are not enough. What is
needed is progress in the search for a political solution on
the basis of the acceptance by the Bosnian Serb party of the
Contact Group plan as a starting point. We reiterate our call
to the Bosnian Serb party to abandon its course of
intransigence and rejection, which will only prolong the
suffering of the

Bosnian Serb people as well. We are following with
concern recent media reports that the Government and the
army of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) continue to support the Bosnian Serb
military. Military actions will not solve, but will only
exacerbate, the conflict in Bosnia. What is needed is a
political settlement. The continued presence of
UNPROFOR and its contributions to the international
community's efforts towards peace have been invaluable.
We support the continued presence of UNPROFOR in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the firm belief
that it will help to bring about the necessary conditions on
the ground for genuine and serious political negotiations
on a final settlement.

1 new resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on the agenda. The Security Council will
remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 3 am.
