Ms. Lee (Singapore): At the outset, Mr.
President, I would like to express my appreciation to
you for convening this meeting. I thank the Secretary-
General for his tenth report on the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) (S/2001/627),
which cogently sets out the issues for consideration at
this crucial period. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Adeniji,
for his comprehensive and very useful briefing.

As the situation in Sierra Leone improves, it is
not too early to consider ways in which the economy of
that country can ultimately become self-sustaining. In
this respect, the export of Sierra Leonean diamonds
will play a key role. It is, therefore, imperative that the
Government of Sierra Leone establishes effective
control over the key diamond-producing areas, such as
the Kono district. As such, the disarmament
process that will soon be conducted in the Kono and
Bonthe districts should be closely monitored.

At the same time, it must not be forgotten that the
mismanagement of diamond resources by previous
administrations was one of the root causes of the
conflict in Sierra Leone. A new opportunity has
presented itself for a better system to be established.
This opportunity must not be lost. Therefore, Singapore
joins in the Secretary-General's call for the
Government of Sierra Leone to give this issue its full
attention.

The Kono region is also the traditional stronghold
of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). The ability
of UNAMSIL to deploy effectively in this region and
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme thus takes on added significance.

We note that during the period under review the
track record of the RUF has been encouraging but not
perfect. My delegation believes that the willingness of
the RUF to cooperate partly stems from its continued
engagement in talks with the Government of Sierra
Leone, UNAMSIL and the renewed engagement of the
Civil Defence Force (CDF). These talks have helped to
address some of the legitimate concerns of the RUF, for
example, with regard to the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, the Special Court and the prospects for
reintegration.

My delegation supports the continued
engagement of all parties in the peace process. Those
with legitimate concerns should be allowed to air them,
and these concerns should be addressed as speedily as
possible. One such concern that has been expressed is
the mistreatment of ex-combatants when they return to
their home communities. Such mistreatment could
encourage ex-combatants to return to arms. As noted in
paragraph 30 of the Secretary-General's report,
"The reintegration aspect of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme is
pivotal to the success of the entire programme".

Therefore, it is important to spread the word of
tolerance and reconciliation to the peoples of Sierra
Leone. The public information arm of UNAMSIL is
critical to the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme as a whole, but while the
word of tolerance is spread to the peoples of Sierra
Leone, no tolerance can be shown to any spoiler of the
peace process. The Brahimi report calls on the United
Nations to

"be prepared to deal effectively with spoilers if it
expects to achieve a consistent record of success
in peacekeeping or peace-building in situations of
intrastate/transnational conflict".

The peace process in Sierra Leone has already
been disrupted more than once. While we continue to
exercise due diligence to prevent any such recurrence,
we must also send a strong message that another
attempt to spoil the peace process by any party will not
be tolerated.

We would also like to express our recognition of
the active role of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) in this issue. Singapore
joins in the call by both ECOWAS and the Secretary-
General for the heads of State of the Mano River Union
to meet. Inter-State dialogue is particularly important
for the resolution of the refugee crisis, which currently
plagues all three countries of the Mano River Union.
We agree with the Secretary-General's observation in
paragraph 22 of his report dated 23 May, document
S/2001/513, regarding this issue, that the presence and
movements of refugees and internally displaced
persons

"place a heavy burden on host States, receiving
communities and the environment and may
complicate an already fragile situation".

My delegation, therefore, looks forward to the swift
return of refugees and internally displaced persons to
their places of origin when the time is right.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Singapore's
support for the good offices of the Secretary-General,
for the sterling work that is taking place in Sierra
Leone and, in particular, the men and women of
UNAMSIL who are ably led by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Adeniji.
Sierra Leone presents the Security Council with an
opportunity to turn around what was a dismal situation
just a year ago to a success story. This is not the time
for complacency; rather, it is a time for sustained
efforts in the face of the magnitude of work still before
us.

The Security Council must continue to remain
seized of this matter.

