Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa was
honoured to lead the Security Council mission to
Timor-Leste, which comprised six delegations, namely,
Azerbaijan, India, Pakistan, Portugal, Togo and South
Africa, and took place from 3 to 6 November 2012.

The purpose ofthe Visit, as provided for the terms of
reference agreed upon prior to our visit by all members
of the Security Council, was to reaffirm the Security
Council's commitment to supporting Timor-Leste; to
assess the progress made on the ground; to discuss
with the Government of Timor-Leste its vision of an
innovative working relationship of cooperation with the
United Nations; to commend and express the Security
Council's full support for the work of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
and for the United Nations country team in Timor-
Leste; and to underscore the long-term commitment of
the international community to sustainable peace and
development in Timor-Leste.

In fulfilling that mandate, during its Visit to
Timor-Leste the mission met with various interlocutors
in Government, including the President, the Prime
Minister, the key Ministers in the Government, the
President of Parliament and political parties, including a
meeting with the leader of the main opposition party. The
mission also held interactions with non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and judicial and security actors,
as well as representatives of UNMIT and other United
Nations agencies on the ground. In addition, the Mission
received a briefing from the International Stabilisation

Force, led by Australia and New Zealand. The latter is
also in the process of drawing down its operation, with
the intention of leaving Timor-Leste.

Timor-Leste is a very different place from six years
ago, when the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste was initially deployed. There have been
significant developments in the country in the past
10 years, since the restoration of its independence
and, specifically, after the crisis in 2006. Due to the
resilience and determination of the Timorese people
and its leaders, the country has made tremendous
progress. Stability has prevailed. Thousands of
displaced persons have returned home. The elections
took place in accordance with international standards.
A new Government has been formed on the basis of the
outcome of the election. The opposition has space to
operate in line with democratic principles.

On 31 October, a few days before the mission's
Visit, the final certification of the full reconstitution
of the Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) took
place. The certification marked the end of operational
support by the United Nations police (UNPOL) to the
PNTL. It occurred after a PNTL-UNPOL joint working
group had prepared a report assessing the PNTL's
capacity. The report identified a number of gaps but
generally gave a favourable assessment of the PNTL's
institutional capacity.

Challenges include continued budgetary assistance
for the PNTL, the improvement of its disciplinary
regime and reporting mechanisms, the implementation
of PNTL-related aspects of the national plan of action
against gender-based violence and the improvement of
communications systems. During our visit, the mission
had an opportunity to engage with senior PNTL
officials and the UNPOL Commissioner. The mission
also visited the police training centre in Dili and the
police station in the town of Same.

In all our interactions, we could assess the progress
made in implementation the Joint Development Plan that
had guided the capacity-building efforts at the national
and district levels. The PNTL has been transformed
into a professional police force and its conduct in
providing exemplary security during the recent rounds
of elections is testament to that. The mission was also
introduced to 17 PNTL officers who were certified in
May and who are now awaiting deployment in United
Nations police missions. It was heartening to note
that women were part of that group of officers. In our

discussions with the Timorese interlocutors, we noted
that they were aware that there were gaps and that there
was willingness to address them.

The mission also had an opportunity to engage with
the Falintil-Forcas Armadas de Defesa de Timor-Leste
(F-FDTL). We were provided with an overview of the
progress in and plans of the defence sector. There have
been concerted attempts to separate the competencies
of the PNTL from those of the F-FDTL.

In February, the Council adopted resolution 2037
(2012), which extended the UNMIT mandate until
31 December 2012 and endorsed as a plan the phased
drawdown of UNMIT, in accordance with the wishes of
the Government of Timor-Leste, the conditions on the
ground and the subsequent successful completion of the
2012 electoral process.

On 20 September, Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao
sent a letter to the Secretary-General expressing his
Government's appreciation and heartfelt gratitude
to the United Nations for the continued support to
Timor-Leste (S/2012/736, annex). He further stated
that Timor-Leste no longer required United Nations
support through the presence of either a United
Nations peacekeeping or political mission beyond
the end of 2012 and that consequently there was no
requirement for the continued consideration of Timor-
Leste's affairs by the Security Council. Prime Minister
Gusmao noted that the United Nations would continue
to be an important partner in the new phase of the
country's development and that Timor-Leste would
like to establish an innovative working relationship of
cooperation with the United Nations with a focus on
institutional strengthening and development.

That message was explicitly relayed to the mission
in its interactions with the Prime Minister and senior
Government ministers. The Prime Minister suggested
that the future United Nations role could involve
the appointment of a non-resident special adviser
on Timor-Leste who would report directly to the
Secretary-General. The task of the special adviser
would be to support the implementation of Timor-
Leste's Strategic Development Plan and the efforts to
strengthen institutions within the framework of the
Millennium Development Goals, with special attention
to the principles of the new deal. The Prime Minister
stated that the Special Adviser could also play a role
in supporting Timor-Leste's leadership of the Group of
Seven Plus fragile States.

Resolution 2037 (2012) encouraged a timely
decision by the Government of Timor-Leste on the
nature, activities and scope of the United Nations post-
UNMIT in coordination with UNMIT and the United
Nations country team and other relevant stakeholders.
The Government of Timor-Leste has made its views
very clear. It does not seek to remain on the agenda
of the Security Council. Instead, it seeks an innovative
relationship with the United Nations focused on
development and institutional strengthening. All
Timorese stakeholders with which the mission
interacted were unanimous in their View that UNMIT's
role has run its course and that it should withdraw.
There were some divergent views on the future United
Nations role.

In our various interactions, especially with political
parties and NGOs, but also with the Government itself,
the challenges faced by the country became evident.
They include human resources capacity constraints,
strengthening State institutions and national and judicial
capacities, addressing past crimes, a security sector
review and socio-economic development. While not
insignificant, such challenges are not insurmountable.
They should be examined in the context of the huge
transition that the country has undergone in the past
10 years. Education, youth employment, health-care
and equitable development will require a continuous
close engagement by the Timorese authorities with the
support of their international partners to overcome the
remaining challenges. The institutional arrangements
that have been put in place provide confidence that
once UNMIT is withdrawn, the Government of Timor-
Leste has the capacity to address those challenges.

One key remaining issue once the UNMIT mandate
ends is that the investigations of all serious crimes will
not be complete. Under UNMIT, the Serious Crimes
Investigation Team was created to assist the Office of
the Prosecutor-General to conduct investigations into
the serious crimes of the past. That Team has managed
to investigate 319 cases to date and was hoping to reach
335 of the outstanding 396 cases by December. The
rest would thus remain pending and will require nine
months to be completed. The Government assured the
mission that the matter was being addressed.

The withdrawal of UNMIT will not mark the
end of the partnership between Timor-Leste and the
United Nations. The Organization will continue to
provide support to its national institutions by designing
and implementing programmes for its accelerated
development through United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes in partnership with Timor-Leste.
Bilateral cooperation between Timor-Leste and its
partners will continue to be important in providing the
necessary assistance. However, key to that new phase
would be national ownership of the process, which was
stressed to the mission in all its interactions.

In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere
gratitude to all Council members that participated in
the mission for their unwavering support. On behalf of
my colleagues who participated in the mission, I would
like to thank the Government and the people of Timor-
Leste for their hospitality, assistance and cooperation,
and the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the entire staff of UNMIT for providing us
with the necessary support during the Security Council
mission's Visit to Timor-Leste. I cannot end without also
thanking our support team - Ms. Lahoud, Mr. McNab,
Mr. Sinclair, security officers Edwards and Henn, and

all the Security Council Secretariat Branch and United

Nations security, respectively - for their professional

and tireless efforts and support during the preparatory

stage and during the mission.

