Mr. Yousfi (Algeria) (spoke in French): May I at
the outset congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council and on the
manner in which you have been guiding our work. I
should like also to thank and commend the
Chairpersons of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), the 1267 Committee and the 1540 Committee
for the presentation of their reports and to thank the
experts of the Committees for their continued efforts in
carrying out their missions.

The threat posed by the Al-Qaida organization
remains very real, and we must remain vigilant. We
welcome the fact that resolution 1617 (2005) has
enabled the 1267 Committee to fine-tune its guidelines,
especially regarding the modalities for listing on the
Consolidated List and the updating of information on
individuals and entities inscribed on the list. We hope
that this will enable us to overcome not only the
difficulties encountered by States that have chosen to
cooperate with the Committee and put names on the
consolidated list, but also the hesitation of some
member States of the Committee to acknowledge the
existence of links between certain terrorist individuals
and groups and Al-Qaida.

Algeria would like to emphasize the importance
of cooperation and mutual assistance among Member
States in the judicial area, in keeping with the relevant
Council resolutions. The legal rule of "extradite or
prosecute" must serve as the cardinal principle guiding
international cooperation to combat terrorism.

In that framework, we welcome the cooperation
between the 1267 Committee and Interpol, which will
no doubt help to enhance our effectiveness in bringing
to trial terrorists included on the Committee's list.
The first four Interpol-United Nations special
notices issued on 6 December 2005 represent a positive
step towards translating such cooperation into reality.

My delegation fully supports the work of the
CTC and welcomes the fact that the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED) is now operational. We
are convinced that this achievement will fully redound
to the benefit of Member States.

I welcome the successful visit made by the
Executive Directorate expert team to Algeria in
November 2005. We hope that other Member States,
including Security Council members, will volunteer to
host similar visits, especially in the light of the
adoption of resolution 1624 (2005) on inciting acts of
terrorism, which mandates the CTC to ensure its
follow-up and implementation.

Algeria, which took part in the drafting of that
resolution, believes that it represents significant
progress in the anti-terrorist struggle in all its aspects.
My country welcomes the steps taken recently by
certain countries to criminalize acts advocating
terrorism or inciting hatred or violence.

I should like to emphasize the major role that the
United Nations must play in providing developing
States with technical, institutional and legal assistance,
so as to enable them to overcome the difficulties they
face in carrying out their tasks under the relevant
Council resolutions.

That is the case with many African countries,
which, despite their goodwill, cannot alone cope with
the threats posed by terrorist organizations. Indeed,
terrorist organizations and their networks find our
continent a fertile ground for their deployment and for
the recruitment of militants. That is due to several
factors, including the geographical expanse of the
Sahel region, the permeability of certain borders, the
existence of many situations of internal conflict,
poverty, and the lack of resources on the part of
security services.

It is with that in mind that the African Centre for
Study and Research on Terrorism, in cooperation with
the United States' Africa Centre for Strategic Studies,
is, even as we speak, hosting an international seminar
in Algiers on cooperation to combat terrorism in the
Maghreb and in the Sahelo-Saharan region, with the
participation of several subregional African
organizations and United Nations experts.

Allow me to recall that in April 2004 my
delegation joined in the consensus in the Security
Council on resolution 1540 (2004). Indeed, it felt that,
given the lack of internationally binding norms
preventing the access and use by non-State actors of
weapons of mass destruction, it was the responsibility
of the Security Council to act, on an exceptional basis,
in order to address the threat of the possible use of
such weapons by terrorist groups.

That achievement illustrates the determination of
the international community to act decisively, in a
spirit of solidarity, against the terrorist threat. The
measures proposed by that resolution represent a
collective response that could prevent the proliferation
of such weapons.

It is important to note that the results achieved by
the 1540 Committee, which has been in existence a
little less than two years, have reflected a significant
involvement by Member States, which have submitted
numerous national reports on schedule. We must now
consolidate the gains made by enabling the Committee
experts to pursue their work, especially regarding
assistance to States that request it, as set out in the
mandate of April 2004.

Finally, Algeria remains convinced that the best
way to cope with the threat of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction is to eliminate them
totally.

