I thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Mark Lowcock and David Beasley for their important updates, and Omer Badokhon for his briefing. It is sad that the conflict in Yemen has failed to improve, with the deteriorating economy and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) proving a deadly combination. It is inconceivable that the number of people facing acute food insecurity is expected to exceed 17 million this year, up from 15 million in 2019. Let me reiterate what my delegation has been saying in the past several months. First, only through a political process can the Yemenis shape the future they want and need. I completely agree with what Martin Lowcock said just now, that, at the end of the day, those who have to negotiate are the parties concerned, and our task is to create a conducive environment for that to happen. We encourage Martin to continue to bring them together. The option is there - through the three Special Envoy's three proposals, the parties can choose a different path for their people: a path without guns and bloodshed. The first step would be a nationwide ceasefire, accompanied by measures to restore the economy. The next step should be the resumption of an inclusive political process, with the participation of women and youth. Women are very important in the peace process. We know that this will take time, but the more protracted the conflict, the more damage it will inflict and the greater the suffering of the people. Indonesia therefore once again reiterates the importance for all to expeditiously agree on the joint declaration and to resume dialogue on a comprehensive political settlement, in line with the relevant resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015). The full implementation of Riyadh agreement is also crucial for allowing a more comprehensive political process. We therefore applaud the continuous efforts by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to mediate the process. Secondly, the parties should exercise maximum restraint and protect civilians. International humanitarian law was created to protect civilians in armed conflict. This is an obligation for all the parties to an armed conflict, whoever and wherever they are. The continuous attacks by the Houthis in civilian areas in the cities of Ma'rib, Taiz and in Al-Hudaydah violate international humanitarian law and must be condemned. We again urge the Houthis to stop targeting civilians and infrastructure. They must reduce violence and thereby give space to measures that could support the peace process. Thirdly, access to humanitarian efforts should be improved. Restrictions on the humanitarian workers in the biggest humanitarian operation in the world is unacceptable. With increased violence and COVID-19, humanitarian agencies already have a very complicated job. They should be permitted to deliver the assistance to those in need quickly and safely. The five urgent priorities updated by Mark Lowcock are now extremely urgent, as we no longer have the luxury of time. Mark Lowcock and David Beasley gave a grim picture of what lies ahead for the children and population of Yemen, due to famine leading to catastrophic scenario. We need to act now, with resources and with political solutions. But, most important, the parties concerned must act to save their peoples. On the FSO SAFER oil tanker, it is regrettable that the United Nations repair team is still denied access. We question whether there was ever any intention to allow such access. In view of the dangers, my delegation again urges expeditious access for the repair team. In conclusion, I will not tire of repeating that the parties must take all necessary measures, in a timely fashion, to prevent famine and the further suffering of our Yemeni brothers and sisters. That is the responsibility of leaders. That is the only way to restore to the people the hope and the future that belong to them. To close, allow me to quote from Dwight Eisenhower's Chance for Peace speech, which is still relevant in the context of Yemen: "Every gun that is made, every warship launched, every rocket fired signifies, in the final sense, a theft from those who hunger and are not fed, those who are cold and are not clothed".
