Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): We wish at the outset
to congratulate Malaysia on its assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of August.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
this morning and his report (S/2016/360), as well
as the representative of UNICEF and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.

Botswana reaffirms the importance it attaches
to the protection and promotion of the rights of
children, including in the context of armed conflict.
The international community therefore has a moral
obligation to collectively pay attention to children's
welfare, without any distinction.

We strongly support all efforts aimed at preventing
violations against children during armed conflict in
all their manifestations, including the mandate and the
work of the Secretary-General's Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict.

My delegation welcomes efforts such as the
Children, Not Soldiers campaign; the Guidelines for
Protecting Schools and Universities from Military
Use during Armed Conflict; and the Safe Schools
Declaration. We believe that these are timely initiatives
that will go a long way towards complementing ongoing
efforts to end the use of children in armed conflict and
protecting facilities such as schools and hospitals.

The nature and character of conflict has involved
over time, increasingly targeting innocent civilians
and subjecting them to unspeakable acts of horror,
exploitation and abuse. The rise in the number of
non- State actors involved in conflict further complicates
this already complex situation.

The threat to international peace and security
posed by these developments, particularly the
internationalization of these conflicts, requires urgent
and decisive action by the Council. Chief among its
objectives as it does so must be to ensure the protection
and promotion of the rights of children everywhere,
including in armed conflict, and to enable them to
study in an environment of safety and security.

Botswana is deeply concerned about the gravity of
these evolving violations against children, including
abductions, which have begun to occur at a startling
rate. The Secretary-General's report shows that
whereas in the past the mass abduction of civilians,
including children in armed-conflict situations, was
largely a means to an end, today they are an end unto
themselves, with the prime objective of inflicting terror
and horror.

We note with sadness the numerous executions
and incidents involving the maiming of children that
have been clearly captured in the report. This matter
has been reported over time, and it is our sincere hope
that the perpetrators of such acts will one day be called
to account.

We must guarantee the full protection of the
rights of children so as to enable them to attend school
without interruption, enjoy access to all social services
that contribute to their development, good health and
well-being, so that they can realize their full potential.

Botswana firmly believes that States have the
primary responsibility to protect their own populations
from all manner of abuse. This includes the protection
of children from the risk of war. In this regard, we wish
to stress the urgency and importance of enhancing
political will and the commitment to prevent and
address the tragic plight of children in armed conflict.

We encourage focus on national ownership and
responsibility; engagement with the Governments
and armed groups concerned, aimed at establishing
frameworks for accountability; and the systematic
monitoring of such commitments, for these are of the
utmost priority to us.

We therefore call on the Security Council to continue
its efforts to fight impunity and enforce accountability,
including the adoption of targeted measures against
persistent perpetrators of violations against children.
Where violations are committed and verified, they
must be referred to the International Criminal Court,
which must, without exception, put an end to impunity
and bring the perpetrators to justice.

Botswana believes that the strengthening of
global efforts to end the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict should be consistent with
and complementary to wider efforts to promote and
implement Security Council resolutions on children
and armed conflict.

As we continue to seek solutions for international
peace and security, our strategies must be guided by
the desire for lasting and sustainable peace. We should
address the root causes of conflict, such as social
exclusion, economic inequality, gender discrimination
and ethnic tension, to mention but a few. In this regard,
we welcome the significant efforts made by several
States in implementing Council resolutions, including
resolution 1612 (2005), 1998 (2011), 2068 (2012), 2143
(2014) and 2286 (2016), and we believe that these should
continue to be vigorously pursued.

We share the view that such efforts should be
supported in order to strengthen national capacities
for child protection, investigative and prosecutorial
capacities and accountability mechanisms, and the
establishment of age-verification processes for military
recruitment must be ensured.

Finally, Botswana reaffirms its commitment to
fulfilling its obligations under international law and
under all other international instruments to which it
is a party. Botswana regards it as fundamentally clear
that in some of the States where major conflicts and
crises rage, the authorities have manifestly failed in
their responsibility to protect civilians. In this respect,
we believe that where States are unwilling or unable to
protect their populations, the international community
must step in to safeguard human rights.

