South Africa views the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) as one of most important diplomatic achievements in the area of nuclear non-proliferation since the signing of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty. We believe it is an exemplar of collective action to consolidate peace through cooperation and collaboration on the basis of a binding agreement, and, therefore, its preservation and implementation should be foremost. We are also of the view that the JCPOA has contributed significantly to the reduction of tensions over Iran's nuclear programme and remains vital to promoting peace, stability and the normalization of relations. South Africa's abstention in the voting on the draft resolution (S/2020/797) before us today is informed by the fact that we believe that the JCPOA participants and all Council members should remain true to their commitment to uphold and implement resolution 2231 (2015). It is therefore crucial that there be full implementation of the JCPOA by all parties in order to re-establish trust in the agreement and avoid any action that would further undermine the integrity of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. South Africa is of the view that the draft text presented by the United States is unfortunately not in keeping with this commitment and would undermine resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. Any non-compliance with the Council's resolutions only undermines the credibility of the Council in fulfilling its central mandate. Furthermore, South Africa believes that any initiative that falls outside the ambit of the delicate balance established by the JCPOA risks upending the balance further and thus adds to the already dire threat to the continuation of this hard-won agreement. Therefore, we encourage the parties to exhaust all options within the JCPOA dispute resolution mechanism before the consideration of options outside it, which could result in the dismantling of the terms of the agreement. We are concerned that any undermining of the JCPOA will lead only to an exacerbation of tensions, and we therefore believe that this issue would be best addressed through consultative dialogue among all members of the JCPOA, outside the Security Council. This will minimize the potential for creating further tensions in an already divided Council. In an effort to avoid any measures that would challenge the integrity of the processes of the Council, South Africa will continue to encourage all parties involved in the JCPOA to act responsibly and in a manner that promotes peace and builds confidence and trust among nations. South Africa will remain resolute in supporting efforts to resolve tensions among all stakeholders and will always promote dialogue rather than antagonism in order to safeguard the gains already made in terms of disarmament and non-proliferation, as these are essential for the maintenance of broader international peace and security.
