Mr. Amon-Tanoh (Cote d'Ivoire) (Spoke in French): Allow me, first of all, to express the regrets
of His Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara, President of
the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire, who, owing to scheduling
constraints, could not attend this high-level debate to
which you, Mr. President, kindly invited him. I would
therefore like to extend to you, Mr. President, his warm
congratulations on your country's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February, and to assure you, Sir, of Cote d'Ivoire's full
support in carrying out your tasks. I am also pleased to
express my appreciation for the timely initiative of this
debate on the impact of the phenomenon of mercenarism
on international peace and security, particularly in
Africa. Finally, I would like to congratulate Mr. Antonio
Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations, and
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, for the quality of their briefings
and the appropriateness of their recommendations.

Unfortunately, mercenarism is an old and
widespread practice. It is characterized by the formation
of armed groups, comprising large and extremely
well-armed combat forces who are ready to fight on
behalf of the highest bidder, and thereby pose a lasting
threat to the peace and stability of States and regions.
This practice is inadmissible and cannot be allowed
to continue.

Several African countries have been continuously
victimized by the destabilizing activities of
mercenaries, as defined by the Organization of African
Unity Convention for the Elimination of Mercenarism
in Africa of 1977 and the International Convention
against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training
of Mercenaries of 1989, which aim to criminalize such
activities. To this day, these activities are a source
of major concern on the continent, particularly in
Central Africa.

It is undeniable that the appetite for natural
resources, political and social divisions within
countries and cross-border conflicts contribute greatly
to the growth of mercenarism. It is even more true
that illicit mining and trade in natural resources,
fuelled by weakened State authority resulting from the
political instability of some Central African countries,
encourages the continuation of mercenary activities in
that region.

Indeed, in an environment of instability, the armed
groups that thrive in areas not controlled by the State
are involved in various illicit trafficking activities,
including the recruitment of foreign mercenaries to
increase their numbers. That dialectic is well described
by the various reports of United Nations groups of
experts on the Democratic Republic of Congo and the
Central African Republic, which reveal that armed
groups and mercenaries that generally occupy areas
rich in natural resources become involved in the illicit
exploitation and trade of those resources.

In a report on the situation in the Central African
Republic contained in document A/HRC/36/47/Add.1,
the Working Group on the use ofmercenaries as a means
of violating human rights and impeding the exercise
of the rights of peoples to self-determination, which
was established by the Human Rights Council, found
that mercenaries had taken advantage of the fragile
security situation in the Central African Republic to
carry out criminal activities, including murder, looting
and the destruction of private property, as well as the
imposition of illegal taxes on local populations. Such
organized criminal activities weaken States, hamper
their development, fuel armed conflict and undermine
the international community's peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts. Faced with the threats posed by
mercenary activities, particularly in Central Africa,
our response must be collective and include the three
international, regional and national dimensions.

My country welcomes the efforts of the international
community, including the United Nations, to put an
end to mercenarism and punish those who engage in
it. The international community, in particular the
United Nations, has repeatedly condemned the use
of mercenaries, which threatens global peace and
security. A further step was taken when, on 4 December
1989, the General Assembly adopted the International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing
and Training of Mercenaries. That was followed by the
establishment, in 2005, by the Commission on Human
Rights, now the Human Rights Council, of the Working
Group on the use of mercenaries as a means of violating
human rights and impeding the exercise of the right of
peoples to self-determination.

However, Cote d'Ivoire remains concerned about
the low level of interest in that Convention, which
remains the main legally binding instrument at the
international level. Moreover, my delegation would
like to encourage all Member States that have not yet
signed it to conclude the formalities, with a View to
extending the scope ofthe Convention once it is ratified
by those States.

The only specific and binding instrument at the
regional level is the Convention for the Elimination
of Mercenarism in Africa, adopted in 1977 by the
Organization of African Unity, now the African Union.
Also at that level, only 30 African countries have ratified
the Convention, while the African continent continues
to be the region most threatened by mercenary activity.
My country therefore calls on all African States to
ratify that document in order to increase the means of
combating mercenarism on our continent.

In addition, it is vital to strengthen cooperation
with a view to finding coordinated solutions to the
issue of securing common borders and repatriating
mercenaries as part of the disarmament, demobilization
and reinsertion or repatriation processes implemented
in some countries in Central Africa, in particular the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the significant progress
made in the fight against mercenarism, particularly
the adoption and entry into force of the International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing
and Training of Mercenaries. By making participation
in mercenary activities an offence subject to mandatory
universal jurisdiction, that document is an important
tool in fighting the impunity enjoyed by that scourge.
The perpetrator of an offence can now be tried by any
State party to the Convention on whose territory he is
arrested. My delegation remains convinced that the
effective implementation of existing instruments of
international law will be a decisive step in the process
of combating mercenarism.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that it is by
pooling our resources that such progress can be made
in order to free Africa from the harmful consequences
of mercenarism, thereby enabling the affected
regions to find again the right path to peace, stability
and prosperity.

On that note of hope, I would like to reiterate my
congratulations to you, Mr. President, on the wise choice
of this topic, as well as my sincere wishes for success in
your conduct of the presidency of the Security Council
throughout the month of February.

