Mr. Brahimi: It has been more than five months
since I last addressed the Security Council. I am
heartened by the Council's continued interest
throughout this period, and by the support it has
provided for the work the United Nations is trying to
do in Afghanistan. I am most grateful to my colleague
Sir Kieran Prendergast, who has briefed the Council
regularly on developments in Afghanistan. Members
have also seen the 11 July 2002 report of the Secretary
General on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2002/737). I
am pleased to have this opportunity to share a few
impressions about where things currently stand, and
where we go from here.

So far, the peace process is on track. To be sure, it
is a fragile peace which must be handled with great
care so that it does not unravel. But there are a few
critical factors which give cause for cautious optimism.
First, the people of Afghanistan are truly tired of
fighting. After 23 years during which they experienced
every form of bloodshed and repression and witnessed
every kind of loss and destruction, Afghans are finally
tasting peace. Most of them are determined to do
everything in their power to avoid a relapse into war.

Secondly, while there are still many individuals
and factions seeking power and perhaps ready to go to
great lengths to gain or hold on to it, no one has so far
opted out of the peace process.

Thirdly, the international community's interest in
Afghanistan has not waned, despite the fact there are
many other crises and deserving causes elsewhere in
the world. We owe a particular debt of gratitude to the
donor community for its invaluable assistance to the
interim administration and its United Nations and non-
governmental organization (NGO) partners in the
following areas: the successful campaign which has
allowed more than 3 million children to return to
primary school; the return of more than 1 million
refugees and hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons; a modest but determined poppy
eradication campaign; a successful locust campaign
programme in the north; and a series of nationwide
vaccination campaigns which reached millions of
children. We hope that, as a result of the patient and
persistent work of the United Nations in the latter field,
polio will be completely eradicated in Afghanistan
within 12 years.

Finally, all the deadlines set out in the Bonn
Agreement have been met on time. Perhaps the most
significant was the timed reconvening of the
Emergency Loya Jirga, an event many people doubted
would ever take place. The fact that it did take place,
on schedule and without a single security incident, is in
itself a great achievement. The Loya Jirga is a
traditional institution in Afghanistan which historically
has not been very representative. However, this Loya
Jirga, which took place only six months after the end of
a long and bitter conflict, was not designed to be, nor
could it realistically have been, a perfectly democratic
or representative process. It did, nevertheless,
incorporate significant and innovative democratic
elements. As a result, two thirds of the 1,600 delegates
who took part were actually selected by the people
themselves. The members spanned every ethnic and
political group, and 200 of them were women. There
was no precedent for any of that in Afghanistan. For
more than a week, those delegates gathered, in the
absence of guns and bullets, to begin debating some of
the most difficult and controversial issues facing the
country, providing great hope for national
reconciliation. In all of these senses, the Loya Jirga,
even if it was not perfect, represented a significant step
forward in the peace process.

Despite those achievements, countless challenges
and problems remain. Foremost among them is
security, which is one of the most critical requirements
for a sustainable peace but which has remained elusive
in many parts of the country. The questions we had six
months ago - how many members of the Taliban and
Al Qaeda remained in Afghanistan, and what kind of a
threat they really posed to the stability of the
country - remain unanswered. Until and unless we
have evidence to the contrary, we must assume that
those groups can still pose a threat.

In many regions of the country, security remains
precarious. In the north, for example, the situation has
seriously deteriorated in recent weeks, culminating in
the tragic gang rape of a female aid worker last month.
Since January, the United Nations has documented
more than 70 serious security incidents in that region
involving aid agencies or vulnerable groups. That list
does not begin to capture the insecurity with which
Afghans in certain regions of the country, who feel that
they are permanently at the mercy of armed groups,
must live on a daily basis.

I have taken up this issue with the commanders in
the north and have made it clear to them that they bear
the ultimate responsibility for bringing criminals and
human rights violators to justice. I have also repeatedly
conveyed to them the Secretary-General's warning that
continued insecurity is likely to discourage donors
from investing in the region.
But the real key to the restoration of security lies
in the creation of a national army and a national police
force, along with a strong demobilization programme.
Equally important will be the proposed reform of the
National Directorate for Security, the NDS. It is
reported that a young man died last month in
circumstances that were suspicious, to say the least,
while he was in detention in the NDS. That is not
acceptable in today's world, and, more important, it is
not acceptable to the people of Afghanistan, who need
to feel protected - not threatened - by the
intelligence and other security services in their country.

President Karzai has highlighted the
establishment of the national army and police and the
reform of the NDS as being among his top priorities for
the transitional period, but he will need a clear
commitment from factional leaders, as well as much
more determined and sustained support from the
international community, in order to realize those
objectives.

Our American and German partners have been
doing very good work in training the army and the
police, respectively. But, before rushing ahead with
training, it is essential to ensure that a comprehensive
strategy has been worked out for those institutions, of
which training would be only one part - a strategy
that needs to have the support both of the Transitional
Administration and of donors. And it must be ensured
that potential spoilers have been brought on board or
otherwise neutralized. Failing that, a national system of
security will not have much chance of success.

It is indispensable, for example, that plans be in
place for the phasing out of those who currently call
themselves soldiers and police, so that we do not
simply create yet another police force and yet another
army in a country where too many such forces already
exist. It must be established that the relevant ministries
are committed to pursuing sustainable methods of
recruitment and to ensuring that the new forces are
adequately armed and equipped. And it must be
ensured that barracks are in place to house new trainees
and that the resources are available to pay them over
the long run. For that, we will need to translate
international commitments into concrete contributions,
both to the army trust fund, which the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will
manage, and to the law and order trust fund for police
activities, which the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) is managing.

All of that will take time, but it will be time well
spent if it leads to the establishment of truly
sustainable institutions. In the meantime, however, a
real security void exists in the country, leaving many
Afghans feeling vulnerable and uncertain about their
own future and that of their country.

We have recognized time and again the dramatic
improvement in security in Kabul in less than six
months, thanks to the presence of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF). Every foreign
delegation that has visited Kabul over the past few
months has praised this progress and has acknowledged
that the precarious security situation elsewhere in the
country could hamper progress on both the political
and the recovery fronts. Yet there does not seem to be
much support for the one measure that is certain to
improve the security situation: the expansion of ISAF
to other parts of the country.

We continue to believe that the expansion of
ISAF would have an enormous impact on security and
that it could be achieved with relatively few troops, at
relatively little cost and with little danger to those
troops. It has been suggested that alternative solutions
for security might be proposed and considered pending
the establishment of the national army and police. But
no such ideas have been put forth, and even the very
modest arrangements that the Secretary-General
proposed in order to provide security during the Loya
Jirga were not supported.

The peace process has now entered a new phase,
and we must all turn to the important tasks ahead.
During the transitional period, the Afghan leadership
must translate the priorities that have been outlined by
President Karzai into a set of achievable objectives,
including good governance, the development of key
institutions and the implementation of recovery and
reconstruction projects. The international community
must do what it can to help the Government function as
a cohesive national unit that speaks with one voice.
The Transitional Authority must also proceed quickly
to establish a constitutional commission to undertake
the sensitive task of drafting the country's new
constitution.

With regard to the census, which was one of the
requests made of the international community in the
Bonn Agreement, experts have advised us that it could
take anywhere from three to five years - and perhaps
even longer under the circumstances that exist in
Afghanistan - to complete such a census.
Nevertheless, we are looking into whether this time
frame could be reduced if maximum resources were
made available.
At the same time, the Electoral Assistance
Division of the Department of Political Affairs will
soon undertake an assessment of what will be needed
in order to start preparations for the national elections,
also provided for in the Bonn Agreement.

With regard to human rights and the justice
sector, the commissions prescribed in Bonn have been
set up, and we hope that they will soon be operational.
Our objective is to assist in creating the conditions that
will allow Afghans to take full charge of these issues.
Clearly, the international community will have to
provide significant assistance - financial, technical
and political - to help these commissions carry out
their difficult and sensitive tasks, which will be critical
in restoring accountability and the rule of law in
Afghanistan. However, the process must be led and
implemented by Afghans themselves.

We must also not forget that there is still a
humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan and that this crisis is
likely to persist for some time. We are facing funding
shortfalls, but refugees are returning in record
numbers, and the services that would allow them to
resettle and reintegrate in their own towns and villages,
instead of flocking to already overcrowded and
overburdened urban centres, are mostly absent.
Meanwhile, the drought continues and household food
security is at risk. And a few months from now,
millions of vulnerable Afghans will face another hard
winter.

In addition to helping the Government of
Afghanistan meet the humanitarian needs of its people,
we must support sustainable recovery and
reconstruction efforts. But recovery and reconstruction
have been slow to materialize, and the pledges made in
Tokyo have not yet translated into concrete
improvements in the lives of ordinary Afghans.
Meanwhile, the Transitional Administration anticipates
a serious crisis with respect to its ability to cover

recurrent expenditures beyond the next four to six
months.

Thus, while recognizing that the donor
community has been extremely generous to date, and
while acknowledging that the impact of most recovery
and reconstruction projects cannot be immediately
visible, continued engagement and the urgent
translation of pledges into commitments are essential. I
know that our concerns on this issue are shared by
ACBAR, the coordinating body for the most important
Afghan and international non-governmental
organizations working in Afghanistan. The recent
meetings in Europe of the Afghanistan Reconstruction
Steering Group, the Afghanistan Support Group and
the G-8 indicated that the donor community intends to
stay the course and ensure that Afghanistan does not
experience paralyzing delays in providing the bare
necessities to its neediest regions and people.

As far as the structure of UNAMA is concerned,
the underlying philosophy of the Mission remains the
same: on the one hand, integration, so that political
activities are linked to and informed by those in the
relief, recovery and reconstruction sectors, and linked
as well to the four cross-cutting areas - that is,
gender, human rights, the rule of law and
demobilization. On the other hand, the Mission is to
have a light expatriate footprint and strive to build
Afghan capacities, so that Afghans can take over as
many of the functions that we are now performing, as
soon as possible.

Integration is already taking place, but we need to
accelerate the pace. The different and sometimes
contradictory rules, regulations and cultures of the
peacekeeping, political and assistance arms of the
United Nations have made the already difficult
integration process an even more challenging one.

This has been a learning process for us, but I
believe that the entire United Nations family is
committed to our goal of ensuring that the
Organization's activities strengthen Afghan
capacities - not only our own institutional
capabilities - and, secondly, that we are responsive to
the priorities articulated in the Transitional
Administration's National Development Framework,
and not to our own agendas or priorities.

A great deal of hard work has been done to
develop a clear strategic direction for all of our
recovery, relief and reconstruction activities. The
appointment in May of programme secretariats was an
essential element in this effort to bring together
agencies and donors into programme groups and to
help the Administration know what resources are
coming into the country, and who is doing what, and
where. But better management and circulation of
information remains a major challenge on which
UNAMA has to work with its partners in the weeks and
months ahead.

As far as the light footprint is concerned, progress
has also been made, but I believe that we must continue
to work to make the delivery of services to the people
of Afghanistan even more cost-effective. Each part of
the United Nations system must, therefore,
continuously ask itself whether its involvement in a
particular sector is based on the fact that it has a
comparative advantage to offer.

The Transitional Authority is concerned that
donors remain reluctant to contribute significant
financial resources directly to the national budget,
while they continue to channel much of their assistance
through the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations. A core element of UNAMA's role during
the next 18 months will be assisting in building
national capacity and confidence in governance
systems so that international assistance will indeed
flow more directly to the Afghan Administration and
civil society organizations, making the United Nations
presence lighter and more effective. This has already
been accomplished in the field of demining, and it sets
a very strong and encouraging example for the rest of
the United Nations family.

In order to achieve this across the board, we plan
to give maximum emphasis to supporting capacity
development within central and provincial
administrations, thereby increasing the number of
Afghan professionals in the United Nations system
itself. This should go a long way towards achieving the
objectives upon which the structure of UNAMA was
based.

The late Haji Abdul Qadir played an extremely
positive role during the Loya Jirga, and the support he
provided in his native J alalabad was decisive in making

the preparatory phases there highly successful. We had
been looking forward to his contribution in the next
stage of the peace process, as Vice-President of the
Transitional Administration. He will be sorely missed.
His tragic assassination serves as a reminder that,
whatever successes may have been witnessed so far in
Afghanistan, a single act or event can send fear down
the spines of the most powerful people in Afghanistan
and has the potential to seriously destabilize the
situation.

So far we have been lucky, for there have been
few such events. But as the peace process moves
forward, we must be prepared for further setbacks, and
perhaps even crises, for a situation as complex as
Afghanistan defies quick and easy resolution. And the
response to tragedies such as the assassination of Haji
Qadir should be more determined cooperation with the
Afghan people and those leaders who, with Hamid
Karzai, are dedicated to the peace process.

Ashraf Ghani, the new Minister of Finance of
Afghanistan, reminded us at the Afghanistan Support
Group meeting in Geneva last week that, following the
establishment of the Transitional Administration,
Afghanistan is at a crossroads. We have encountered
many other crossroads in the months since Bonn, and I
hope that we have taken the right turn most of the time.

The challenge before us now is to prove to the
people of Afghanistan that we will not disengage until
we have made good on our promises to them, and that
we will not allow setbacks to reverse our course. We
owe this to the people of Afghanistan and to regional
and global security, for we know only too well that
instability in that remote part of the world can have
repercussions far beyond the borders of Afghanistan.

