Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I wish first to thank China
for organizing this very important open debate.

Hungary, of course, aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered later on behalf of the European Union, but
I should like to say a few words in my national capacity.

Hungary truly believes that terrorism is a global
problem that has to be tackled globally. We always say
that terrorists cannot win, and we can counter terrorism
only through the broadest possible international
cooperation and with the help fo a comprehensive
set of instrucments, ranging from security measures
to preventive tools. Hungary believes that all acts of
terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless
of their motivation and wherever, whenever and by
whomever they are committed. Terrorism should not be
associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or
ethnic group.

Hungary believes that the United Nations is the
best placed to play a leading role in the coordination
of international counter-terrorism cooperation. It is
the best placed to assess and monitor international
priorities, set international strategies and policies,
and play an important role in capacity-building. In
this regard, we fully support the all-of-United Nations
approach laid out in the Secretary- General's recent
Plan of Action on Preventing Violent Extremism. We
also believe that the upcoming review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy will
offer a unique opportunity to reach consensus on the
robust framework of international cooperation and
coordination that is needed to counter terrorism today.

Hungary supports all international and regional
efforts aimed at cutting off the sources of terrorism.
The Hungarian criminal code criminalizes terrorism
financing and money-laundering for such purposes.
We believe that the efforts and specific activities of
the relevant financial intelligence units of Member
States must be harmonized on the basis of shared
information and joint investigations, as appropriate,
to more effectively hamper the capacity of terrorist
organizations to function and survive.

The most recent tragedies in Brussels have also
painfully reminded us of the importance of curbing
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters. More effective
border control is needed if we are to be able to manage
the security threat caused by foreign terrorist fighter
returnees. Interoperable databases and real-time
information-sharing should help more us to effectively
monitor the travel of foreign terrorist fighters and
ensure swift action by all stakeholders when needed.

A comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy
cannot be based solely on security measures. Enhanced
preventive measures are also critical elements for
success. Good governance, the rule of law, full respect
for human rights, quality education, youth participation,
intercultural dialogue all play an important role in
preventing radicalization. We must also engage all
members of society, including religious leaders,
women leaders, leaders in the arts, music and sports in
this regard.

One of the greatest challenges of our time is to
create an Internet that is a free and safe environment
for our children and youth and prevents terrorists from
exploiting the Internet for their own purposes. We must
learn from examples of responsible online activism
that effectively engages young people to contribute
to inclusive societies and a sustainable future for all.
We support all efforts aimed at confronting terrorists'
distorted propaganda, including the activities of
those Muslim communities, Islamic leaders, imams
and other Islamic opinion-leaders who commit their
actions to making a clear difference between Islam as
a religion and Da'esh propaganda, which goes against
it. We are also pleased that various service and content
providers are open to cooperating with the international
community when terrorist online content is reported
to them.

