Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): At
this, the first public meeting, I should like, Sir, to wish
you every success as President of the Council. I should
like also to thank Ambassadors Mufioz and Maquieira
for their past stewardship of the Council.

I, too, wish to associate myself with the sympathy
expressed earlier to the Russian Government, and
indeed we should condemn all such acts of terrorism
against innocent people, wherever they may take place.
I should like to associate myself with the remarks to be
made later by Ambassador Ryan on behalf of the
Presidency of the European Union.

I thank Mr. Holkeri for his report and for the
contribution that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is making
in Kosovo. There has been much progress in Kosovo
since the establishment of UNMIK, but there is clearly
much more to do. I should like to set out five simple
points.

First, all politicians in Kosovo need to show a
greater commitment to, and to assume real
responsibility for, sustainable progress in the province.
They should manifest a determination to improve the
lives of all Kosovo's people. We think that it is time for
all Kosovo politicians fully to support a common
agenda and the agreed standards. Those standards
include dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, and
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government should
establish delegations for that dialogue, and in particular
for the working groups, without further delay.

Secondly, ownership carries with it
responsibilities. The United Kingdom expects the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to
demonstrate their capacity to govern, their concern for
all of Kosovo's citizens and their commitment to
reform, in line with European integration - in short, to
fulfil the responsibilities they already have. Only then
should we be ready to consider suggestions of their
taking on further responsibilities.

But those responsibilities in the Constitutional
Framework that would normally be reserved for States
cannot be transferred pending the settlement of
Kosovo's future status - its final status. We would
welcome attendance by the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government at the quarterly review meetings in
the Security Council, provided that any delegation is
strictly multi-ethnic. But in saying that, the PISG
should recognize and appreciate the fact that the
Council will expect such representation to be
accompanied by tangible progress.

Thirdly, Mr. Holkeri dwelled on standards for
Kosovo, set out within the framework of resolution
1244 (1999), which remain, in our View, the only way
forward for a settlement which would eventually
provide for European integration. Non-participation by
the Kosovo Serbs in the standards and implementation
working groups is not consistent with those aims.
Belgrade should not, for its part, obstruct their
attendance. Rather, it should encourage their
participation.

None of this is taking place in a vacuum. On 12
December, this Council endorsed an approach which
introduced a review mechanism for progress on
standards. It comprised the following elements: the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government's progress
on implementing the standards will be reviewed
quarterly; the Special Representative will report back,
through the Secretary-General's reports to the Council,
on progress made in each reporting period; and the
formal review in mid-2005 - or earlier if progress
warrants - will serve as a basis upon which to decide
whether to begin a process to determine Kosovo's
future status in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999).

There is nothing, as I see it, automatic about that
process. If Kosovo has made the necessary progress on
the standards, then a process will begin to determine
the final status in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999); but if it does not pass the review on that date,
then there will have to be another review at a later date.
If I may, I should like to underline one very simple
message. There will be, in the United Kingdom's View,
no decision on process or outcomes of status
discussions until the standards are met. All final status
options remain on the table within the principles of full
observance for democracy, human rights, multi-
ethnicity and minority representation.

Along with that, however, there are two key
points to be stressed. The assessment will be negative
if insufficient progress is made, and the process will
not be derailed because some on either side object to it.
Extremists have had their day in the Balkans and those
who obstruct progress, in our view, deserve no say in
the future of Kosovo.

Fourthly, we very much welcome the joint efforts
of the United Nations and the European Union to tackle
corruption. A strong, coordinated approach by both
bodies lies at the heart of tackling that problem.
Investigative and remedial action are equally
important. We welcome, therefore, the
recommendations made by the Office of Internal
Oversight Services in its report. We cannot expect local
communities to live up to their responsibilities if the
international community is not to live up to its own.
The United Nations and the European Union have our
continued and full political support in that regard.
Fifthly and lastly, UNMIK is a very large
mission. It represents a very significant investment for
the United Nations and for the international
community. In 2004-2005, it will comprise some 8,000
staff members, costing about $270 million. UNMIK's
role has changed since its inception in 1999. The
demands are now very different. I think it is now
incumbent upon all of us - and I know that
Mr. Holkeri takes this particularly seriously himself -
to make sure that the structures we have deliver against
the challenges of today. The priority is clear -
progress on standards - and, with the completion of
the transfer of competencies under chapter 5 of the
Constitutional Framework, UNMIK should look at
whether its resources are as well directed as they
should be or whether, indeed, there is scope for change
as part of a natural review of every organization. The
challenge for UNMIK, with the assistance of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, is to make
sure that it adapts to meet, efficiently and cost-
effectively, our shared objectives for the future benefit
of Kosovo and for all Kosovars.

The international community has demonstrated its
commitment to Kosovo and it remains so committed.
We are committed to a better future for South-East
Europe. The international organizations as a whole
pretty well are heavily involved in the province. It is
now time for the partnership with the Kosovars to
evolve, to reduce the dependence upon the external
players, and for greater ownership by the people of
Kosovo. However, that requires, crucially,
responsibility and a commitment to the ideals and the
standards that have been set out. That is what we now
expect of the Kosovars.

