Mr. Cohen (United States): I want to thank Special
Envoy Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
and Executive Director Beasley for their briefings and
for their teams' tireless efforts.

The United States acknowledges the tragedy of
this human-made crisis in Yemen, which continues to
deteriorate as the conflict continues for a fifth year. We
strongly condemn the reported Houthi missile attack
on Abha airport on 12 June, which injured numerous
innocent civilians. The Houthis should be implementing
the commitments they made in Sweden instead of
launching such attacks. As we repeatedly hear in the
Council, there is no military solution to this conflict.
The Houthis must demonstrate good faith in the political
process and cease their unmanned aerial vehicle and
other attacks on their fellow citizens and neighbours.
Iran must stop supplying them with the weapons to do
so. Attacks on Yemen's neighbours threaten to derail
the progress made by the United Nations and the parties
to the conflict and do not serve the greater interests of
the people of Yemen.

The goal of the United States in Yemen remains
consistent. It is to work with our international partners
to bring peace, prosperity and stability to Yemen. That
is our focus, and we will continue to support Special
Envoy Griffiths, Lieutenant General Lollesgaard,
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Executive
Director Beasley. Since December the Council has
been urging the Houthis to finish the first phase of
redeployments initiated on 11 May, demonstrating their
commitment to a political settlement and to the terms
of the Stockholm Agreement. It is imperative that the
Yemeni Government and the Houthis work in good faith
with Mr. Griffiths and General Lollesgaard to achieve
the full implementation of the redeployments as soon
as possible. That means addressing the contentious
issues preventing further progress on the ground while
continuing to exercise restraint so that fighting does not
threaten the ceasefire.

We were pleased to hear of initial progress with
regard to positioning additional United Nations
monitors, should redeployments proceed as planned.
We must all seize the momentum of that progress. The
Council should continue to demonstrate full support for
the efforts of the Special Envoy and the Redeployment
Coordination Committee on the ground. The parties
must facilitate the United Nations monitors' arrival in
Yemen by providing permits and safe passage.

The ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah is one of the
Stockholm Agreement's most important outcomes. It
was meant to encourage a nationwide de-escalation of
hostilities, but as we have heard, it has instead led to
the redeployment of forces from Al-Hudaydah to other
battlegrounds. The escalation in Al-Dhale'e and Hajjah
threatens humanitarian access and is forcing residents
to flee for their lives. Fighting all over the country, not
just in Al-Hudaydah, has to end.

Apart from Al-Hudaydah, in the rest of Yemen
civilians are living in desperation, as today's briefings
repeatedly underscored. The Yemeni Government
has demonstrated a clear commitment to the United
Nations-led process. We call on the Houthis to
demonstrate to the international community that they
too are serious about the United Nations process by
removing all Houthi-affiliated personnel from the ports
of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa so that the first
phase of redeployments can be completed.

We reiterate our deep concern about the rise
in suspected cholera cases this year and call on all
parties to provide humanitarian support, including by
providing the funding that was pledged in Geneva in
February. We further call on the parties to allow access
to food, medical care and safe shelter for displaced
people throughout the country. The United States
supports the World Food Programme's efforts to ensure
that critical humanitarian aid is delivered throughout
Yemen to those who need it and in accordance with the
international humanitarian principles of impartiality,
neutrality and independence. We call on the Houthi
authorities to respect those principles and work with the
World Food Programme to achieve a swift resolution.
With some 20 million people in need of emergency food
assistance and more than 24 million requiring some
type of humanitarian assistance, it is critical to ensure
that aid gets to those who need it immediately.

In conclusion, United States support for Special
Envoy Griffiths and General Lollesgaard remains
steadfast. Along with their staff and the international
humanitarian community, they are working tirelessly to
help the parties reach a peaceful, enduring resolution to
the conflict and to save Yemeni lives. The United States
applauds the Yemeni Government for joining them in
this effort and calls on the Houthis to do so without
further delay.

