Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun and
Mr. Simonovie for their briefings. What they have
described for us today backs up the information
contained in the report of the commission of inquiry
(S/2014/276, annex), chaired by Mr. Kirby.

The work the commission of inquiry has done is not
only remarkable for its quality, it is also salutary. For the
first time, it has given us an overview of the violations
committed by the North Korean authorities over 50
years, pursuant to policies established at the highest
level of the State, as the commission's report puts it. It
has thrown light on a terrible machine, the Pyongyang
regime's machine for enslaving its people. There is no
time today to detail the full litany of the crimes: murder,
arbitrary arrest and detention, widespread torture, rape,
abduction, forced disappearance, slavery, obstruction
of humanitarian access, the exploitation of famine. The
list is long, unfortunately. Hundreds of thousands of
political prisoners have died in camps over the past 50
years, while between 80,000 and 120,000 are still being
detained.

The violations affect men and women. They do
not spare children. The regime's murderous madness
seems limitless. The Security Council has finally met
to hear the cry of distress of the victims of a bloody
regime. What is more, those crimes are committed
in the darkness of censorship. North Korea is closed
to international media and to the organizations that
defend human rights and the High Commissioner for
Human Rights. The commission of inquiry could not
gain access.

We cannot remain silent in the face of this waking
nightmare. Those responsible for the terror, the North
Korean authorities first and foremost, must be brought
to justice to answer for their actions. The crimes they
have committed will not go unpunished. This is an
ethical imperative for the international community. As
Mr. Simonovic' emphasized, there can be little doubt
that the seriousness, scale and systematic nature of
these crimes render them crimes against humanity.
The commission of inquiry's recommendation that the
situation be referred to the International Criminal Court
should therefore receive the maximum attention possible
from the Council. The Court is a guarantee of fair and
effective justice. What is at stake is the fight against
impunity today and tomorrow, justice for the victims
and future reconciliation. The High Commissioner for
Human Rights also has a role to play. His field office,
which is currently being set up in Seoul, should enable
us to monitor the report's recommendations and the
situation as it develops. It should also continue to collect
information on the violations committed, and we would
like the Council to receive regular updates.

The regime's violations are a threat to peace and
international security. They are part - indeed, an
essential component - of a totalitarian political system
that threatens and destabilizes the entire region. In
the words of the commission of inquiry, "the gravity,
scale and nature of these violations reveal a State that
does not have any parallel in the contemporary world"
(S/2014/276, annex, para. 80). It is a State that has no
parallel in the degree of its terror, a pariah State under
the international nuclear and missile non-proliferation
regime, a State that, in violation of Council resolutions,
exports sensitive goods and technologies that then
serve to finance its leaders' indecent life style and
the repression of a population that is regularly hit by
famine.

The Security Council could no longer ignore crimes
such as these that shock humankind's conscience. It was
its responsibility to take up the issue. By holding this
meeting today, the Council has sent a clear message
to the torturers in Pyongyang. The wall of silence that
has too long imprisoned a people and a country cut off
from the world has been removed. The reality of North
Korea is now visible to all. The Security Council is
on the case. Nothing, not even the nuclear blackmail
the North Korean regime used to try to dissuade
us from convening this meeting, will make us look
away. The Pyongyang regime is confronted with its
responsibilities before history and the judgement of the
international community. The violations must now end,
the political prisoners be freed and the country opened
to the media, non-governmental organizations and the
United Nations.

Let us hope that instead of hurling itself into
another of the cycles of provocations and repression to
which it is, alas, accustomed, the North Korean regime
will hear our urgent call and at last choose the path of
openness, reconciliation and peace.

