Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for arranging and presiding over this
meeting. Many thanks also to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Mr. Abdul Fatau Musah of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and Mrs. Florentina
Adenike Ukonga of the Gulf of Guinea Commission
for their briefings.

As we said in the Chamber during the debate (see S/PV.6717) on peace and security in West Africa and
the Sahel held on 21 February, the United Kingdom
welcomes the Security Council's focus on threats to
maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea. Piracy and
armed robbery at sea significantly impact the security
of both coastal and landlocked States in the region.
Such activities, especially when linked to the
trafficking in narcotics, people and weapons, to illegal
fishing, oil bunkering and the prevention of
international trade, pose a threat to regional peace and
security. They also hamper economic development. It
is important that such threats to maritime security be
addressed in order to harness the benefits that can be
delivered by a secure maritime domain. The United
Kingdom welcomes Togo's leadership on this issue.

The year 2011 saw a significant increase in the
volume and impact of armed robbery and piracy
incidents in the Gulf of Guinea, as we have heard. The
United Kingdom is extremely concerned about that
increase in the number and frequency of attacks, as
well as by their increasingly violent nature. Earlier this
month, three attacks occurred in just four days,
resulting in the deaths of two seafarers. The shipping
industry, too, is rightly troubled by those incidents. It is
unacceptable for innocent seafarers to face the risk of
violent attack and death while transiting that area.

In the past year, incidents of piracy and armed
robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea have spread along
the coast and further out to sea, including some
evidence of the use of mother ships. That is a regional
problem, not one that is limited to the territorial waters
of Nigeria and Benin. It is in the interest of all States in
the region to work together in the shared goal of
preventing further destabilization.

States of the region could of course harness
considerable benefits by creating a secure maritime
domain. We therefore urge States of the region to
declare their exclusive economic zones. That will
afford States the authority to enforce their national
laws, including those related to fishing, protecting the
environment, including from the dumping of waste,
and armed robbery at sea. It will also enable national
control over all economic resources within the
exclusive economic zones, including with regard to
ocean life, mining and oil exploration.

In that regard, we encourage States to continue to
coordinate on maritime activity, both domestically and
regionally, as well as with the United Nations Office
for West Africa. It is important that action be taken
now to prevent the situation from further deteriorating.
We hope that West African heads of State will be able
to prioritize activities to tackle the range of maritime
security threats facing their countries.

The United Kingdom strongly welcomes the
leadership shown by ECOWAS and the Economic
Community of Central African States to work together
on maritime security off the coast of West Africa. We
also warmly welcome the industry-led initiative to
create a maritime trade information-sharing centre,
following the example of the Maritime Security Centre
(Horn of Africa) website, which has to be proved very
valuable in tackling piracy off the coast of Somalia.

This is a timely and important debate, and I am
grateful for Togo's leadership on this issue.

