I would like to thank President Yusuf for his briefing, and South Africa for putting this public debate on our agenda. At this time of challenges for multilateralism and international law, the Security Council must reaffirm how essential the International Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, remains as a major institution for peace and the international legal order. The mandates of the Court and the Council are complementary for the maintenance of international peace and security. The Court's decisions contribute to the pacification of relations between States and help them to reach a solution when other means of peaceful settlement of disputes fail. While there have been many examples over the past 75 years, we can recall the decisive contribution of the Court to the resolution of border disputes, particularly on the African continent. For its part, the Security Council adopts resolutions that are binding on States. It exercises its functions within the framework of the Charter of the United Nations, the summit of an international order based on law. That is the case when we establish peacekeeping operations, fight against impunity by referring situations to the International Criminal Court, authorize the delivery of humanitarian aid or decide on measures against proliferation. The Court has had the opportunity to clarify the law on several of those issues. The Charter enshrines not only the missions but also the links between the two organs. First of all, the Security Council must take into account the fact that parties to a legal dispute should generally submit it to the Court in accordance with its Statute. Once the Court has rendered a decision, the Council can then intervene to ensure its full implementation. In that regard, the absence of a referral to the Council under Article 94, paragraph 2, of the Charter tends to demonstrate the authority of the Court's judgments. The binding scope of decisions also applies to orders. Finally, the Council, like the General Assembly, may refer matters to the Court when legal questions arise in the course of its work that require clarification. Those opinions are intended to provide a better understanding of international law and are not a substitute for judgments in resolving bilateral disputes. As a permanent member of the Security Council, France attaches paramount importance to the Court. France has consented to the Court's jurisdiction by concluding numerous treaties that include arbitration clauses to that effect. That is, for example, the case of the Protocol to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, which established the Court's jurisdiction in the case relating to immunities and criminal proceedings that gave rise to the judgment of 11 December. France is also the only State to date to have agreed in practice the procedure for accepting a request made by another State, also known as forum prorogatum. Moreover, France supports the Court's operations. In that regard, we welcome the adoption this week by the General Assembly of resolution 75/129, co-sponsored by France, which establishes a trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme. That initiative will enhance the geographical and linguistic diversity of the participants in the programme, who will be selected solely on the basis of merit and talent. France will make a financial contribution to the fund as soon as it is set up, which we hope will happen quickly. I would also like to reiterate the importance that France, like many partners, attaches to the proper representation of the principal legal traditions and respect for the Court's language regime, which contribute to the quality of its work and the legitimacy of its decisions. We congratulate the five judges elected this fall, who reflect that valuable diversity. France hopes that the Court and the Council will continue to work together, within the framework defined by the Charter, to provide responses to today's challenges, which are also potential sources of conflict in future. There is no shortage of topics - health, the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes, and, of course, environmental protection and the fight against climate change. That is to be expected. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate to the Court and all its members and staff our gratitude for the work it has done.
