The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Albania,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Latvia, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, the
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Republic
of Korea, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia and
Sweden to participate in the meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2015/161, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, the
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Republic
of Korea, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/20lS/138, which contains a letter dated
25 February 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America

Abstaining:
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in French): There were 14
votes in favour and one abstention. The draft resolution
has been adopted as resolution 2209 (2015).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


