Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Ijoin other speakers in
commending you, Sir, for convening this important
open debate.

Sri Lanka associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

I congratulate the new members of the Security
Council on their elections.

We had hoped that in the year 2014 the world would
have witnessed a much-needed breakthrough resulting
in a just and durable solution to the situation in the
Middle East. Instead we witnessed a series of setbacks,
including the breakdown of peace talks followed by a
devastating humanitarian crisis in Gaza. However, in
the midst of much hardship, we were encouraged by
the unwavering support for the people of Palestine
worldwide.

The formation of the Palestinian unity Government
was indeed a positive development. It is important
that the international community continue to strive
for a peaceful solution through continued diplomatic
engagement with the parties concerned. Peace
negotiations need to be conducted expeditiously, and
a solution reached consistent with the principles of
international law and the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and Security Council.

One of the key challenges this year is rebuilding
following the destruction caused in Gaza. The
international community must also assist the Palestinian
peopleinmeetingtheirday-to-dayexistentialchallenges.
The Cairo conference on Gaza reconstruction held last
year saw the pledging of significant resources for the
Palestinian people's rebuilding efforts. It is our fervent
hope that, with the help of the global community, the
people of Palestine will rise up to rebuild their lives and

livelihoods.

We urge the Governments of Israel and Palestine
to utilize the international goodwill that exists to
facilitate the peace process. The cost of failing to reach
a peace accord is too high for the countries concerned,
as well as for the region and beyond. The cessation
of settlement activities in the occupied territories and
ending the Gaza blockade are important measures that
must be taken while respecting the security needs of
the people of Israel. These are important measures for
confidence-building. They would be consistent with the
expectations of the world, the norms of international
law and accepted practice. The security needs of the
people of Israel must be respected.

Sri Lanka supports a negotiated solution, resulting
in a sovereign, independent and viable State of Palestine
with East Jerusalem as its capital, living within secure,
recognized borders, side by side and at peace with Israel,
as endorsed in the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet
road map and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Sri Lanka also supports Palestine's application for
admission as a full Member of the United Nations.

Sri Lanka also supports a two-State solution on
the basis of the 1967 borders. The viability of the two-
State solution will depend upon the political unity and
economic advancement of the Palestinian people. The
lifting of the Gaza blockade within the framework of the
resolution 1860 (2009) would contribute significantly to
the economic advancement of Gaza and the well-being
of the Palestinian people. At present, the United Nations
is hard-pressed to keep the vast majority of the people
of Gaza supplied with their minimum necessities. We
underline strong support for the work of the United
Nations agencies in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

Terrorism originating in the Middle East region has
the potential to pose a serious threat to the security and
stability of many countries. In today's interconnected
world, it is very easy for agents of extremism to spread
their ideologies across national borders. One of the key
excuses of terrorists is the Palestinian issue. We must
not provide any excuses for terrorism. We hope that
every effort will be made in 2015 to lay the groundwork

for the advancement of a peaceful solution to the Middle
East peace process. It is our hope that the international
community will continue to support initiatives for
sustainable peace and that both sides will demonstrate
the necessary political will required to achieve that end.

