Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today's meeting. I also thank the
Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth for her briefing.
China listened carefully to the statement delivered by
Mr. Simpson, Ms. Pierre-Antoine and Ms. Ekomo-
Soignet.

Young people show us the world's future and
hope. The international community should strengthen
the protection of youth groups in conflict areas and
help them to play a greater role in promoting world
peace and stability. We should continue to implement
resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security.
The Security Council should continue to fulfil
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and strive on the basis
ofits mandates and international cooperation.

First, we must resolutely crack down on terrorists
and extremists in response to the harm they cause to
young people. Terrorism and violent extremism are the
common enemies of all humankind. The international
community should abide by the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, unify
its standards and, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, resolutely fight all forms
of terrorist and violent extremist activities. The United
Nations anti-terrorism mechanisms should push the
international community to strengthen its cooperation,
in particular by taking measures to prevent the corrosive
influence of terrorist and extremist ideologies on young
people; cutting off the channels through which terrorist
and extremist forces influence and incite young people;
effectively combating the activities of terrorists and
extremist forces in using the Internet to recruit, make
master plans and raise funds; and cutting off the black
hands of terrorists and extremists reaching out to
young people.

Secondly, we must increase our efforts to resolve
flash-point and regional issues by finding political
solutions and attaching importance to the role of
young people in resolving conflicts. The international
community and the Security Council should heighten
their sense of urgency, strengthen the search for
political solutions to relevant flash-point issues and,
in accordance with the principles and purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations, assist countries in
conflict to advance their peace process and national
reconciliation; resolve disputes through the peaceful
means of dialogue and consultation; help conflict areas
to achieve peace and stability at an early date; and
create a peaceful and serene environment for the growth
and development of young people. We must ensure the
constructive participation of young people in political
processes, taking fully into account their views and
giving full play to their advantages in peace processes.

Thirdly, we must fully consider the special needs
of youth and focus on addressing the root causes of
conflict. There are many deep-rooted reasons for
conflict, including extreme poverty, unbalanced
development and the scarcity of resources. All countries
should firmly engage in joint efforts to implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
strengthen youth education and employment security.
The international community should help developing
countries to improve their capacity for sustainable
development, especially at the level of youth education
and employment, increase social integration and
inclusiveness, and cultivate young people's sense of
responsibility for social stability.

In that regard, the United Nations and the
international community should strengthen cooperation
with the African Union and other regional and
subregional organizations by increasing support for
related projects in the field of youth. China is willing
to work with the international community, participate
actively in the fight against terrorism and violent
extremism, take practical measures to prevent conflict,
contribute to safeguarding world peace and stability, and
help young people to achieve all-round development.

