Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): The
parties to the conflict in Yemen are pursuing a futile
and cruel military conflict, which is eroding the path
to peace. At the same time, the people of Yemen are
suffering from an entirely man-made humanitarian
catastrophe.

Clashes and exchanges ofheavy fire have continued
on all major frontlines, including Taiz, Ma'rib, A1 Jawf,
Al Bayda, Hajjah and Sa'dah governorates, and the
Saudi-Yemen border areas. The recent sharp increase in
civilian casualties show the parties' continued disregard
for the loss of civilian life and their obligations under
international humanitarian law. An airstrike against a
residential suburb of Sana'a took place on 25 August
reportedly resulted in the killing of 14 civilians and
the injury of 16 others, and caused further damage to
civilian infrastructure.

In Taiz city, shelling of residential areas from
zones controlled by Houthi forces and forces loyal to
Ali Abdullah Saleh has continued. In two incidents on
15 and 18 September, rocket-fire killed and injured tens
of civilians, including eight children. In addition, on
23 September the coalition intercepted a Houthi missile
fired towards the Saudi city of Khamis Al-Mushayt.
The Houthis' recent threats to expand the firing of
ballistic missiles towards other countries in the Gulf
region represent a counterproductive escalation of
rhetoric.

Resolution 36/31, recently adopted by the Human
Rights Council, supports the Yemen National of Inquiry
and establishes a group of experts to examine alleged
violations and abuses of international human rights
and international law. It is a significant sign of the
increased engagement of the international community
and a step forward towards accountability and reducing
future violations.

I have consistently reminded the warring parties of
their responsibilities under international humanitarian
law and human rights law, including their obligation to
stop the recruitment of child soldiers and to end sexual
and gender-based violence. Targeting civilians and the
destruction of civilian infrastructure are unacceptable.

The conflict is creating a desperate situation in
every facet of daily life. The economy is shrinking even
further and the use of dwindling State revenues to fund
the war continues to hinder the salary payments on
which millions onemenis depend. There are continuing
efforts to reactivate the Central Bank and stabilize the
Yemeni economy, as recently discussed in the track-II
event held in Germany for the interest of repayment of
salaries to Yemeni civil servants, including those in
the education and health sectors. This will hopefully
decrease the humanitarian and economic strife.

Appproximately 17 million individuals are food
insecure, and over one third of the country's districts
are now in severe danger of famine. The destruction
of infrastructure and the breakdown of public services
have fuelled the world's worst outbreak of cholera,
which has already killed more than 2,100 individuals
and continues to infect thousands each week.

If things remain unchanged, future Yemeni
generations will have to suffer and bear the burden
of this conflict - including the massive destruction,
malnutrition, lack of education and economic
deterioration it has caused. In the absence of a political
solution, the outlook can only become bleaker. An
agreement to end the war is urgently needed so that
a new Yemeni unity Government, supported by the
international community, can be formed and begin the
process of rebuilding the country's economy and State
institutions.
I welcome the efforts of the World Bank and
UNICEF to mitigate the impact of the economic
crisis. The first disbursement of cash assistance to
the most vulnerable Yemeni households took place on
20 August. The $400 million programme will reach all
of its beneficiaries in the coming weeks and months.
The programme is providing vital support to those
households and is maintaining a critical safety-net
system.

There are no winners on the battlefield in Yemen.
The losers are the Yemeni people, for it is they who
are suffering from this war. They are getting poorer
while their influential leaders are getting richer. These
leaders are not interested in finding solutions because
in a settlement they will lose their power and control.
Nevertheless, the parties have to commit to ending all
hostilities and start discussions for a comprehensive
peace agreement.

Common ground must be found in order to relieve
the effects of conflict, hunger and disease and to
increase mutual trust. An agreement that provides for
secure access for humanitarian and commercial goods
to reach Hudaydah and get distributed to the rest of the
country, for the opening of the Sana'a airport and for
ensuring more consistent civil-service salary payments
will be an essential step in alleviating the humanitarian
crisis. However, those steps cannot replace the broad
solution we are trying to achieve, which will be a part
of a larger comprehensive peace agreement.

To reach such a peace agreement, I held meetings
with Yemeni and international officials during the
opening week of the seventy-second session of the
General Assembly in New York. I continue to be in
communication with the parties. I am currently in
the process of discussing a proposal that includes
humanitarian initiatives to rebuild trust and steps to
bring the parties back to the negotiating table. We will
discuss the details of this proposal with the Government
of Yemen and the alliance of the Houthis and General
People's Congress, which have committed to engaging
in further discussions on the details of the proposal.
We hope that this commitment will translate into action
by the parties and that it will deepen their engagement
with me with respect to those initiatives, with a view to
achieving a peaceful political solution.

The bloodshed and destruction in Yemen has to end.
There are no excuses. There are nojustifications. People
are asking the United Nations to provide a solution for

salary-payment issue while others are actively working
to hinder talks on the issue as if they able ignore the
fact that millions onemenis are suffering. Many of the
powerful in Yemen benefit from the current conflict at
a time when their citizens are facing the worst suffering
in the history of the country.

At a time when the gap between the Yemeni people
and those in power is growing, the people want this war
to end. Yemeni young people, women and civil-society
groups are calling for peace, stability and accountability
for crimes committed. In the southern governorates,
past injustices and calls for greater autonomy remain
unaddressed despite the urgent need for them to be
addressed. The Yemenis themselves are not without
many positive ideas for tackling these issues in a
peaceful manner, but the parties need to show greater
flexibility and listen to the people. If they do not do
so, the fissures in Yemen's political and social fabric
will only become wider, thereby increasing the danger
of further fragmentation and with it the potential for
terrorism.

The United Nations is using all its political,
logistical, administrative and advisory capabilities to
support the Yemeni cause, but only the warring parties
can decide to reach peace. They are the ones who will
be held to account for a failure. I reiterate that the only
viable path for the future of Yemen is a negotiated
settlement. The proposals that I have put forward meet
the concerns of both parties. Their implementation
would bring real benefits to the Yemeni people.

Finally, I request the Security Council to use all
its political and economic power it to apply pressure
on all parties to commit to a path of peace. The parties
must climb out of their trenches and put an end to
hostile rhetoric. Instead of fighting over Yemen, let us
cooperate for the best interests of Yemen.

