Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
Mr. Ahmed Aboul-Gheit and Mr. Michael Doran for
sharing their insights and perspectives. They all spoke
with passion - and rightly so - and their briefings
were very useful. I am very appreciative.

We understand that there is one historic fact, as
many have already mentioned, that gives context to
the briefing on the Middle East this month - that
June 2017 marks 50 years since the 1967 Arab-Israeli
conflict, with all of its implications. There is no doubt
that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been one of
the disputes at the core of the dangerous situation that
essentially has defined the Middle East region for the
past several decades

Today's meeting provides the Council an
opportunity to reflect on efforts that have been made
thus far and renew its commitment to helping to
resolve this long-standing dispute. The Council and
the international community cannot claim to have done
enough in that regard. We have all failed.

For what it is worth, Ethiopia's position has been
very clear - we fully support the goal of two States
living side-by-side in peace and security as the only
viable option to resolving the Israeli-Palestinian dispute.
Unfortunately, peace has so far remained elusive, to the
detriment of Israelis and Palestinians, as well as to the
peace and stability of the Middle East region. Actions
of both sides that run counter to the achievement of a
negotiated peace have not only continued to increase
frustration and mistrust but also undermine the very
viability of the two-State solution.

We know full well that ultimately it is up to the
two parties to achieve peace and resolve the conflict.
It is therefore absolutely imperative that the two sides
resume direct and meaningful negotiations in order to
reach a comprehensive, just and lasting solution on the
basis of mutual respect and the spirit of compromise
that ensures Israel's security and Palestinian aspirations
for Statehood. We believe the Council has a duty and
responsibility to support and encourage that process
with a view to ensuring the viability of the two-State
solution and the achievement of lasting peace. The loss
of the opportunity to realize the two-State solution
would be a tragedy of historic proportions. The Council
has the responsibility to make sure that does not happen.

