Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Since this is the first
time we are speaking under your presidency, Sir, allow
me first of all to congratulate you on your assumption
of your duties. I should also like to express our warm
congratulations to the previous President, the
Permanent Representative of Mexico, on his excellent
work.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The acceding countries Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia, the
associated countries Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey,
and the European Free Trade Association country
belonging to the European Economic Area Iceland
declare that they align themselves with this statement.

The maintenance of international peace and
security is a major concern of the European Union. In
that respect, we firmly support all efforts undertaken in
the United Nations and within regional organizations to
strengthen mechanisms aimed at the prevention or
removal of disputes that might threaten international
peace and security and at the peaceful settlement of
such disputes.

The European Union is fully committed to the
implementation of existing international instruments
and to the relevant principles and rules concerning the
peaceful settlement of international disputes. We
strongly uphold the principle that States should act so
as to prevent, in their international relations, the
emergence or aggravation of disputes or situations, in
particular by fulfilling their obligations under
international law. Likewise, we believe that it is the
duty of all States, in accordance with the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, to use peaceful
means to settle any dispute to which they are party and
whose continuance is likely to endanger international
peace and security.

In that respect, the European Union attaches great
importance to Chapter VI of the Charter and, in
particular, to the various methods for the prevention
and settlement of disputes that are incorporated in its
Articles 33 to 38. We consider, however, that States
should make the most effective use of those procedures
and methods, as was also indicated in General
Assembly resolution 55/217.

We would also like to emphasize the importance
of judicial mechanisms in the prevention and resolution
of legal disputes. In our View, early and more frequent
resort to these mechanisms, in particular the
International Court of Justice and the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, would greatly
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security and the promotion of the primacy of
international law in international relations.

The European Union wishes to underline the
primary role of the Security Council, in accordance
with the Charter, in the area of the peaceful settlement
of disputes or any situation the continuation of which is
likely to endanger international peace and security. In
this connection, we would like to stress the obligation
of States, in accordance with the Charter, to refer to the
Council a dispute to which they are parties if they fail
to reach an early solution by any of the means
indicated in Article 33 of the Charter.

In the report entitled "An Agenda for Peace:
preventive diplomacy, peacemaking and
peacekeeping", the Security Council was urged to take
full advantage of the opportunities provided for by the
Charter in order to recommend appropriate procedures
or methods for dispute settlement and to make
recommendations to parties for the pacific settlement
of disputes. We fully support that recommendation,
which is also in line with Article 36 of the Charter.

We are also of the view that the Security Council
should act without delay, in accordance with its
functions and powers, particularly in cases where
international disputes develop into armed conflict.

The Security Council should also emphasize the
importance of the peaceful settlement of internal
conflicts, the number of which has increased
significantly during the past decade.

The European Union considers the role of the
General Assembly in relation to the peaceful settlement
of disputes to be important, in particular in developing
recommendations, as appropriate, or calling the
attention of the Security Council to situations that are
likely to endanger international peace and security. We
think that the Assembly should make the most effective
use of its relevant competences under the Charter.

We also believe that the Secretary-General is
entrusted with important responsibilities in relation to
the peaceful settlement of disputes. We commend him
for his activities already deployed in this area, and we
urge him to continue to make full use of those
responsibilities, particularly by bringing to the
attention of the Security Council any matter which in
his opinion may threaten the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The European Union is of the view that
preventive diplomacy and early warning can prevent
the emergence and escalation of disputes, and it wishes
to underline the important role played in this respect by
the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Secretary-General. We are convinced that those bodies
should continue to play that role and should further
enhance it.

Likewise, we support the declarations and
resolutions of the General Assembly concerning
dispute prevention that call for strengthening the
capacity of the United Nations to respond effectively
and efficiently in matters relating to dispute
prevention, including through strengthening
cooperative mechanisms for information-sharing,
planning and developing a comprehensive plan for a
revived early-warning and prevention system for the
United Nations; training intended to support such
enhanced capabilities in these areas; and cooperation
with regional organizations.

The European Union is also of the view that
regional arrangements and agencies also play an
important role in the peaceful settlement of local
disputes and in the prevention and elimination of such
disputes. Some of these regional arrangements have
elaborated significant political and legal instruments
providing for mechanisms for the peaceful resolution
of disputes. The European Union urges States parties to
such arrangements or members of such agencies to try
to achieve the pacific settlement of their disputes
through such mechanisms, in accordance with Articles
33 and 52 of the Charter.

Finally, the European Union believes that there is
a need to increase regional responses to local disputes
by strengthening the dispute-settlement mechanisms
and capacities of regional arrangements and agencies.
In this respect, greater cooperation and coordination
with the United Nations will benefit both and will
contribute to lasting peace and security.

