Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): In September
2000, with the adoption of resolution 1315 (2000),
the Council demonstrated its commitment to the fight
against impunity and the restoration of peace and
security in Sierra Leone. Given its deep concern that
serious violations of international humanitarian law
had been committed in Sierra Leone, the Council was
determined to bring those responsible to account, in
accordance with international standards of justice,
fairness and due process of law.

The Council requested the Secretary-General to
work with the Government of Sierra Leone to establish
an independent special court to prosecute those persons
bearing the greatest responsibility for the commission
of those crimes, including those leaders who threatened
the peace process in Sierra Leone. Today, as we have
heard from the President and the Prosecutor of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, that vital task is almost
complete. The United Kingdom congratulates the
Special Court for its significant achievements. And we
would like to thank the President of the Court and the
Prosecutor for their briefings.

We are also grateful to Guatemala for convening
this meeting during its presidency of the Council. Like
Guatemala, the United Kingdom believes that it is
important and timely to take stock of the progress made
by the Special Court - to acknowledge how much it has
achieved and to better understand the tasks that remain.

The United Kingdom looks forward to September
2013, when the Special Court is due to become the first
modern war crimes tribunal to successfully complete
its mandate. We do not underestimate the complexity
and significance ofthe appellate proceedings in the case
against Charles Taylor. The United Kingdom strongly
believes that the completion of the trial of Charles Taylor
by the Special Court was a landmark for international
justice.

As the Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom at
the time said, the trial proceedings played an important
role in helping the people of Sierra Leone come to terms
with the past and consolidate national reconciliation. It
is heartening to hear from the President of the Special
Court that the people of Sierra Leone and Liberia feel
so strongly that the Special Court has contributed to
bringing peace to their countries. The Special Court's
prosecution of Charles Taylor sends a strong message
that the international community will not allow serious
crimes to be committed with impunity. It signals that the
reach of international justice is long and patient.

Since its inception in 2002, the United Kingdom has
been a leading supporter of the Special Court.

United Kingdom funding has reached approximately
$44 million and accounts for some 20 per cent of the
Court's voluntary contributions to date. That includes a
contribution of almost $1 million in March. We reaffirm
our commitment to imprisoning Charles Taylor in the
United Kingdom if the Appeals Chamber upholds his
conviction and if the President asks us to do so.

Our support for the Special Court will remain
strong long after the Taylor appeal and the high-profile
work of the Special Court has come to an end. But the
achievements of the Special Court do not begin and end
with Charles Taylor in The Hague. The United Kingdom
commends the Special Court in Freetown for successfully
completing three important trials of eight former rebel
leaders and conducting five contempt proceedings.
Furthermore, the Special Court's invaluable role in
building the capacity of the Sierra Leonean legal system
will certainly be a lasting legacy, as will the Court's
vital outreach programmes, which have made its work
accessible to many people in Sierra Leone and Liberia,
contributing to reconciliation and raising awareness
on important issues such as child soldiers and sexual
violence in armed conflict. We welcome the way in which
the Court has developed gender-sensitive approaches to
witness support and outreach in partnership with local
women's organizations and resources.

But the United Kingdom cannot fail to acknowledge
the Special Court's serious and challenging financial
circumstances. Funding shortfalls risk the completion
of appellate proceedings in the Taylor case. Funds are
needed urgently. Longer term, the Residual Special
Court requires secure and sustainable funding in order
to continue to protect witnesses, manage the detention
of those convicted, and protect the archives. The United
Kingdom is considering all funding options for the
Special Court and the Residual Special Court, and
we urge other members of the Council, and indeed all
Member States, to do so as well.

The United Kingdom applauds the Special Court for
its groundbreaking achievements. We remain ready to
support the Court as its completes its mandate in order
to sure that it's legacy is preserved.

