The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Italy.

Today's meeting of the Security Council coincides
with the arrival from Geneva of information on important,
positive new developments in the crisis of the former
Yugoslavia. The Foreign Ministers of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
came to an understanding today, in that venue, on some
agreed basic principles that will govern the difficult
negotiations to come and on the text of a joint statement.
We wish to congratulate all those who contributed to this
success and to pay a special tribute, as has already been
done by the representative of the United States, to the
eminent American diplomats who lost their lives near
Sarajevo only a few days ago while engaged in helping
peace prevail. The good news coming from Geneva is, I
believe, the highest tribute that could have been paid to
their memory, as well as to the memory of all those who
have lost their lives for the cause of peace in the former
Yugoslavia.
While recognizing the importance of this
development, let us, however, not deceive ourselves into
thinking that peace is very close at hand. In recent years
too many hopes have been dashed, and too many
agreements between the parties in conflict have been
treated as simple chifions de papier. However, as pointed
out by my Foreign Minister, the Honourable Susanna
Agnelli, today's understandings constitute a first important
step towards peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, a step that
must be consolidated as quickly as possible. These
understandings can help lead to the implementation of the
peace plan proposed by the United States, to which Italy
and its European partners have contributed from the
beginning, and whose terms and general approach it
shares.

 

We would also like to express our satisfaction over the
emergence of mechanisms for managing the later phases of
the negotiations, on the basis of close coordination with the
action of the United States, the European Union and the
Russian Federation. Also, in view of the upcoming meeting
in Rome of the Contact Group, my country will continue to
join the international community in striving to restore peace
to Bosnian and Herzegovina.

However, this flicker of optimism and what has been
called a ray of hope should not make us forget that the city
of Sarajevo and the other safe areas in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are still under direct threat from Bosnian Serb
shells. The memory of the recent massacre in Sarajevo, in
which 32 innocent civilians lost their lives, is still painfully
clear to the mind and heart of Italian public opinion.

On many occasions in the past we have declared that
the practice of waging indiscriminate attacks against a
defenceless civilian population is a particularly heinous
practice that is totally unacceptable under every standard of
civil society. Hence, it is the duty of the international
community to prevent the repetition of such attacks in the
future.

This, and only this, was the main purpose of the air
attacks that NATO recently launched against Bosnian Serb
military objectives, which were carefully selected in order
to ensure effectiveness and to simultaneously limit collateral
damage as much as possible. These initiatives were adopted
in close coordination with the military authorities of the
United Nations and of NATO, according to the new
modalities illustrated in the Secretary-General's letter of 1
August.

I wish to underline once again that the purpose of
these air attacks is not punitive. As my German colleague
rightly said, their purpose is to prevent any more horrible
episodes, such as the recent massacre in Sarajevo. In short,
they aim to put an end to all attacks against the safe areas,
force the Bosnian Serbs to withdraw their heavy weapons
from the exclusion zone of Sarajevo and grant full freedom
of movement to the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) and the other humanitarian agencies.

In other words, it is a question of convincing the
leaders in Pale to honour the commitments that they
themselves have made in the past. This, and only this, is
the goal of an alliance - the North Atlantic alliance - of
which Italy is proud to be a founding member, and in
Whose air operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, after
providing in the past substantial logistic support, it now
participates directly with some of our aircraft.

On several occasions in the past we have noted that
these military operations must not be an end in
themselves. They should be seen in the context of a
broader political and diplomatic effort by the international
community - an effort meant to restore peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and throughout the former Yugoslavia.

Our final thoughts go to those who continue to
suffer: the innocent civilians who have been forced to
leave their places of origin and wander from place to
place without homes, Without security and, until today,
even without hope. In closing, let me assure them that my
country will continue to do everything in its power to
bring peace to an area so close to Italy - and close not
only from a geographic point of View.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker is the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, on whom I now call.

