Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I wish to emphasize the following points on the
question of the inclusion in the agenda of the Security
Council of an item concerning the situation in
Myanmar.

First, we should objectively evaluate the
relationship between the situation in Myanmar and
international peace and security. According to the
United Nations Charter, it is only those questions that
constitute threats to international peace and security
that warrant discussion by the Security Council. If the

existence in Myanmar of such issues - including
human rights questions, refugees, drugs and HIV/
AIDS - means that they are likely to endanger

international peace and security and thus makes it
necessary to make one country the subject of an item
on the Council's agenda, then it follows that any
country facing similar issues should likewise be
inscribed on the Council's agenda. That is
preposterous.

In fact, neither the direct neighbours of Myanmar
nor the overwhelming majority of Asian countries
recognizes the situation in Myanmar as any threat to
regional peace and security. Without seeking the
consent of the country in question, and without a
request from a country in the region, some countries as
far away as across the ocean are, however, of the belief
that the situation in Myanmar is indeed a threat to
international peace and security. That is a far cry from
reality, to say the least. To request that the Security
Council discuss an issue that by nature pertains to the
internal affairs of a country not only exceeds the
mandate given by the Charter to the Council, but will
also undermine the Council's authority and legality.

Secondly, we should recognize the efforts on the
part of Myanmar to solve its own problems. There is no
denying that in Myanmar there are many questions or
problems, some of which are quite serious. However,
2
all of the countries involved are faced with problems of
some kind. The key is to find a constructive solution to
the problems facing a country.

Recently, in cooperation with the International
Labour Organization (ILO), Myanmar revised its
domestic law so as to align it with the ILO
conventions. On the basis of close consultations with
its neighbours, Myanmar has set out to properly tackle
its refugee problems.

The 2006 World Drug Report and the United
States Government's International Narcotics Control
Strategy Report both point to remarkable achievements
on the part of Myanmar in combating drug production
and trafficking. All of that indicates that the situation
in Myanmar is gradually improving.

The international community should continue to
encourage Myanmar and to create a favourable
environment for the country. Only in that manner can
real momentum be injected to accelerate the early
completion of the democratic process so that Myanmar
will participate in regional peace and development.

Thirdly, we should further promote
communication and cooperation between Myanmar and
the international community. In May 2006, Under-
Secretary-General Gambari visited Myanmar upon
invitation. The visit, during which he met with
members both of the Government of Myanmar and of
civil society, had successful results.

Following the visit, Under-Secretary-General
Gambari also indicated that Myanmar was ready and
willing to collaborate with the United Nations and turn
over a new leaf. As we speak, the Government of
Myanmar has once again extended an invitation to
Under-Secretary-General Gambari, and a visit will
likely take place in early November.

On 10 July, the Non-Aligned Movement wrote a
letter to the Security Council in which it put forward
its categorical opposition to the inclusion of the issue
of Myanmar on the agenda of the Security Council and
its request for constructive cooperation between the
international community and Myanmar. In August, the
Foreign Minister of the Philippines, as current Chair of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
paid a successful visit to Myanmar, which served to
boost ASEAN's confidence in finding a successful
solution to the question of Myanmar on its own.
06-52444
As a result of that series of exchanges, visits and
communications, we now have favourable interaction
between the international community and Myanmar
and some hard-won gains. The international
community should welcome and further encourage
such momentum. Only in this way can it assist the
Secretary-General in fulfilling the mandate of good
offices entrusted to him by the General Assembly. To
force the Security Council into intervening is not only
inappropriate but will also further complicate the
situation and have a negative impact on future
interaction between Myanmar and the United Nations.

As a permanent member of the Security Council
representing the Asia-Pacific region, and as an
immediate neighbour of Myanmar, China wishes, more
than any other country in the world, to see political
stability, economic development and national unity in
Myanmar. At the same time, China has all along
adopted a responsible attitude in constructively
assisting the Government of Myanmar in tackling its
problems incrementally. We are of the View that events
in Myanmar certainly relate to that country's internal
affairs, and that it should therefore be left to the
Government and the people of Myanmar to find a
solution to the problem on the basis of consultations. It
is incumbent upon the international community to lend
a helping hand and play a positive and constructive
role.

So long as the situation in Myanmar does not
pose a threat to international or regional peace and
security, China will be unequivocally against including
the question of Myanmar on the agenda of the Security
Council. China's position on this matter will remain
unchanged.

