Mr. Lamamra (Algeria) (interpretation from Arabic):
We are convinced, Mr. President, that given your broad
knowledge of the issues, great experience and diplomatic
skills, you will certainly accomplish your tasks in the
service of international peace and security in a manner that
does honour to your country, the sister nation of
Botswana, linked to Algeria by deep friendship, and to all
Africa.

I also wish to express our esteem and appreciation
to the Permanent Representative of the United States,
Ambassador Albright, for her efforts and achievements as
President of the Security Council in the month of
February.

The Security Council's discussion of the situation in
Somalia is a timely event. I wish to express our gratitude
and thanks to you personally, Sir, and to the Ambassadors
of Egypt and Guinea-Bissau for this most welcome and
significant initiative. We would like it to be seen as an
expression of solidarity with the brotherly people of
Somalia, who have suffered and continue to suffer so
much from the war and its miseries. They are the victims
of short-sighted political machinations and irresponsible
ambitions. We hope that this discussion will convey a
firm and clear political message to all parties directly
concerned with Somalia as a result of their position and
responsibility, be they individuals or organizations - the
message that the United Nations, the Organization of
African Unity, the League of Arab States and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference will henceforth
dedicate their efforts to helping the people of Somalia
establish the conditions necessary for national
reconciliation and the formation of a broad-based
Government.

At the end of this month, it will be one year since
the withdrawal of the United Nations Operation in
Somalia (UNOSOM. II). Since then, the United Nations
presence has gradually declined, to the point where the
Organization was compelled to transfer its office from
Somalia. We appreciate the substantive difficulties and
problems that have been encountered by the United
Nations in Somalia, as presented by the Secretary-General
in his most recent report to the Security Council on the
situation in that country. We also recognize that
inadmissible acts of aggression and sabotage have been
directed against United Nations personnel and property.

However, in our view, such difficulties and acts
should not be used as a pretext for abandoning that
country. Given its responsibilities towards Somalia, a
State Member of the United Nations, and its people, the
Security Council enjoys the political and moral authority
and the power to influence events there. It is true that the
problems of Somalia are the responsibility of the Somali
people themselves, but the international community

 

should not use the lack of cooperation by some parties in
Somalia as an excuse to shirk its duties in the face of such
a tragedy. The United Nations, we feel, has not exhausted
all the ideas or energy that could encourage the Somali
factions and party leaders to honour their commitments
under the Nairobi Declaration of 24 March 1994, which
provides a basis for the settlement of the Somali crisis, to
fostering national reconciliation and establishing a central
Government with authority over the Somali State and
people in the spheres of security, economy and the
country's territorial integrity.

The humanitarian assistance efforts made in very
precarious security conditions by the United Nations and
other international and non-governmental organizations to
relieve the suffering of the Somali people deserve our full
appreciation and tribute. However, the effectiveness of
humanitarian assistance continues to depend on a political
settlement of the crisis. Humanitarian efforts to address the
political problem cannot replace political action vis-a-vis the
Somali factions. The situation requires consistent political
action by the United Nations, in addition to the pursuit of
humanitarian assistance, in a way that responds to the ever-
growing needs, including the need for medicine, in the light
of the deteriorating health situation in Somalia.

It is high time the Security Council rose above the
political repercussions of its failure in Somalia and resumed
the initiative in order to create or take opportunities to
make progress towards genuine peace.

The Organization of African Unity, the League of
Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic Conference
have already suggested ideas worthy of support. The United
Nations political and moral support for these efforts could
ensure their success. The proposal to create a contact group
for Somalia deserves support and encouragement from the
international community. A combination of efforts by all
parties and intensified action with regard to the factions in
conflict have become urgently necessary for the promotion
of national reconciliation. All the parties, whether States or
individuals, capable of exerting influence on the leaders of
the rival factions should use their full influence to convince
them to give up short-sighted calculations and fulfil their
responsibilities to the State and people of Somalia.

We hope, in the light of the crisis in Somalia, that
today's debate will have concrete results, even if they are
modest, and that the debate will not remain a dead letter.
