We welcome this timely and topical high-level open debate on pandemics and security, organized by the German presidency of the Security Council. We commend the leadership and work of the International Committee of the Red Cross and all the staff who actively continue to both fight the pandemic and fulfil their vital mandate on the ground. The spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has clear security consequences and should be approached comprehensively, including at the individual, societal, State and international levels. Therefore, it is appropriate that Germany has brought this very important topic to the attention of the Security Council. Our response to the COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated the importance of the rule of law and a rules-based international order. International norms and institutions have given us guidance on how to better deal with the spread of the pandemic, with the United Nations and its agencies at the core of global efforts. And, clearly, the members of the Security Council should lead by example. Only through good governance, trust and collective and international action can we curb the spread and become more resilient in dealing with the next pandemic. Strengthening collective resilience and making timely preparations for any further developments regarding pandemic-related challenges is in our common interests. We were among those nations that welcomed the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. Such a ceasefire should facilitate solving all protracted conflicts - both hot and frozen, including the one in Ukraine's east caused by Russia's aggressive actions. We reiterate our call to respect the principle of territorial integrity, including of Ukraine. In that respect, military transparency is an important element of a more predictable and stable international security environment. It is all of our responsibility to preserve it under any circumstances, particularly if health safety measures hinder practical verification. One clear security consequence of COVID-19 is the "infodemic". Generally, the information space is linked to security, as threats and solutions are based on perception. There can be no doubt that the infodemic can be lethal, and fighting it is a priority for both Latvia and the European Union. Latvia has accumulated expertise in that domain, which we are ready to share. In our cross-regional statement on the infodemic, endorsed by 132 Member States and Observers, we called all stakeholders, such as media workers, social media platforms and non-governmental organizations, to increase their efforts to fight the infodemic. We now call on all countries, both those who endorsed that statement and those who have not done so yet, to join our common effort. We should all work more actively towards implementing United Nations recommendations in this area. In that respect, we welcome the United Nations communications response initiative and the Verified campaign, and were glad to contribute to the social media campaign launched on 30 June. The COVID-19 pandemic and its socioeconomic impacts highlight once again the multifaceted nature of threats and challenges in the era of global interdependency, which can increase security risks. Therefore, our response to COVID-19 should correspond to the aims of green recovery and building back better. That is key to ensuring stronger resilience and long-term, sustainable security for all.
