Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Peru for having convened this open meeting and
Deputy High Representative Thomas Markram for his
briefing.

Since the chemical-weapons attack incident
in Syria, China has been deeply concerned, as we
strongly condemn any attack against civilians. China's
position on the issue of chemical weapons has been
consistent: we firmly oppose the use by any country,
organization or individual of chemical weapons, under
any circumstances.

China supports the carrying out of a comprehensive,
objective and impartial investigation into the use of
chemical weapons on Syrian territory so as to achieve a
result that can pass the litmus test of history and truth,
bringing the perpetrators and the parties responsible
for the use of chemical weapons to justice.

China is deeply concerned about the recent
incidents involving the suspected use of toxic chemicals
as weapons. The establishment of a new investigation
into the use of chemical weapons in Syria aimed at
determining the truth, in a bid to prevent the recurrence
of the use of chemical weapons on Syrian territory, is
of vital importance; this is also the consensus of all
parties in the Security Council. We appreciate Russia's
active efforts to promote the establishment of a new
investigative mechanism and hope that the members
of the Council will be united and continue their
constructive consultations on this issue.

All parties concerned should continue to insist
that the Security Council and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) be the main
channels for dealing with the Syrian chemical-weapon
issue in an effort to seek proper solutions through
consultations. China welcomes the positive progress
made in the OPCW's efforts to destroy the remaining
two chemical-weapon facilities in Syria and hopes
that the parties concerned will cooperate closely and
complete related work as soon as possible. At the same
time, China hopes that the Syrian Government will duly
continue to maintain its cooperation with the OPCW in
order to resolve all relevant issues regard to its initial
declaration on its chemical-weapons programme.

The Syrian conflict has entered its eighth year
and led to profound suffering for the Syrian people. A
political settlement is the only solution to the Syrian
issue. The international community should increase its
support for United Nations mediation efforts and the
work of Special Envoy De Mistura in order to begin the
next round of Geneva peace talks as soon as possible
and to move forward constructively. China welcomes
the summit meeting held by Russia, Turkey and Iran,
which China hopes will contribute to advancing the
process leading to peace talks in Geneva.

