Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
supports and greatly appreciates Russia's initiative to
convene this open debate of the Security Council at the
ministerial level. Resolving the conflicts in the Middle
East and eliminating the threat posed by terrorism are
essential to world peace and part of the responsibilities
of the Security Council.

The situation in the Middle East region is serious
and disturbing, with differences among nations,
religious sects and ethnic groups aggravating the
situation. Wars and conflicts, humanitarian disasters
and terrorist threats are interlinked. The image of
the drowned 3-year-old Syrian boy is an affront to
human morality and strikes at the conscience of the
international community.

We are gathered today in the Chamber of the
Security Council not to express lament and engage
in empty rhetoric, but to seriously reflect on the root
causes of the turmoil in the Middle East, make an
accurate and objective assessment ofthe situation in the
region, seek a feasible and effective solution and strive
to build a framework for peace that can be acceptable
to all parties. More important, we are here to seize
opportunities and take action to break the vicious circle
of incessant turbulence in the Middle East, comply with
the mandate entrusted to the Security Council by the
Charter of the United Nations and meet the expectations
of the international community and, in particular, of
the people of the Middle East.

China hopes that the international community and
the people of the Middle East will jointly build a region
of peace, tolerance and prosperity. First and foremost,
the peoples of the Middle East need a region of peace.
Stability is a blessing, while turmoil brings with it peril.
Peace is the most precious. The 70-year history of the
United Nations has witnessed continuous gun smoke
in the Middle East and the displacement of innocent
civilians.

The history of the Middle East has taught us, time
and again, that violence will not lead to the ultimate
solution of problems and that hatred will only extinguish
hopes. Only by respecting one another can people live
together peacefully. Only by adhering to dialogue
can problems be resolved, and only by promoting
friendship can a better future be created. That is what
the international community hopes to see and what
China's diplomacy aims to achieve.

People need a Middle East characterized by
tolerance. The Middle East - once a cradle of
civilization - boasts a glorious history with major
contributions to human progress. Its flourishing
civilization and cultural confidence have made that
region an important platform for exchanges and the
integration of Eastern and Western civilizations. In the
twenty-first century, the coexistence of civilizations
requires the spirit of harmony without imposed
uniformity, more than ever before, and the progress of
society calls for inclusiveness and broad-mindedness.
The various religions should tolerate and learn from
one another, and the various ethnicities should live in
harmony.

People need a Middle East of self-advancement. The
Middle East is the home of all the peoples in that region.
Therefore, its future and destiny should be determined by
those same countries, through consultation. Countries
outside of the region may provide help but should avoid
interfering in the internal affairs of other countries
and - even more importantly - avoid imposing a
specific model on them. The regional order should be
shaped by the countries in the Middle East, based on
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in
the light of the circumstances on the ground, and in
accordance with the needs of the people there.

The Syrian crisis has been lingering for nearly five
years. The international community should not stand
idly by, nor should it intervene arbitrarily. First, we need
to step up humanitarian assistance. In particular, the
growing tension caused by the migrant situation needs
to be addressed so as to avoid additional tragedies.
We welcome greater efforts on the part of European
Union member States to that end. Syria's neighbouring
countries - which have received over 4 million Syrian
refugees over the past several years - face even
greater and more immediate pressure. It is both unfair
and unrealistic to ignore their efforts and difficulties.

Political settlement is the only way out of the
Syrian crisis. To achieve that goal, parties need to find
a middle way that draws on workable international and
regional practices, satisfies Syria's national conditions
and accommodates the interests of all parties. The
resurgence of violent terrorist forces and the spread
of the migrant crisis have further driven home to all
parties the necessity and urgency of seeking a political
settlement to the Syrian crisis.

China calls on all parties to seize the
opportunity - arising from a growing desire for a
political settlement - to convene a third Geneva
Conference on Syria and push for restarting an
inclusive political transition process that does not set
preconditions or predetermined results, and involves all
parties to the conflict. Let the Syrian people decide for
themselves the future of their country, with the help
of the international community and the support of the
Security Council.

In order to achieve that goal, Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and Special Envoy de Mistura are carrying out
active mediation efforts. China, in that regard, hopes
that all parties will unite behind the United Nations
endeavour, create conditions, build consensus and
foster an enabling environment for a mediated solution
to succeed.

China is deeply concerned about the recent conflict
between Israel and Palestine involving the Al-Aqsa
mosque compound. Violence never brings true security;
it will only entrench hatred. China firmly supports the
timely restoration of the Palestinian people's lawful
rights and the realization of peaceful coexistence
between the two States of Palestine and Israel. The
international community should work together to
facilitate restarting talks between Palestine and Israel
on a broad-based platform, with the direct participation
of all parties concerned. Only talks can bring hope for
peace and a better future.

Terrorism is a scourge affecting all humankind. The
evolving situation in the Middle East has repeatedly
shown that terrorist activities are all the same in nature,
and that, in order to fight them, we must not adopt
double standards. Combatting Violent terrorism in all
of its manifestations should be the shared responsibility
and priority of countries in the region and the
international community. China calls for broad-based
and comprehensive international counter-terrorism
cooperation within the United Nations framework.
International counter-terrorism cooperation should
include the following priorities: combatting cyber-
terrorism, preventing the rise of violent extremist
ideologies, blocking the flow of terrorists and terrorist
funding, strengthening the exchange ofintelligence and
giving full play to the role of Security Council.

China believes in a comprehensive response to
terrorism that addresses both the symptoms and the
root causes. Regional instability and development
gaps breed terrorism, while ethnic disunity and
religious conflict allow radical ideologies to resurface.
In order to fundamentally resolve issues that breed
and help spread terrorism, we must properly address
regional disputes, restore regional stability, enhance
the governance capabilities of the various countries,
accelerate economic development and improve people's
lives in tangible ways.

China hopes that this Security Council meeting will
be a new starting point for renewed efforts on the part
of the international community and open new prospects
for peace and security in the Middle East.

