Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Togo for the initiative to convene this open
debate on the impact of transnational organized crime
on peace, security and stability in West Africa and the
Sahel region. I welcome His Excellency President
Gnassingbe presiding over today's meeting. I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Executive
Director Fedotov for their statements.

In recent years, transnational organized crime has
spread in West Africa and the Sahel region. The
increase in the trafficking of illegal drugs and arms,
piracy and terrorist activities seriously threaten peace
and stability, endanger economic and social
development and have a negative impact on the
humanitarian situation in that region. China expresses
its serious concern in that regard.

We appreciate the consistent efforts made by
West Africa and the countries of the Sahel region to
combat transnational organized crime. We hope that
West Africa and the countries of the Sahel region will
learn from the positive experience of other regions,
draw up and improve comprehensive strategies,
strengthen capacity-building and promote cooperation
in border management, justice and law enforcement so
as to better assume responsibility for maintaining peace
and stability in the region.

We welcome the relevant efforts made by
regional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States, to cooperate with
countries in the region. We support West Africa and the
countries in the Sahel region in their efforts to
strengthen practical cooperation through regional
coordination.

The countries in West Africa and the Sahel region
are developing countries and urgently need the active
support and assistance of the international community
to combat transnational organized crime. In the short
term, the lack of resources, technology and capacity is
the main obstacle to West Africa and the countries in
the Sahel region combating transnational organized
crime. We appeal to the international community to
increase its input of capital and technology and to
provide effective assistance to the relevant countries
and regional organizations on the basis of full respect
for the sovereignty of the countries concerned. We
hope that the United Nations will actively exercise its
coordinating role and that members of regional
organizations and United Nations specialized agencies
fully utilize their respective advantages and expertise
to promote resource integration and allocation as an
effective guarantee of relevant efforts of countries and
organizations in the region.

The Security Council should continue to be
seized of the issue of transnational organized crime in
West Africa and the countries in the Sahel region and
promptly adopt the necessary measures. In the long
term, poverty and delayed economic and social
development are the breeding ground for transnational
organized crime in West Africa and the countries in the
Sahel region. We appeal to the international community
to actively take practical and effective steps to assist
countries in the region in their economic recovery and
development, job creation and better living standards
in order to solve the root causes of the problem.

The security situation in West Africa and the
Sahel region has a significant impact on combating
transnational organized crime. The current problem of
arms proliferation in West Africa and the Sahel region
is rooted in history, but the recent regional conflict has
exacerbated the matter. China is very concerned about
that. We hope that the relevant parties in the
international community will draw lessons from that,
be prudent in dealing with regional crises and conflicts,
continue to settle disputes peacefully through dialogue
and negotiation, avoid taking any action that exceeds
the mandate of the Security Council, and play a
constructive role in maintaining regional peace and
security.

