Mr. Hughes (New Zealand): Mr. President, may I
first congratulate you and your delegation on bringing this
very important matter to the Security Council this month in
this open format. I would also like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Prendergast, for his valuable
introduction to today's debate.

As others have observed, the Council's recourse to
sanctions, which are specifically provided for under Article
41 of the Charter, has increased dramatically in recent
years. The increasing frequency with which sanctions are
being used has helped highlight some serious
shortcomings. The Secretary-General has on more than
one occasion drawn attention to deficiencies in their
application and also to the unintended harm they may
inflict on innocent and vulnerable people, most recently,
for example, in his millennium report entitled "We the
peoples: the role of the United Nations in the twenty-first
century" (A/54/2000).

It is easy to see why sanctions have become an
instrument of choice. Their imposition represents a useful,
low-cost middle course of action somewhere between
diplomatic censure and the use of force, by means of
which the Security Council may address a serious threat
to international peace and security. The problem is,
however, that sanctions, and comprehensive sanctions in
particular, can be a blunt instrument. The mechanisms for
enforcing them have too often been lacking or have not
been uniformly implemented. There has been little
reliable information on or monitoring of their actual
effects. Sanctions have had a limited record of success in
achieving the goals for which they were imposed.
Compliance has often been inadequate or uneven, the
economies of neighbouring countries can be impacted
adversely, and black markets and smuggling in banned
goods or commodities can flourish.

In the case of comprehensive trade sanctions
imposed on authoritarian regimes in particular, we have
seen how the unintended effects can be manipulation and
profiteering by the elite, who thus escape any adverse
impact on themselves and may even exploit the situation
to their own advantage. On the other hand, sanctions can
cause serious humanitarian distress for ordinary people
and, if sustained over a long period of time, severe
damage to the local infrastructure. In addition, there is
ample evidence of numerous structural, processing and
administrative problems which impede the effectiveness
of sanctions. New Zealand believes that the Security
Council needs to develop, as a priority, a more focused
and refined approach to reduce the unintended
consequences of sanctions, especially the incidence of
humanitarian suffering.

Let me say, at this point, that the aim of sanctions is
not in question. New Zealand supports the use of
sanctions as a legitimate instrument, provided for by the
Charter, for dealing with threats to international peace and
security. Rather, it is their effectiveness and their
unmoderated side effects on innocent civilians and
neighbouring countries that is at issue.

 

In its presidential note of 29 January 1999, issued
under the symbol S/1999/92, the Security Council offered
a number of practical proposals for improving the work of
the sanctions committees. Welcome as these were, they did
not go far enough. More needs to be done.

We were grateful for the work done recently by
Switzerland, Germany, the United Kingdom, Canada and
others to investigate the feasibility of developing better
targeted, "smarter" sanctions regimes. We endorse these
efforts and urge the Security Council to improve the overall
efficacy of sanctions by taking a more graduated -
perhaps a two-pronged - approach to sanctions in the
future.

First, the trend away from general trade sanctions
towards a more selective approach needs to be accelerated,
with greater efforts made to identify a limited range of
goods and services that would target the interests of the
regimes and elites identified as responsible for threats to
peace and security. These could include financial sanctions
such as the freezing of assets, bans on foreign travel and
the imposition of more precisely defined and better
monitored arms embargoes.

Secondly, the procedures for approving humanitarian
exemptions to sanctions regimes should be overhauled and
streamlined. For example, lists of exempt foodstuffs,
pharmaceuticals, medical and other humanitarian supplies
should be better defined and agreed, and decisions on
dual-use goods made more transparent. United Nations
agencies, as well as humanitarian organizations, should also
be able to apply directly to the sanctions committees for
exemptions. The Secretariat should establish a dedicated
unit to maintain the necessary databases and to process
applications and notifications electronically. The sanctions
committees should be able to draw on special expertise to
identify the profiles of their targets and design the scope of
proposed targeted sanctions accordingly. Clear exit
strategies identifying the actions required to suspend or
remove sanctions should be built into mandates in order to
clarify the inducements for compliance. There should also
be mechanisms in place to monitor and assess regularly the
impact of sanctions. The possibilities for better border
control measures should also be explored.

These are but a few of the measures that my
delegation believes could improve the current effectiveness
of sanctions regimes. Furthermore, up to now the
international community has depended on existing structures
and resources to manage the application and enforcement of
sanctions. This approach has entailed very little financial
cost to the membership, but in some cases it may have
contributed to devastating suffering and long-term
degradation for civilian populations, far in excess even of
the kind of damage that might be inflicted by armed
conflict or war. This situation poses, as the
Secretary-General has said, a moral dilemma for the
United Nations, which has a responsibility to protect the
vulnerable and the weak.

While these are complex and challenging issues,
increased effectiveness lies in the hands of the Security
Council and the General Assembly. As we have
suggested, the Council should focus on designing better
targeted sanctions regimes with clear objectives and exit
strategies, regular reviews and stronger institutional
support, including the provision to the Secretariat and
Member States of the necessary technical expertise and
advice to make sanctions work better. Finally, for its part
the General Assembly might consider adopting a separate
budget with adequate resources for implementing
sanctions mandates and supporting the sanctions
committees, along the same lines as the budgets
established for peacekeeping operations and the
International Tribunals.

