Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke in Arabic): First, permit me to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month, wishing you every success in your
important tasks. I also take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Tafrov for his able stewardship of the
Council last month.

On 16 September 2002, following the tireless
efforts by the Secretary-General Mr. Kofi Annan, and
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States,
Mr. Amr Moussa, Iraq accepted the return of inspectors
of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) without
restrictions or conditions, a step that was welcomed by
the international community.

Following that, an agreement between Iraq and
the Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC was reached in
Vienna on the arrangements for the return of the
weapons inspectors. World markets have been relieved,
and the Dow Jones index gained $1 billion in one
minute. That relaxation did not last for long, since
some have requested that inspectors not return until a
new draft resolution is prepared.

Iraq has declared that it is free of all weapons of
mass destruction and that it is committed to all relevant
Security Council resolutions. Therefore, we believe
that the present situation requires the return of the
inspectors to Iraq as soon as possible, in accordance
with relevant Security Council resolutions, in order to
fulfil their tasks and to present a report to the Security
Council so it can lift the sanctions imposed on Iraq.
There is no reason for the delay in the Council's work,
and there is no reason to prejudge the results of the
inspectors and to prepare for war.

We would like to recall that Article 2 of the
United Nations Charter states that all Member States
shall refrain in their international relations from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State.

The League of Arab States, at the Beirut Summit
on 27 and 28 March 2002, completely rejected any
strike against Iraq or any threat against the safety and
security of any Arab country. We requested that
sanctions against Iraq be lifted and called for respect
for its territorial integrity and security. We also
welcomed Iraq's reaffirmation of the Council's call for
respect for the independence and sovereignty of
Kuwait, and we have called for implementation of
resolutions of international legitimacy and for adoption
of policies of good intentions.

Security Council resolution 687 (1991) also
called for the entire region of the Middle East to be
free of all weapons of mass destruction, including
nuclear weapons. Israel has rejected that and is the only
nuclear State in the region. It has large stocks of
nuclear weapons and biological and chemical weapons
of mass destruction and the ability to strike any region
in the Arab world.

Why does the Security Council not adopt a
resolution to force Israel to dismantle its weapons of
mass destruction? Why is there this double standard?
Article 25 of the United Nations Charter states that
Member States of the United Nations undertake to
accept Security Council resolutions and implement
them in accordance with the Charter. All Council
resolutions should be implemented. Israel has violated
scores of them in its conflict with the Arab side. Why
does the Security Council not adopt a resolution
forcing Israel to implement its resolutions?

The Secretary-General of the United Nations
stated lately that every time he is in a press conference
he is asked about double standards. In its last issue, on
12 October 2002, the Economist magazine addressed
this particular matter.

(spoke in English)

"This question is no longer being asked by Arabs
alone. 'No war against Iraq, Free Palestine' has
become the slogan of anti-war demonstrations in
Europe and America. The two conflicts have
become entwined in the public mind in a way that
the West's politicians cannot ignore. When he
sought last week to talk his sceptical Labour
Party into supporting action against Iraq, Tony
Blair, Britain's Prime Minister, got his biggest
cheer for the bit of his speech that said UN
resolutions should apply in Palestine as much as
Iraq."

(spoke in Arabic)

We are extremely concerned about the increasing
possibility of war breaking out against an Arab country.
A dark, ominous cloud is gathering on the horizon,
threatening the peace and safety of the entire region.
We call for the expeditious return of UNMOVIC
inspectors to Iraq to fulfil their tasks in order to allow
the region and the entire world to breathe easily again.
We completely reject the waging of war against an
Arab country. The imposition of a new military conflict
on the Middle East will be a grave mistake that will be
very difficult to contain or control. War against Iraq
will open a Pandora's box. Violence and civil war will
sweep the entire country, fragmenting it. This in turn
will undermine the entire Arab region, which has
already been plagued with extreme anger due to the
Israeli occupation and preparations for another military
attack against another brotherly State.

War against Iraq will annul the current world
order, the United Nations Charter and international law.
It would expose States, particularly those of the South,
to the danger of attacks on the pretext of preventive
measures, leading the entire world back to the era of
the League of Nations.

Upholding the United Nations Charter,
international legitimacy and the solidarity and unity of
the international community is the only means to face
up to the crises of the twenty-first century, to maintain
international peace and security and to "save
succeeding generations the scourge of war, which twice
in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind".

