The Islamic Republic of Iran is fully committed to contributing to a political solution to the Syrian crisis. This is a message that the Iranian President and other high-ranking officials of our country conveyed to the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Syria during the latter's recent visit to Tehran, during which a broad range of issues, including ways and means of preserving Syrian sovereignty and territorial integrity and reducing the suffering of the Syrian people, were discussed extensively. Similarly, the latest developments in the political process were discussed in recent consultations between Iran's Special Envoy on Syria and Special Representative of the Secretary-General Pedersen, who briefed the Iranian side on the outcome of the fourth session of the Constitutional Committee. They also exchanged views on facilitating the successful convening of the Committee's next session. The Committee must continue its work and operate without any external interference or pressure and without setting any artificial deadline for the conclusion of its work. The only objective of the political process must be to enable the Syrian people to determine the future of their country by themselves. Furthermore, the sovereignty, political independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria must be fully respected by all. Separatist agendas and illegitimate self-rule initiatives must be rejected, and all foreign forces whose presence is not permitted by the Syrian Government, particularly the forces of the United States of America, which are following a hidden agenda, must leave the country. Places like Idlib must not turn into a safe haven for terrorist groups; accordingly, while every effort should be made to protect the lives of civilians, efforts must be continued to combat terrorism until that threat is fully removed. Facilitating Syria's reconstruction and the safe and voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced persons to their original places of residence in Syria need to be part of an overall solution to the current conflict in the country. The interests of millions of Syrian refugees must not be held hostage to the political ambitions of certain Powers. Delaying their return will only prolong their suffering. Along the same lines, unilateral sanctions, particularly those imposed by the United States, target the most vulnerable people the most, adding to their suffering. That inhumane practice must come to an end. We will continue to support the people and the Government of Syria in their struggle to overcome the threats of terrorism and foreign occupation.
