Mr. Farhfidi (Afghanistan): Allow me,
Mr. President, to express to you our deep sorrow and
sympathy in relation to the two tragic airline accidents
that took place yesterday in Russia. Through you, we
convey our condolences to the Russian Government, to
the Russian people and to the families of the Victims.

Allow me also to present to you, Sir, my sincere
congratulations on your new assignment as Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations and to congratulate you on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the current month. I
thank you and the other members of the Council for
including on this month's agenda an open meeting on
the situation in Afghanistan. Such a meeting provides
an opportunity to assess the overall situation in
Afghanistan in the presence of the Afghan delegation.

For almost three years the Afghan Government
has been making major progress in implementing the
Bonn Agreement, which was concluded on 5 December
2001. At present, we are reaching the final stages of the
implementation of the Bonn Agreement. The
presidential election is going to be held on 9 October
2004 and the parliamentary election will be held in
April 2005. The political dynamism and enthusiasm
generated among Afghans by those elections can be
observed in the high number of voter registrations.
According to recent data, more than 10.5 million
Afghans have received their voter registration cards.
More than 41 per cent of registrants are women.

Different political and social organizations and
political actors on Afghanistan's political scene are
involved in political debate and discourse in these two
historic elections. These positive political
developments are a major blow to those extremist
groups that were engaged in the propaganda of
intimidation and threats directed at persons
participating in the democratic process. The attempt to
derail elections through violent attacks failed. It is
important to mention that the United Nations, in its
impartial and central role, has performed its
assignments in preparing the election and registering
voters. The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Jean Arnault, and the staff of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
have played a major role throughout that process.

The Afghan delegation is thankful to Mr. Jean
Arnault for his comprehensive briefing at today's
meeting, during which he ably updated the Secretary-
General's report of 12 August 2004 (S/2004/634). I am
also thankful to the members of the Security Council
for their active participation in the debate on the
situation in Afghanistan. They have provided us with
important views and ideas about the subject.

Achievements in Afghanistan have generally
tended towards the consolidation of peace and security.
However, despite that predominant trend, attempts to
sabotage and destabilize the situation continue by
remnants of Al Qaeda and Taliban groups, particularly
along the eastern and southern borders of
Afghanistan - attempts that are aimed at challenging
the authority and legitimacy of the Afghan
Government. Those elements have their network
support in certain politico-religious circles outside
Afghanistan. The armed forces of Afghanistan, the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the
anti-terrorist coalition forces are actively involved in
thwarting the subversive and terrorist attacks of
extremist groups, which are mainly targeting the
innocent civilian population, relief workers and those
who are working for the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of the country.

The major development of the past year was the
adoption of a Security Council resolution regarding the
expansion of the ISAF beyond Kabul and the
establishment of provincial reconstruction teams. The
Afghan Government welcomed the adoption of that
resolution.

NATO, which took over command of ISAF in
August 2003, has played a beneficial role in efforts to
consolidate peace. Another major development in that
context was the transfer of ISAF command to the
Eurocorps. Afghanistan is thankful to NATO and
welcomes the Eurocorps command and its commander
General Jean-Louis Py. We also appreciate the
remarkable contribution of Lieutenant-General Rick
Hillier, the outgoing Canadian commander.
Afghanistan looks forward to the expansion of ISAF as
planned, to assure a secure environment during the
coming elections.

As we have indicated in previous meetings of the
Council, economic recovery and reconstruction in
Afghanistan, security and improving the lives of the
Afghan people are closely interrelated. Visible
rehabilitation and reconstruction enhance the authority
of the Government and greatly contribute to the peace
process. The Government should have the ability to
provide services, launch major projects, build roads
and create jobs. Thousands of ex-combatants should be
reintegrated. Only the viable creation of economic
growth can assure successful implementation of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes. The active participation of the
international community and financial assistance to
reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts in Afghanistan
contribute greatly to the restoration of democracy and
the consolidation of peace and stability. The full
disbursement of commitments made at the Berlin
Conference, which was held from 31 March to 1 April
2004, is essential in that context.
During the recent official visit of President
Karzai to Pakistan, from 22 and 23 August 2004,
President Musharraf held out a categorical assurance to
the Afghan President, assuring him that he would not
allow anybody to use Pakistan's territory for actions
against the interests of Afghanistan. Anybody trying to
carry out terrorist activities in Afghanistan or to disrupt
the election process or create law and order problems
will not be allowed from Pakistan. Pakistan will act
against them.

In conclusion, I wish to assure the Council that
there is no alienation of any ethnic group in
Afghanistan, including in the southern and eastern
border areas. The Taliban emerged in southern
Afghanistan and recruited from the border areas only at
the end of 1994. The many scholarly books describing
the facts that have been published to date about the
Taliban should be read if we want to understand the
events of today. We hope that the time will come when
Doctors Without Borders will resume their valuable
services in Afghanistan.

