I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. During the past months Estonia has repeatedly called for keeping alive the momentum towards peace between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. Hopefully, the recent announcement of the normalization of bilateral relations between Israel and the United Arab Emirates will contribute to that end. Estonia welcomes this historic announcement and the role played by the United States in this respect. We believe the normalization of relations between Israel and the United Arab Emirates will contribute as well to the stability of the whole region. It is positive that, along with this agreement, Israel is committing to suspending plans to unilaterally annex areas of the occupied Palestinian territory. We also join the Secretary-General in his hope that this will create an opportunity for Israeli and Palestinian leaders to re-engage in meaningful negotiations. Estonia remains committed to a negotiated two-State solution, based on internationally agreed parameters and relevant United Nations resolutions, while taking into account the legitimate aspirations of both parties and Israeli security concerns. Only direct and meaningful negotiations between the parties can resolve the final-status issues and achieve a just and lasting peace. As the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories, a need for unity and solidarity is even more important, and we underline the continued importance of cooperation between Israeli and Palestinian authorities to tackle the pandemic. Estonia strongly calls upon all parties to refrain from any unilateral steps that could undermine the viability of the two-State solution and increase instability in the region. This includes Israel's settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territories, including in East Jerusalem, which is illegal under international law. We call on the Palestinian Authority to reconsider its announcement of suspending agreements with Israel, including in the area of security. This would be especially vital in the context of COVID-19. We are deeply worried about the gradual increase in violence between Israel and Gaza after a relatively quiet summer. We condemn the firing of rockets from Gaza towards Israel, or any other form of violence targeting civilian population. We call on both parties to exercise maximum restraint to avoid escalation of violence, as it would further undermine the prospects for a peaceful resolution to the conflict. We encourage all Palestinian factions to work towards reconciliation, which would enable them to address common challenges and the needs and expectations of the Palestinian population and is essential in order to reach the two-State solution. We also encourage Palestinians to announce elections. Second statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Estonia to the United Nations, Gert Auvaart We took note of the letter (S/2020/815, annex) sent by the United States notifying the Security Council of significant non-performance by Iran with regard to its commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We also took note of the letters sent by other JCPOA participants who consider that the United States is no longer a JCPOA participant, and therefore cannot initiate the snapback procedure. Considering that there is no agreement among the JCPOA initial participants regarding the United States status as a JCPOA participant, we support the Security Council presidency in considering the notification as ineffective for the purposes of snapback. However, the Security Council needs to address the concerns regarding the planned lifting of the conventional arms embargo in October 2020. We agree with the United States and with our European partners that the expiry of the arms embargo would have potentially serious consequences for the region and its security. Iran's destabilizing and malicious activities in the Middle East have been reckless and irresponsible and warrant the full attention of the Security Council. We are encouraged by the willingness of the JCPOA participants and other Security Council members to find a solution that could secure the support of the Council.
