The President (spoke in French): I shall now say
a few words in my capacity as representative of France.

In a few minutes, the European Union, speaking
through its Presidency, Belgium, will say what the 15
members of the Union feel today. I join with the
previous speakers in congratulating the two first
winners of this exemplary election. First of all, the
Timorese themselves have displayed their political
maturity, which is all the more remarkable in that this
is only the second election held in 25 years.

I would also like to congratulate the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET), under the remarkable, inspired leadership
of Sergio Vieira de Mello, as well as the person
responsible for the electoral process, Carlos
Valenzuela. When we think about the violence that
occurred in the wake of the referendum on self-
determination only two years ago, we can fully grasp
the magnitude of the advances.

Another very positive element has been
Indonesia's response, which augurs well for the
relationship that will develop between the two States
once East Timor is fully independent.

France today congratulates all the elected
officials and wishes them every success in the crucial
task that lies before them. They will have to lay the
constitutional foundations on which democracy in East
Timor can be built in a lasting manner.

Next month, on the basis of the Secretary-
General's report, we will have to join forces to define
the way in which the international presence should
evolve in order to best prepare for and accompany East
Timor's independence. France wishes to emphasize
from this day on its conviction that, in a manner that
will obviously be different, international support will
continue to be necessary if the soon-to-be independent
East Timorese people is to benefit not only from
independence, but also from the social and economic
development to which it has been aspiring for so long.

Today is a day for celebration. Let us all celebrate
together the remarkable success and clear round that
the United Nations has just scored.

I now resume my responsibilities as President of
the Council. I shall give the floor to the speakers who
are not members of the Council and who have
expressed the wish to speak.

The first speaker is the representative of Belgium.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.

