Mr. Milanovie (Serbia): First of all, I would like
to welcome His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
thank him for his report to the Council (S/2014/314, annex).

Serbia considers Bosnia and Herzegovina one of its
closest partners. As a guarantor of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, Serbia continues to be firmly committed
to respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and considers that all key
decisions regarding the future of the country should
be agreed among all its political actors. We support
all agreements reached by the entities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina aimed at promoting the well-being of all
three constituent peoples.

Home to 1.5 million Serbs, Bosnia and Herzegovina
is also our third-largest economic partner. Two days
ago, the Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Aleksandar
Vucie, made his first official visit abroad - to Sarajevo.
Surely, that visit is a clear reflection of the importance
that Serbia attaches to its relations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its entities and of my country's
commitment to promoting those relations at the highest
possible level and on the basis of good neighbourliness.

My country fully supports Bosnia and Herzegovina's
European integration and the cooperation between
the two countries within that process. In that context,
we point out in particular the importance of the
commission for the implementation of the action plan
of the memorandum for cooperation in the field of
European integration, the first meeting of which was
held in Sarajevo on 5 June 2013, with the next one
expected to take place in the first half of 2014.

We share the interest of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in exchanging experiences on the fulfilment of the
Copenhagen criteria and its readiness for coordination
on the road towards the European Union. We are
ready to help Bosnia and Herzegovina on that road
and share with it the experience gained with respect
to the technical membership conditions that Serbia has
fulfilled.

Serbia calls for an intensification of regional
cooperation. It considers that a politically and
economically stable region of South-East Europe is
one of the basic preconditions for its own economic
development. In particular, my country is interested in
promoting cooperation within the Central Europe Free
Trade Agreement, in signing in the coming period a
memorandum of understanding on third markets and
in the initiative by Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
establishment of a consortium of Bosnian and Serbian
companies after the signing of that memorandum.

In the field of economic cooperation, which is one of
the most important components of bilateral cooperation,
Serbia is interested in promoting business, investment,

trade and military-economic cooperation. Of particular
importance in that process is the role played by the Joint
Commission for Economic Cooperation, the expected
joint meeting of the Government of the Republic of
Serbia and the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the forthcoming visit of President Nikolie
to Bosnia and Herzegovina and the meeting of the
Interstate Border Commission. The resumption of the
work of the Interstate Council for Cooperation would
also be welcome.

In good faith and with a View to mutual interests,
Serbia continues to cooperate with Bosnia and
Herzegovina in addressing all outstanding issues,
which are significantly reduced in number now, in
direct contacts and talks without intermediaries. Those
issues include demarcation, refugees and missing
persons, and the process of succession.

We share the concern of High Representative
Inzko regarding the recommendation by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to lift the refugee status of refugees from Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the region. Serbia has not accepted
the recommendation of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees of 4 April
2014 because it has a negative effect on the protection
of refugees and is detrimental to the implementation
of the Regional Housing Programme and the process
of reconciliation. Alongside with Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we have continually pointed out that the
recommendation is premature.

As the country with the largest number of refugees
in the region, Serbia calls for the adoption of lasting,
just and sustainable solutions that will address
the needs and respect the rights of long-displaced
vulnerable populations. In that context, in cooperation
with Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Montenegro,
we have worked hard on addressing refugee issues
and, in particular, implementing the Regional Housing
Programme. We have invested every possible effort in
reaching reconciliation and promoting development
and stability in the region. To achieve these goals, my
country will continue to support the overall development
and progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

