Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. Minister, for your personal participation today
and for your commitment on this issue of such great
importance to the Security Council. Let me begin by
thanking Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, whom I welcome
as the new Special Representative. 1 think he is quite
familiar with Afghanistan, and I wish him every
success in his new duties. Finally, I would like to thank
Ambassador Saikal for his briefing.

I, too, align myself in advance with the statement
to be delivered on behalf of the European Union a
little later.

First of all, as we coming up to the second
anniversary of the National Unity Government, it is
important to note the significant progress made by the
Afghan Government since September 2014. France
reiterates its full support for the Afghan Government
and encourages it to step up its efforts in favour of the
development and stabilization of the country.

However, on the eve of the Brussels Conference, the
international community's support for Afghanistan as
it pursues this transition is essential. The role played by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in that respect is of course central. I wish
to pay tribute to the work undertaken by all United
Nations personnel in Afghanistan over the past 15
years. France is gratified by the fact that the Council
has been able, through the presidential statement that
we have just adopted (S/PRST/2016/14), to reiterate
that message of solidarity and support in a context that
remains quite fragile.

Next, and we regularly refer to this point in the
Council, it must be emphasized that the challenges that
Afghanistan faces every day remain quite daunting.
As the Secretary-General indicates in his report
(S/2016/768), despite considerable progress achieved by
Afghan forces, to which I wish to pay tribute for their
commitment and courage, the ongoing deterioration of
the security situation is extremely worrying. The recent
attacks attributed to the Taliban as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province, or Da'esh, show
that the situation remains fragile. France condemns
those acts of terrorism in the strongest possible terms,
and I would like, on behalf of France, to again express
our condolences for those tragedies.

There are a number of difficulties in the economic
area. The unlawful economy, corruption and the
production and trafficking of drugs must be actively
fought, for they are all obstacles to the sustainable
re-establishment of security and development of
Afghanistan. The development of economic trade with
countries of the region and the international community
should be encouraged. As Mr. Yamamoto told me
earlier, this fragile context makes maintaining the
unity of the Afghan Government all the more essential
if the challenges are to be met. We call on the Afghan
authorities to work to that end.

Finally, the concept of an Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned peace process remains more valid than ever,
as no peace process can be imposed from the outside.
Increased pressure must be exerted on the Taliban by
those who possess any influence on them to provide
every possible opportunity for a political settlement.

It is important that Afghanistan work closely with
its partners in the region on a road map for a sustainable
peace. France also calls on all countries in the region
to actively and unambiguously support the stabilization
of Afghanistan and to contribute positively to the
restoration of lasting peace in the country.

The support of the United Nations, particularly
through UNAMA, is crucial today, at a time when the
flow of refugees who have been expelled from Pakistan
is fraught with the risk of bringing the Government
and the people of Afghanistan face to face with a very
difficult humanitarian situation in the short term, and
with reintegration issues in the longer term.

The NATO Summit in Warsaw on 8 and
9 July reaffirmed international support for security
in Afghanistan for the next few years. The
Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, to be held on
October 5, should reaffirm ongoing international
support for development, within the framework of
mutual commitments.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate my country's
full support for the Afghan Government and for the
actions undertaken by the United Nations in support of
its efforts.

