Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): I should like first of all to
join other in thanking the High Representative,
Mr. Lajcak, for his briefing as well as his report. We
also wish to welcome the presence of Mr. Nikola
Spiric', Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and we thank him for his statement.

We welcome the fact that some progress has been
made regarding the objective and conditions of the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board.
Moreover, we welcome the continuous efforts by all
stakeholders in the region by taking various measures
to strengthen the rule of law at the local and national
levels. It is our view that one of the fundamentals for
forging a strong society is to build a culture of the rule
of law. Such a culture can guarantee that all its citizens
will reap the dividends of peace.

We note the incremental progress that has been
made by Bosnia and Herzegovina to fulfil the
stabilization and association agreement. We also
acknowledge that the continuation of the mandate of
the European Union force contributes to a safer and
more secure environment in this process.

Despite this notable progress, the report noted
some concern on the current security situation in the
country that is emanating from the political
environment. We place our hope in the Office of the
High Representative to continue to engage all political
parties and other relevant stakeholders to further
ameliorate the current acrimonious political climate.
This climate, we believe, will undoubtedly affect and
erode inter-ethnic trust and thus make compromise
between the parties even more complex.

In this regard, we continue to believe that
dialogue, reconciliation and negotiation must be the
preferred option for the resolution of any issues. This
effort would ensure that cooperation among parties can
be materialized and, most important, it would allow for
the parties to focus their scarce political energy on
achieving their common goal of prosperity and stability
in the region.

We continue to note with concern the slow return
of refugees and internally displaced persons. We
encourage the Office of the High Representative, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and other stakeholders to redouble their
efforts to tackle these delicate humanitarian issues.
Such efforts need to encompass measures to build a
higher level of trust among the returnees and the local
populations. As in other places, we recognize that the
longer it takes for them to return, the less incentive
exists for them to do so. The returnees need to be
convinced that they would be able to interact and live
peacefully with others.

Finally, I should like to reiterate Indonesia's
continued support to the political process conducted by
the High Representative in line with the Peace
Agreement.

