Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming your new
responsibilities. I also commend Ambassador Tafrov
for his work last month.

I wish to convey the apologies of Ambassador
Alfonso Valdivieso, the Vice-Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), who, for reasons beyond
his control, is unable to be present here today.

We appreciate the work and leadership of
Ambassador Greenstock in his capacity as Chairman of
the CTC and thank him for his comments today, which
serve to elucidate the current political standing of this
issue in the Security Council. My delegation associates
itself with the statement to be made by the
representative of Costa Rica on behalf of the States
members of the Rio Group.

In response to your invitation, Sir, I take this
opportunity to offer some thoughts on the role of the
CTC on the basis of six general questions.

First, what is the added value of the CTC? I feel
that the Committee's greatest contribution has been to
help forge a global and uniform cooperation framework
to combat terrorism. Today, we, as members of the
international community, are duty-bound to comply
with certain minimum, globally accepted standards, as
defined in imperative terms in resolution 1373 (2001).
The CTC has done a great deal of work in information-
gathering and follow-up. It has succeeded in
persuading the great majority of States to adjust their
internal structures to the requirements of resolution
1373 (2001) and has arranged assistance for others that
have requested such help in complying with the
Security Council's requirements.

Secondly, what results has the CTC achieved in
the fight against terrorism? The CTC has achieved
many positive results. We attach tremendous
importance to its successes in the area of cooperation.
We sincerely applaud the constructive spirit in which
States have faced up to their responsibilities. However,
these achievements can be regarded neither as final
objectives in and of themselves, nor as points of
arrival. They are simply points of departure. They are a
contribution that has made it possible to breathe
juridical life into a set of national and international
instruments and machinery that have established an
environment more conducive to combating terrorism.
Subsequent action will allow the achievement of more
tangible results aimed at eradicating the direst threat to
international peace and security.

Thirdly, what is the greatest risk of the CTC? The
greatest risk of the Committee, in our opinion, lies in
the possibility that States may believe that complying
with it is tantamount to accomplishing the fight against
terrorism. This is a very dangerous impression. A
country receives a certificate of good conduct from the
experts and believes that this signals the end of its
work. Another risk is that the reporting mechanism
may become exhausted. We are gradually moving in
that direction and there is an urgent need to review the
scope of the challenges and the proportionality of our
response.

Fourthly, what will the major challenges to the
CTC be in the future? In our opinion, the greatest
challenge to the CTC is to develop actions and
decisions specifically targeting States, individuals or
organizations that are directly or indirectly involved in
terrorist activities. In other words, we must move from
the general framework of cooperation to its practical
application through the consideration of specific cases.
In order to do this, we feel that the CTC will require a
re-evaluated and, possibly, a modified mandate.

Resolution 1390 (2002) could serve as the initial
frame of reference for that application. In cases in
which there is consensus among the 15 members of the
Committee, terrorism in specific regions of the world
could be another specific sphere of application.
Although we acknowledge the great progress achieved
by the CTC, we believe that the time has come to
consider positively the elaboration of specific lists of
terrorist individuals and groups in order to implement
resolution 1373 (2001) with full force. The CTC must
draw specific distinctions between given cases if it
does not wish in the middle term to become a body
whose main working mechanism has been exhausted.

Fifthly, should we have the CTC operate like a
sanctions committee? We definitely should not.
Sanctions committees and the CTC are fundamentally
different animals. While the former have specific
targets that are the subject of sanctions aimed at
inducing changes in conduct, generally in a given
territory, the latter is establishing a global framework
of cooperation that is binding on all States. That is why
we must be very cautious with the comparisons that are
frequently made between the CTC and the sanctions
committees, as if they were the same thing. The
functioning of each must be considered on its own
terms.

Sixthly, how can we ensure effective cooperation
with the Committee established under resolution 1267
(1999)? This is an area in which we have not yet
established genuine points of contact and exchange. In
an ideal world of effective cooperation, the CTC's
existence would contribute to the effectiveness of the
work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). On 30 September 2002, during
the informal consultations devoted to a political review
of the work of that Committee, we sought to draw the
attention of Council members to this. But it is clear that
there is still a gap between the cooperation framework
set up by the CTC and its effective application to
specific cases, including the areas covered by the
Committee established under resolution 1267 (1999).

