Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): Allow me first to thank
the United Kingdom for organizing this open debate on
the protection of civilians. Slovenia would like to
congratulate Ms. Amos on her appointment as Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator. I would like to thank
her, Under-Secretary-General Le Roy, High
Commissioner for Human Rights Pillay and the
Director General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Daccord, for their presentations today.

Let me stress that Slovenia fully aligns itself with
the statements delivered by the representatives of the
European Union and, on behalf of the Human Security
Network, of Costa Rica.

Last year was an important year in the Security
Council for the issue of the protection of civilians.
Resolution 1894 (2009) introduced new provisions that
focus on humanitarian access, the implementation of
protection measures in peacekeeping missions, and
monitoring and reporting. In the past year, the Council
also took several important decisions related to the
special protection needs of women and children. We
welcome the fact that the Council has started to address
the concerns of the protection of civilians more
systematically. We encourage it to continue to address
those concerns consistently in its country-specific
resolutions and presidential statements.
However, the situation of civilians in armed
conflicts around the world remains alarming. As
outlined in the report of the Secretary-General

(S/2010/579), civilians continue to account for the
majority of casualties in conflicts and are often the
deliberate targets of different forms of violence by all
parties to conflict. Special attention should be paid to
the most vulnerable, namely, women and children, who
continue to suffer extreme violence and hardship
during conflict, in particular sexual violence, including
rape.

Slovenia believes that the Council must
increasingly focus on preventing conflict, including
through early warning, as failure to do so bears only
grave consequences for the affected civilians. The
Council must respond to situations where civilians are
at risk of systematic and widespread violations of
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
in particular to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

Grave violations of international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee law should be properly
addressed and the perpetrators of, and those
responsible for, such violations should be found
accountable. Impunity presents a major obstacle to the
prevention of the grave violations committed against
civilians in armed conflict. The Council should be
sensitive to the issue of accountability, including in the
country situations on its agenda.

Situation-specific resolutions have increasingly
called for prioritizing the protection of civilians in the
implementation of peacekeeping mandates. They have
requested missions to develop protection strategies.
The role of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support in
developing an operational concept on the protection of
civilians in United Nations peacekeeping operations is
of great importance in that regard. Lessons learned and
the best practices of regional organizations are at our
disposal and must be utilized.

The challenges ahead also concern the
implementation of normative standards. We support the
use of benchmarks, which would facilitate monitoring
the implementation of those standards and
peacekeeping mandates.

Slovenia shares the concerns over the impact of
explosive weapons on civilians, in particular when
used in densely populated areas. We are also deeply
concerned about the tremendous challenges still arising
from the presence of mines and other unexploded
ordnance, which continue to constitute an obstacle to
the return of refugees and other displaced persons,
humanitarian aid operations, reconstruction and
economic development, as well as the restoration of
normal social conditions. They have serious and lasting
social and economic consequences for the populations
of mine-affected countries. Slovenia is active in the
area of mine action, especially through the
International Trust Fund for Demining and Mine
Victims Assistance, established by the Slovenian
Government.

Let me conclude by stressing that the
international community should not and must not be
indifferent to the plight of civilians in armed conflict.

