Mr. Gambi (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): On 10 August, the Security Council met (see
S/PV.6371) to consider the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/409) on the drawdown of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT). That report announced the withdrawal
of the Mission on 31 December 2010. We meet here
today to consider the Secretary-General's penultimate
report (S/2010/529), which should focus our attention
on the issue of MINURCAT'S disengagement.

I should like first to convey to you, Sir, the
congratulations of my delegation on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I should also like to commend Mr. Youssef
Mahmoud, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for MINURCAT, who has given us an
exhaustive briefing on the situation on the ground.
Finally, I wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for the report before us, which will allow
Council members to undertake deliberations aimed at
attaining concrete results.

MINURCAT's mandate will come to an end on
31 December. The Central African defence and security
forces will ensure the changeover from international
forces for the continued operations to prevent a
security vacuum in the north-east of the territory.

The case is similar with regard to concerns raised
by the attacks of the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)
rebels, which initially ravaged the south-east of the
country but are now in the north-east, in Birao. Today,
four prefectures of the Central African Republic are
victims of LRA violence. That terrorist group sows the
seeds of desolation among the population by pillaging,
raping, massacring and burning down villages as they
move through an area, resulting in thousands of
internally displaced persons and refugees.

On 13 and 14 October 2010, on the initiative of
the African Union, a regional ministerial meeting on
10-59402
the activities of the LRA took place in Bangui to seek
ways and means to eradicate that phenomenon in the
countries that are affected - the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Central African Republic - as
well as South Sudan. In that connection, the Central
African Government will deploy a battalion of 500
personnel to Birao. That deployment will be gradual,
continuing through to 31 December 2010.

Unfortunately, the Central African armed forces
desperately lack materiel and equipment to complete
their mission, which is to ensure the security of people
and goods, refugees, displaced persons and
humanitarian workers in the region. Thus the Central
African Republic requests the support of friendly
nations and the international community in order to
bolster the operational capacity of the Central African
armed forces as well as of its security and defence
forces so that they can fully play their role. To that end,
a needs assessment was sent to the Council.
Furthermore, the Central African Republic is currently
taking steps with neighbouring States to reactivate
existing accords for joint patrols along common border
areas.

To us, the withdrawal of MINURCAT seems to be
a new opportunity to support the efforts for security
sector reform in the Central African Republic. If the
stationing of peacekeeping forces has had a limited
effectiveness over time, it is important and logical that
the gains be consolidated within the framework of
arrangements for strengthening the capacities of local
forces. That is why I repeat here the Central African
Republic's position that was set out at the Council's
last meeting on this matter (see S/PV.6371). We believe
that the return of logistical means and installations
used by MINURCAT to the Central African forces and
their operational supervisory staff will allow us to
accelerate the process. The President of the Republic
and head of State, Army General Francois Bozize,
addressed a letter to the Secretary-General along these
lines at the beginning of 2010.

The security situation in the north-east and the
south-east of the Central African Republic calls to the
international community, which has always been at my
country's side. Help us to take up those responsibilities
in order to ensure our security.

That is why that we place a great deal of hope on
the pertinent decisions that will come from the Council
with regard to the report now before it.
10-59402

