Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to express a warm welcome to His
Excellency Oscar Arias Senchez, who has come to the
United Nations to preside over today's Security
Council meeting. The theme of this open debate is
collective security and armaments regulation, a topic
that is of vital importance to the maintenance of
international peace and security. I would like to
express my appreciation for this initiative by Costa
Rica.

Our contemporary world is undergoing great
changes and readjustments. The international security
situation is also undergoing a complex and profound
transformation. The latest developments have pointed
to a need for the international community to consider
and review its international security concepts against
this new background.

The maintenance of peace and stability and the
promotion of development and cooperation are
aspirations shared by the international community. In
our View, we should work in the following areas in
order to promote international security and build a
global consensus, so as to revitalize the international
arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation
process.

First, it is imperative to promote, on the basis of
mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality and assistance,
the common security of all countries and remove the
root causes of the factors that endanger peace and
security. While safeguarding their own security
interests, all countries and groups of countries should
fully respect and accommodate the legitimate concerns
of other countries. Actions that are taken in disregard
of the security interests of other countries and regions,
or actions that undermine such interests, will ultimately
diminish and weaken the credibility of the relevant
principles of international law and may jeopardize the
security of our nations.

Secondly, we must be committed to maintaining
global strategic stability, keep advancing the process of
nuclear disarmament and reduce the role of nuclear
weapons in the national security context. The countries
in possession of the largest nuclear arsenals should
continue to reduce them drastically through verifiable
and irreversible means. Effective measures should be
taken to prevent the weaponization of - and an arms
race in - outer space and ensure the peaceful use of
outer space.

Thirdly, we should adhere to multilateralism,
maintain and strengthen the existing mechanisms for
international arms control, disarmament and
non-proliferation and revitalize traditional multilateral
bodies for arms control and disarmament. With
globalization developing in depth, all countries are
linked together and interdependent in the quest for
security. No country can remain aloof or detached.
Only by adhering to multilateralism and strengthening
the authority, effectiveness and universality of such
arms control and non-proliferation treaties as the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention will it be possible to cope with
the myriad challenges and enhance common security.

Fourthly, to address issues related to
non-proliferation, it is vital to address their root causes
and symptoms in an integrated manner and to pursue
dialogue and negotiations as means to solve the related
problems and ensure justice and non-proliferation. In
international non-proliferation efforts, a balanced
approach should be taken in handling the relationship
between non-proliferation and the peaceful use of
relevant technologies.

China has always worked to maintain and
promote the international arms control, disarmament
and non-proliferation process. China is ready to work
with all other countries to promote multilateral arms
control and the non-proliferation process.

