Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Allow me first to
express our deep condolences to the Government of
Bangladesh for the loss of eight of its peacekeepers in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, for
introducing the Secretary-General's report and
updating the Council on the situation in Timor-Leste.

Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union.

I would also like to welcome among us the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-
Leste. It is always a pleasure to have him here.
Since independence in 2002, there is no doubt
that remarkable progress has been made in Timor-
Leste, primarily due to the determination and the
efforts of its citizens and the Timorese Government.
The role of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor has been a central one in the preservation
of peace and stability in the country. We are grateful
for the hard work of all its personnel, as well as of all
the development and humanitarian agencies and
financial institutions of the United Nations system
involved in the economic reconstruction, social
advancement and general peacebuilding efforts in the
country.

The Secretary-General, in his report, records the
current positive developments in the overall internal
situation in Timor-Leste, as well as the continued
positive trends in the country's relations with
Indonesia. We warmly welcome all steps towards peace
and reconciliation between the two neighbours. In that
context, the establishment of the Truth and Friendship
Commission is of particular importance. Dealing with
the difficult problems of the past, especially human
rights violations, and ending the perpetrators' impunity
are necessary measures in order to create a solid base
of confidence and stable conditions for further
improvement in their relations. The Secretary-
General's decision to establish a commission of experts
to assist the parties in their quest for justice and
reconciliation is highly commendable in that regard.

The bitter past is behind them. The Timorese
people can now focus on building their country and
improving the conditions of everyday life, especially in
the health, nutrition and education sectors. As in all
similar cases, there is a lot still to be done. Establishing
sustainable State institutions, including in the judicial
and financial sectors, border management and control,
law enforcement, respect of human rights, and the
promotion of democratic governance and rule of law.

Timor-Leste and its people have traveled a long
way in the past five years and the presence and
assistance of the international community have been of
crucial importance in the successful outcome of their
efforts. The journey is not over yet. Dealing with the
remaining challenges requires additional help on the
part of the international community. The Timorese ask
for that help and the Secretary-General thinks that it is
necessary.

In this case, Greece believes that the request for
help cannot and should not go unanswered. The
international community has invested a lot of money
and effort in making Timor-Leste a success story. We
should not allow it to falter at the last stages.

There are various ideas about how to continue
providing assistance. We need to explore all available
options and come up with the one most suitable, under
the circumstances, so that the people of Timor-Leste
can enjoy every chance to consolidate their
achievements and successfully pursue their quest for
peace, stability and development towards they future
they dream of and deserve. The Secretary-General has
submitted some proposals. Greece would have no
difficulties supporting them.

