Mr. Choi: For the first time in its history, C6te
d'Ivoire had a second round of presidential elections
on 28 November. Despite the tense environment that
preceded it and some incidents, which were sometimes
violent, in the West and the North of the country, the
second round was generally conducted in a democratic
manner. The participation rate was actually quite high,
attaining over 81 per cent. It was also quite
encouraging to note that, all along the five observation
routes established by the United Nations Operation in
C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI), representatives of both
candidates were present in all the polling stations.
Based on these findings and analysis, on
29 November I implicitly certified the conduct of the
election through a press conference in Abidjan.
Following that phase, the moment has come for us to
safeguard the result.

At this critical juncture, the Independent Electoral
Commission (IEC) began to show signs of internal
divisions. The IEC internal divisions were further
exacerbated when the Ivorian security authorities
reinforced their protection at the IEC headquarters
beginning on the morning of 30 November. In the end,
this led the IEC President, Mr. Youssouf Bakayoko, to
proclaim the provisional result of the second round in
the afternoon of 2 December at the Golf Hotel.
According to the IEC, the participation rate in the
second round was over 81 per cent, with candidate
Alassane Ouattara garnering 54.1 per cent of the votes
and candidate Laurent Gbagbo garnering 45.9 per cent.

The Constitutional Council immediately reacted
to the announcement made by the IEC. In the evening
of 2 December, the President of the Constitutional
Council, Mr. Paul Yao N'Dre, declared that the IEC's
proclamation was null and void, as the IEC had passed
the legal limit of three days for pronouncing itself on
the provisional results.

Then, on 3 December, the President of the
Constitutional Council proclaimed the final results,
with the cancellation of voting in nine northern
departments. According to this proclamation, candidate
Laurent Gbagbo garnered 51.45 per cent of the vote
and candidate Alassane Ouattara 48.55 per cent, with
an overall participation rate of 71 per cent.

Meanwhile, I, as a certifier of the Ivorian
elections, had completed the analysis and evaluation of
20,000 tally sheets provided to me by the Ivorian
authorities for the purposes of certification. All the
work was completed by 2 December. I must stress that
the conduct of my certification was done without
regard to the methods used and results proclaimed by
either the IEC or the Constitutional Council. The result
I obtained through my certification methods was very
clear. There was only one winner, by a clear margin.

Even if all the complaints submitted by President
Gbagbo's camp to the Constitutional Council were
taken into account in terms of the numbers of tally
sheets, and consequently of votes, the outcome of the
second round would not change, with Mr. Alassane
Ouattara being the winner of the presidential election.
10-67740
As such, I certified the results of the second round of
the presidential election on 3 December.

The United Nations did not seek this
responsibility. It was requested to play the certification
role by Ivorian leaders themselves by virtue of the
2005 Pretoria Agreement. It is a solemn responsibility
that the United Nations has towards all the Ivorian
people, who deserve peace, stability and prosperity.

Considering the distance that Cote d'Ivoire has
travelled, ignoring the will of the people at this stage
would be a let-down of the people of Cote d'Ivoire and
a waste of significant resources invested over the past
eight years by the international community.
10-67740
