Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like at the outset to thank the Danish presidency
of the Security Council for convening this open debate.
We are honoured by the presence here today of
Mr. Moeller, the Foreign Minister of Denmark.

We also welcome the statement and the presence

of Judge Rosalyn Higgins, President of the

International Court of Justice. We learned a great deal

from her briefing. Argentina believes that the

International Court of Justice is our Organization's
basic pillar of international law.

Our country attaches the greatest importance to
the affirmation of the rule of law as a requisite for
achieving peace and security at the national level, and
especially within the framework of the action of the
Security Council.

Argentina's history in recent times allows us to
appreciate even more deeply the importance of
democracy and the rule of law. The socio-economic
and political crises that we have experienced, and
which were resolved in accordance with the
Constitution and the law, strengthened the attachment
of Argentine society to those basic values of
coexistence, which must be defended and preserved.
The rule of law is a system in which the law treats all
individuals equally.

The Security Council's mandate under the United
Nations Charter to secure international peace and
security gives its action a key leading role in the
formulation and application of the rules of
international law. We believe that the global interest is
part and parcel of each of the national interests that we
defend, since the Security Council is the international
institution entrusted with the greatest responsibility.
We also believe that human rights law falls within that
category of inalienable global values.

Legitimacy, democracy and justice are values in
the building and maintenance of peace that must guide
the action of the Council in conflict management and
post-conflict situations. We must continue effectively
to apply the criteria and recommendations proposed by
the Secretary-General in 2004. To that end, we believe
that it is most necessary that we receive the report that
was requested at that time, and that a rule of law
assistance unit be established within the Secretariat, as
requested in the outcome document of last year's
summit of heads of State and Government. At the
institutional level, we must promptly and effectively
create that unit vis-a-vis the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The link between peace and justice is essential
and was the impulse behind the Council's creation of
the international tribunals. We must continue to work

together and to support politically and financially the
international tribunals for the former Yugoslavia,
Rwanda and Sierra Leone.

Here, I wish again to emphasize Argentina's
support for the work of the International Criminal
Court. In recent months, the objectives for which the
Court was created are beginning to be attained. We
note, inter alia, the investigations under way, the
transfer to The Hague of Thomas Lubanga and Charles
Taylor, the arrest warrants issued for the leaders of the
militia known as the Lord's Resistance Army in
Uganda and the endeavours to meet the objective of
referral of the Darfur case.

In that context, we urge the Sudanese authorities
to cooperate fully with the Office of the Prosecutor of
the Court so that the investigation may be carried out,
while providing security for the witnesses. We
encourage the Security Council to continue to
cooperate with the Court to put an end to impunity,
thereby continuing towards a universal system of
justice which will prevent future crimes and will
ensure that perpetrators do not go unpunished. For that
reason, we urge all States that have not yet signed or
ratified the Rome Statute to do so as early as possible.
The international community wants an International
Criminal Court with truly universal jurisdiction and
competence.

Combating impunity and promoting the rule of
law should be a firm policy of the Security Council.
Effective implementation of human rights reduces the
conditions that lead to threats to, and violations of,
international peace and security, which, as we all know,
are for the most part intra-State conflicts.

As a result of our painful historical experience,
Argentineans know that justice may be secured only
through knowledge of the truth, and that all flagrant
human rights violations should be brought before the
courts. Impunity cannot be tolerated. Thus, Argentina
along with other Governments, is actively participating
in the preparation of an international convention for the
protection of all persons from enforced disappearance.
Here, we urge all States Members of the Organization
to adopt the draft convention during the first session of
the Human Rights Council, which began this week in
Geneva.

Lastly, I would like to refer to the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
committee, which is chaired by Argentina. As regards
the Council's application of sanctions, we believe that
the 1267 Committee may suggest a productive way of
fulfilling the mandate issued by heads of State at the
2005 summit, in order to ensure that the procedures
used for listing and delisting individuals and entities on
the sanctions list, as well as for granting humanitarian
exceptions, are clear and fair.

As Chair of the Committee, my delegation has
sought to maintain impartiality in the negotiations on
reviewing the Committee guidelines, a process that has
just begun. But we believe we must do our utmost to
include and respect the basic elements and standards of
due process. We need to arrive at a consensus and
strike the proper balance between security and
intelligence imperatives and respect for human rights.

While we know the Council acts on behalf of all
United Nations Members pursuant to Article 24 of the
Charter, we must also be aware of the perceptions that
exist outside of the Council - among Members, in
national courts and in parliaments - that the Council
has decided at times to act as a global judge and
legislature.

However, the Charter also states that the Council
has duties and we must also take jus cogens into
consideration. Therefore, we appeal to Council
members to make every effort to achieve consensus in
the review of the guidelines of the 1267 Committee
and thus improve its legality and legitimacy. Political
responsibility, common sense and the strengthening of
international law should impel us to achieve those
objectives. We are certain that we shall achieve them if
we make the effort.

