Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Allow me to join
others in thanking Special Representative Shearer, not
only for his briefing, but for his work and that of his
entire team on the ground in South Sudan. We really
enjoyed coming to see Mr. Shearer. We were impressed
by what he and his team were doing, and we really want
to thank him.

I would also like to thank Ambassador Joanna
Wronecka very much for her tireless efforts as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan.
This is our first Council meeting since the 100-day
extension, but it is not the first time that the parties have
failed to deliver progress. We are over one-third of the
way through the 100-day extension and I believe that the
Council must repeat and reinforce the clear and united
message that we delivered collectively in Juba, that all
parties must seize this opportunity and agree the steps
that are necessary to form an inclusive Government.
Those steps include, of course, efforts to make
progress on cantonment. We also heard from Special
Representative Shearer today about the importance of
food and resources being delivered to those cantonment
sites, as well as training being conducted and genuine
reintegration taking place in order to ensure security
for all in South Sudan.

I also very much want to pay tribute to the efforts
of the Deputy President of South Africa, Mr. David
Mabuza, on the thorny question of States in South
Sudan. That is a crucial issue, one that we perhaps have
to recognize may not be fully resolvable before the 100
days are up, but we do need the parties to commit to
continuing to engage in that process, and I very much
welcome the efforts of the Deputy President of South
Africa in that regard.

We of course welcome the recent meetings and
positive statements that have taken place between
President Kiir Mayardit and Mr. Machar, but I have to
say that so far we have not seen those shift the dial.
I want to stress today the importance of actions and
results, as well as statements and promises. I echo the
need expressed by others to resolve the status oer. Riek
Machar. I just do not understand how he does not hold
a South Sudanese passport while he is busy negotiating
to be part of the South Sudanese Government. I hope
that that can be sorted out quickly as a gesture of good
faith and that his status can be resolved by the region.

We strongly welcome the region's engagement and
leadership to achieve those ends. History has shown
that without external pressure, the parties fail to act. We
therefore urge our partners in the region, particularly
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), to redouble their efforts to ensure progress.
We believe that the release of the IGAD 50-day report
will mark an important moment. The Security Council
must work hand in hand with IGAD - that is key. And
I think that we should consider in our consultations
how we could deepen that cooperation.

We also need to look beyond the 100-day extension
and issues around South Sudan's future. It is deeply
concerning that subnational communal violence remains
at worrying levels across the country. The persistence
of conflict-related sexual violence, as evidenced in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/936), is
extremely worrying. All parties to the conflict must
take immediate action to stop conflict-related sexual
violence. We welcome the focus of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan on this important issue and its
support to efforts to end impunity for such crimes. 1
want to strongly support the intervention made by the
representative from Belgium on that point and echo
his concerns about the reappointment of the Gany
County Commissioner.

Humanitarian partners continue to face high
levels of bureaucratic impediments to humanitarian
access and serious insecurity. The urgency, as others
have said, has been only further exacerbated by the
recent flooding - the worst in 30 years - which has
affected almost 1 million people. The United Kingdom
contributed $210 million in 2018 in that regard and we
continue to do all that we can to improve the situation.

In closing, let me stress that the ongoing ceasefire
must continue to hold, and the two leaders must
unequivocally commit to that ceasefire and to peace.
The Council must stand ready to support the parties,
in coordination with IGAD and the African Union, to
support the parties forward on the pathway to peace
and to make the necessary compromises. That cannot
happen unless the best interests of the people of South
Sudan are prioritized over the self-interest of the elite.
There must be consequences for those who do not live
up to their responsibilities to bring about a lasting
peace in South Sudan.

