Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): Ithank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. The
question of Palestine is fundamental to the situation
in the Middle East and to the issue of achieving peace
there. Only by fully resolving it can the situation in
the Middle East be fundamentally alleviated. At he
construction of settlements continues with rising
violence, and tensions in the Gaza Strip are obvious.
China is closely following such developments and is
concerned about the high number of casualties resulting
from the conflict.

China calls on the Security Council and the
international community to remain united and work
with a greater sense of urgency to promote a political
settlement to the question of Palestine, which is in
the fundamental interests of Palestinians and Israelis
alike and is the common aspiration of the people of the
Middle East and the world at large. .

The two-State solution is the correct way to resolve
the Palestinian issue. The international community
should adhere to the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the
Arab Peace Initiative; step up its efforts to promote
and resume negotiations, effectively implement
resolution 2334 (2016), stop all settlement activities in
the occupied territories, and take measures to prevent
violence against civilians.All parties should remain
calm, exercise restraint, meet each other halfway and
avoid adopting measures that could exacerbate the
situation. They should also create conditions conducive
to the resumption of negotiations. Parties with strong
influence in the Middle East should also assume a
constructive role to that end.

China has always firmly supported and promoted
the Middle East peace process. We support the
establishment of a fully sovereign and independent
State of Palestine, based on the 1967 borders and
with East Jerusalem as its capital. Chinese President
Xi Jinping's four-point proposal in favour of the
settlement of the Palestinian question includes the
promotion of a political process based on a two-
State solution; adherence to a shared, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security concept; improved
coordination of international efforts to rally support for
peace; and the implementation of a holistic approach
promoting peace through development. On that basis,
China will endeavour to play a constructive role in the
implementation of that proposal and in the realization
of the peace process in the Middle East.

The issue of Jerusalem is complex, sensitive and at
the very heart of a solution to the question of Palestine.
All parties should respect the plurality of its history,
adhere to impartiality and fairness, and implement
international consensus to achieve peaceful coexistence.
In accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions,
all parties should reach a solution acceptable to all and
accommodate the interests of all parties through the
final-status negotiations.

At present, the occupied Palestinian territories
are facing even greater security and humanitarian
challenges, especially in Gaza, where the humanitarian
crisis has deteriorated. The international community
must not forget the millions of Palestinian refugees
to whom humanitarian assistance must continue to be
provided. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East has played an
irreplaceable role in alleviating the humanitarian crisis
in the occupied territories. We call on all parties to
continue to step up their support to the Agency and to
countries that host Palestinian refugees so as to ease the
humanitarian situation of the refugees.

