Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): On this day, 27 April,
17 years ago, South Africans loudly proclaimed from
their rooftops, in the words of Doctor Martin Luther
King Jr.: "Free at last! Free at last!" This was in
celebration of the fulfilment of our right to
self-determination and freedom. Nelson Mandela stated
that our freedom would be incomplete without the
freedom and self-determination of others. The people
of Western Sahara continue to be denied this
inalienable right.

Twenty years ago, this Council mandated the
creation of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO). While
MINURSO has successfully maintained the ceasefire,
its core mandate of overseeing the referendum that
2
would lead to the realization of the right to self-
determination of the people of Western Sahara has not
been realized.

We welcome the fact that the parties have made
some progress during their negotiations, especially on
confidence-building measures. However, we regret that
the parties have not moved on the core issues that
would allow the people of Western Sahara to freely
determine their future and destiny, whether it is full
independence or autonomy from Morocco.

It is noteworthy that the Council, through the
draft resolution before us (S/20l 1/268), encourages the
parties to demonstrate further political will towards a
solution, including by expanding on their discussions
of each other's proposals. We would hope that a
meaningful engagement in this manner would
contribute to finding a mutually acceptable solution
that would provide for the self-determination of the
people of Western Sahara.

My delegation further welcomes the parties'
stated commitment to hold the seventh round of
informal talks in May to examine the 27 April 2007
proposals. We urge them to focus on the core issues in
order to bring finality to this intractable dispute.

The impending adoption of this draft resolution
comes at a critical time in history, when the people of
the Middle East and North Africa are demanding the
full promotion, protection and enjoyment of their
political, socio-economic and human rights. Our
discussion on the situation in the Western Sahara also
comes at a time when the Security Council acted
swiftly in fulfilling its mandate to maintain
international peace and security in Libya and Cote
d'Ivoire, as well as ensuring that the voices of the
people in those countries were heard. As a responsible
member of the Council, we supported those actions.
Uprisings in the Middle East and North Africa are an
indication that the status quo, when the human rights of
people are denied, can no longer be sustained.

In keeping with the Council's action in the past
few months, we have to ensure that the rights of the
people of Western Sahara are not ignored and are
protected. Human rights are universal, indivisible and
interdependent. It is a travesty that MINURSO's is one
of the few United Nations mandates, and the only one
in Africa, that does not include a human rights
mandate. This double standard creates the impression
that the Security Council does not care about the
11-31280
human rights of the people of Western Sahara.
Certainly, the continued inertia of the Council on this
matter has the potential to erode the credibility of this
important body. South Africa maintains that
MINURSO should have a human rights monitoring
mandate, especially in the light of recent reports of
human rights incidents in Western Sahara, including
events in Laayoune late last year.

The draft resolution that we have before us
stresses the importance of improving the human rights
situation in Western Sahara in the Tindouf camps and
encourages the parties to work with the international
community to develop and implement independent and
credible measures to ensure full respect for human
rights, bearing in mind their relevant obligations under
international law. We would have hoped that the
Council would have created a mechanism to protect the
human rights of the Saharawi people, as it does in other
situations. We believe that an international, credible,
legal and permanent mechanism is necessary.

We note the establishment of the National
Council on Human Rights in Morocco and the
proposed component regarding the territory of Western
Sahara, as well as the commitment of Morocco to
ensure unqualified and unimpeded access to all special
procedures of the United Nations Human Rights
Council. However, we believe that this should be done
without prejudice to the legal status of Western Sahara
as a Non-Self-Governing Territory under Chapter XI of
the Charter of the United Nations.

In conclusion, we draw attention to the fact that
Western Sahara remains the last colony on the African
continent and that it is listed as a Non-Self-Governing
Territory by the United Nations. South Africa will
continue to support efforts to achieve a just, lasting and
mutually acceptable political solution, which will
provide for the inalienable right to self-determination
of the people of Western Sahara. It is for this reason
that my delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us, extending the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara.

