Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I would like to join
previous speakers, Sir, in extending to you my
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May. Allow
me also to extend to your predecessor our appreciation
for the excellent manner in which he guided the work
of the Council last month.

Namibia attaches great importance to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In that connection,
we commend you, Sir, for the initiative to have this
matter debated in the Security Council and for the non-
paper which is the basis of our discussion today.

On 29 March, the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations held a debate on this matter,
which focused on issues presented in the report of the
Secretary-General, contained in document A/58/694,
on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Special Committee. Important and fundamental issues
were discussed, with a view to finding solutions to the
challenges facing the Security Council, Member States
and the Secretariat.

We agree that peacekeeping operations have
become not only a huge responsibility of the United
Nations, but also a multidimensional exercise that
requires shared understanding and continuous
cooperation among the Security Council, Member
States and the Secretariat - without which success
may be in jeopardy. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the positive efforts aimed at enhancing the
cooperation and the consultations among the Security
Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries, as outlined in the Security Council
resolution 1353 (2001).

I wish to stress that the maintenance of
international peace and security is the primary
responsibility of the Security Council. However, it is
our firm belief that enhancing regional peacekeeping
capacities, especially in the regions mostly affected by
armed conflict, particularly in Africa, will immensely
complement the efforts of the United Nations in
achieving international peace and security. In that
connection, we welcome the ongoing efforts of the
international community aimed at enhancing Africa's
regional and subregional capacity for conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peace-building.

As we stated at the meeting of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations on 29 March,
the security and safety of United Nations peacekeeping
and associated personnel should be enhanced. That is a
priority. Therefore, we are pleased that the United
Nations has embarked on a review of its system and
procedures for safety and security both at Headquarters
and in the field.

The ability of the United Nations to deploy
peacekeepers rapidly so as to meet the agreed
requirement of deploying within 30 to 90 days after the
adoption of a Security Council resolution must be
further improved. The Security Council must give
clear, specific and robust mandates, which should
include the protection of civilians and address the root
causes of conflict. And this is of paramount
importance: adequate resources must be made
available, and peacekeepers must be well trained and
well equipped in order to be effective.

We are concerned by the delays in the Security
Council in authorizing the deployment of a
peacekeeping mission in Burundi, despite repeated
calls by the African Union. The selective approach that
we have often seen in implementing some
peacekeeping operations - especially in Africa -
undermines the credibility of the Security Council. The
Council should move swiftly in responding equally to
all situations that threaten international peace and
security.

In conclusion, my delegation is fully convinced
that, with the necessary political will and commitment
of all Member States, the Security Council and the
Secretariat, we can achieve remarkable success.
Namibia stands ready to continue to make its
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

