Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): With the
expected adoption of this draft resolution, the Security
Council will take an important step towards obtaining a
measure of justice for the victims of the Pan Am flight
103 bombing and their families.

The arrangements endorsed in this draft resolution
will assure a fair trial for the two Libyan suspects. The
proceedings will be consistent with the requirements of
United Nations resolutions as well as United States,
British and Dutch law. The terms of the draft resolution
and modalities of the trial have been carefully crafted by
legal experts and are based on the decisions of the
international community, as reflected in Security Council
resolutions 731 (1992), 748 (1992) and 883 (1993).

We thank the Government of the Netherlands for
helping to bring about the arrangements endorsed in this
draft resolution.

We deeply regret the hostile and negative content
and tone of the Libyan representative's statement tonight.
What we need now from the Libyans is not aggressive,
equivocal or conditional statements, but simple,

 
straightforward acceptance. Chapter VII resolutions are
mandatory on all Member States, including Libya. We look
now to the Libyan Government for prompt action. We
expect its deeds to be the proof of its stated intentions.

The Libyan representative raised a question as to
whether the United States would feel bound by all the
elements of this draft resolution. It goes without saying, but
let me say it anyway: I can assure him that we do.

Let us not mince words. For Libya, dealing positively
with this draft resolution can mean one thing and one thing
alone: ensuring that the two suspects appear to stand trial
in the Netherlands without delay.

The international community has heard the Libyan
Government repeat, on numerous occasions, its explicit
commitment to cooperating in bringing the defendants to
trial under Scottish law, with Scottish judges, in a neutral
third country. Senior Libyan officials have made that
commitment on the record many times, including the
Libyan Foreign Minister's personal pledge to this Council
just last March. Now Libya will be required to live up to
that pledge.

The United States, the Security Council and the world
community are watching. Most importantly, the family
members of the 270 victims of the Pan Am flight 103
bombing are watching. Failure by Libya to act promptly to
ensure the appearance of the defendants would be a
monumental breach of faith which would compel the
Security Council to act appropriately in response. We hope
that will not be necessary.

In recent years, a number of nations and regional
Organizations - including the Arab League, the
Organization of African Unity, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement, which
is about to convene an important summit conference in
South Africa - have endorsed exactly the sort of
arrangements contained in this draft resolution. They have
urged the United States and the United Kingdom to adopt
this approach. We have listened to their views and
responded.

We now call upon those nations and organizations, in
turn, to urge Libya in the strongest terms to turn over the
two defendants for trial without delay. Just as we will be
watching Libya's response to this draft resolution, we will
be carefully gauging the response of those nations and those
organizations. we expect unhesitating and unequivocal
support for this draft resolution. The victims of the Pan Am

 
flight 103 bombing and their surviving family members
deserve nothing less.

I would also reaffirm United States support for
France in its ongoing investigation of the UTA bombing.
As we look forward to convening the trial of the Pan Am
flight 103 defendants, we will continue to support
France's demand for Libya's full cooperation on the
question of UTA flight 772.

It has been nearly 10 years since the terrorist
bombing of Pan Am flight 103. Since that terrible day in
December 1988, the United States, the United Kingdom,
the surviving family members and the world community
have suffered the frustration of a long, complex
investigation and an even longer period of delay and
equivocation by the Government of Libya.

This draft resolution spells out exactly what Libya
must do and notes the Security Council's intention to
consider further measures if the two suspects do not
appear for trial promptly. We expect Libya to take the
necessary steps so that the trial can proceed without
further delay. The international community and the
families of the victims have waited long enough.

