Mr. Al-Dosari (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, may I express my pleasure at seeing you, Sir,
preside over the work of the Security Council despite your
very busy schedule. I should like to thank your country's
delegation for its excellent choice in submitting the issue
before us for open debate.

The problems, troubles and questions that plague the
African continent deserve in-depth consideration. We hope
that this meeting will afford us a good opportunity to
exchange views on African issues and to activate the role
of the United Nations in Africa.

Africans often feel themselves ignored by the United
Nations; we sympathize strongly with the feelings of our
brothers on that continent. We also hope that today's
meeting will have a positive impact on the real situation in
Africa. I should also like to thank Secretary-General Kofi
Annan for his important introductory statement.

As everyone knows, African issues constitute more
than 50 per cent of the total number of items on the
Security Council's agenda. In our view, this requires the
allocation of greater attention to African countries and
prompts us to consider ways to improve the working
methods of the Security Council in particular, and the
United Nations in general, in Africa. In this context, we
wish to share the following thoughts and observations with
other Council members and with the wider United Nations
membership.

First, coordination and cooperation between the
Council and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) must
be strengthened and increased. This will require greater
transparency in the Council's work. In considering
African issues, it might be appropriate for the Council to
invite the parties to a conflict to participate in its
deliberations and for it to listen to their points of view
and attempt to reconcile them. Furthermore, the
participation of the Secretary-General of the OAU in
some Council deliberations on Africa would also be very
significant. We believe that, in the absence of such
transparency in its work, it will be difficult for the
Council to play an effective role in the settlement of
conflicts in Africa.

Secondly, recognizing that the root causes of many
African problems and issues are economic, it may be
necessary to intensify consultation and cooperation
between the Security Council, on the one hand, and the
Economic and Social Council and the United Nations
specialized agencies, on the other, in seeking radical
solutions to these problems. In this context, we must
recall the vast resources and wealth that are available in
Africa, but which, for many reasons, are poorly and
improperly exploited. The United Nations could assist in
overcoming these obstacles.

Thirdly, if the Security Council were to speed up its
decisions on establishing United Nations peacekeeping
missions when required, and also speed up their
deployment, we believe that the Council could send
military observers to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In this context, we could also consider the
possibility of establishing a permanent trust fund with a
limited budget that would cover the initial deployment of
African missions, particularly in emergency situations,
until the competent United Nations bodies had the
opportunity to consider a budget for such missions. This
would accelerate the deployment of forces and the
maintenance of peace and security in the relevant country.
However, the trust fund should not be an alternative to
the peacekeeping budget.

Fourthly, there is a need for a continued United
Nations presence in the relevant African countries in the
post-conflict era in the form of high United Nations
officials, or in any other form the Council deems
appropriate, in order to maintain the peace achieved
through such peacekeeping missions.

In conclusion, we support the practical steps
proposed by the Secretary-General and believe that if
these steps were implemented effectively, they would
contribute greatly to resolving the problems of the African

 

continent and would prevent the eruption of new armed
conflicts there. We hope the Security Council will take
specific, practical measures to complement the Secretary-
General's proposals and will formulate them in a legal
framework so that there will be a binding commitment to
implement them.
