Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) and to convey the Movement's
appreciation to New Zealand and its Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Murray McCully, for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine, at this critical
juncture for Palestine, the Palestinian people and the
Middle East. 1 would also like to thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, the United Nations Special Coordinator and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his informative briefing.

The Non-Aligned Movement would like to take this
opportunity to reaffirm its longstanding solidarity with
the Palestinian people and to reiterate its support for
their realization of their legitimate national aspirations
and inalienable rights, including self-determination
and freedom in an independent State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, along with a just solution
to the plight of Palestinian refugees, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

We should keep in mind that the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly contain the
fundamental principles for a just, lasting and peaceful
solution. The question of Palestine has been on the
United Nations agenda for more than 67 years, almost
as long as the Organization has existed, so it is not
for lack of attention that the conflict and its injustices
continue. That is due rather to a lack of political will
and the Security Council's repeated failure to uphold
its responsibilities, leaving the Palestinian people with
little hope of realizing their right to self-determination
and freedom and the justice and peace they have been
denied for so long.
Despite decades of the Palestinian people's
good-faith participation in peace efforts and a
clear commitment by them and their leadership to
international law, reaffirmed by Palestine's recent
accession to several international conventions and
treaties, Palestine's plight and predicament have
worsened on all fronts. That is directly owing to Israel's
illegal policies and practices, which have entrenched
the occupation, caused widespread suffering and
flagrantly undermined all peace efforts, to a point
where the viability of a two-State solution has been cast
into grave doubt.

As we Witness escalating breaches by Israel, the
occupying Power, of international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law, we stress that it
is high time for the international community to take a
decisive and historic step towards ending the occupation
of Palestinian lands and paving the way for a just and
peaceful settlement of the conflict. In doing so, the
Council would be fulfilling its duty under the Charter of
the United Nations to maintain international peace and
security and make a genuine contribution to a solution
ofthe Palestinian-Israeli conflict, which is at the core of
the Arab-Israeli conflict and remains a source of grave
concern for the region and the international community
and for the prospects for global peace and stability.

This time last year, Israel was carrying out an
act of military aggression against the besieged Gaza
Strip that lasted for 51 days, during which it inflicted
widespread death, injury and trauma on Palestine's
civilian population and massive destruction of their
homes and infrastructure. According to the report of
the Human Rights Council's Independent Commission
of Inquiry, the scale of the devastation in Gaza was
unprecedented, and serious violations of international
humanitarian law, in some cases amounting to war
crimes, were committed by the Israeli occupying
forces. According to the Secretary-General's summary
of the Board of Inquiry report (S/2015/286) into certain
incidents affecting schools run by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA), as a result of Israeli actions
during the 2014 conflict, at least 44 Palestinians were
killed and 227 injured at seven UNRWA schools that
were used as emergency shelters.

The Secretary-General's annual report on children
and armed conflict (S/2015/409) states that at least 540
Palestinian children were killed during the conflict,
and 2,955 were injured. At least 262 schools, 274
kindergartens and 17 hospitals in Gaza were damaged,
while only three schools were damaged in Israel.
That report concludes that the unprecedented and
unacceptable scale of the impact on children in 2014
raises grave concerns about Israel's compliance with
international humanitarian law, notably the principles
of distinction, proportionality and precaution in
attack, and respect for international human rights law,
particularly in relation to the excessive use of force.

Israel has not been held accountable for those crimes,
despite the fact that the occupying forces launched tens
of thousands of missiles, bombs, artillery shells and
live ammunition against the defenceless Palestinian
civilian population in a brutal onslaught that killed
more than 2,200 Palestinians, the majority of them
civilians, including hundreds of children and women;
injured more than 11,000 people; displaced hundreds of
thousands; and terrorized the entire population.

It is unacceptable that this humanitarian disaster,
deliberately inflicted on the Palestinian people by the
occupying Power, remains without redress and that,
one year later, not a single home of the more than
12,000 homes completely destroyed has been rebuilt,
as the illegal Israeli blockade continues to obstruct
reconstruction; more than 100,000 people remain
homeless; and socioeconomic conditions continue
to deteriorate, as Gaza continues to be suffocated by
the blockade and isolated from the rest of Palestine
and the entire world. It is unacceptable that Israeli
impunity persists without consequence. There can be
no justification for such inhumanity and criminality.
We appeal to the Security Council once again to uphold
its Charter and moral duties and act to redress this
injustice.

The Security Council must also act to address
Israel's ongoing illegal colonization of the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in line
with international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention and the Council's own resolutions. How
can the Council remain silent as Israel continues,
deliberately and systematically, its settlement and
wall construction and the confiscation and de facto
annexation of Palestinian land, destroying the possibility
of realizing the two-State solution for peace? Those and
other systematic violations 4 including the demolition
of homes, the forced displacement of Palestinian
civilians, the arrest and detention of Palestinians,
including children, and incessant violence, terror and
provocations by Israeli settlers and extremists, including
at sensitive religious sites, particularly the Al-Aqsa
Mosque in occupied East Jerusalem 4 have persisted
unabated, worsening the already fragile situation on the
ground, and must be addressed immediately to avert
further destabilization and to salvage the two-State
solution based on the pre-1967 borders.

The Security Council cannot remain on the
sidelines in the quest to find a just and peaceful
solution to the question of Palestine. NAM. once again
urges the Security Council to act forthwith to end the
plight of the Palestinian people with resolute action
towards ending the Israeli occupation, supporting the
realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people and establishing peace and security so as to put
an end to this prolonged conflict that has so severely
destabilized the region and undermined international
law and our international system as a whole.

NAM. believes that the message is clear worldwide.
It is high time to end this abhorrent Israeli occupation
and the impunity that has brought so much suffering,
has caused so many crises, sown so much instability
and anger throughout the Middle East, and continues
to undermine regional and global peace and security.
The position of NAM. vis-a-vis the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict and the question of Palestine as a whole is clear
and strong, as reflected in its summits and ministerial
declarations over the decades. NAM. will therefore
not relent in calling on the Security Council to act in
accordance with its Charter duties, its resolutions and the
applicable provisions of international law that provide
the solution to the conflict. We stress the important
role to be played by the NAM. caucus members of the
Council in this regard and call for active engagement
to uphold our collective responsibilities for finding a
solution.

Lebanon continues to suffer from consecutive
Israeli violation of its borders and incursion into its
territory, followed by subsequent years of occupation
and aggression. Unfortunately, Israel still continues to
violate Lebanese airspace, intensifying its incursions
over Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant violation
of Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006). The
provisions of that resolution should be implemented
in a manner that guarantees the consolidation of the
foundations of stability and security in Lebanon and
prevents Israel from undertaking its daily violations of
Lebanese sovereignty.

With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement condemns all the measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan,
which intensified after the outbreak of the Syrian crisis.
The Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of4 June
1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).

