Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Venezuala) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela rejects the reprehensible act that
led to the downing of civilian Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17 in the region of Donetsk, Ukraine, where 298
crew members and passengers perished. We reiterate
our solidarity with the families and countries of the
victims affected by that regrettable incident, which
took place a year ago. We are convinced that, in the
framework of combating impunity, justice must prevail
in order that those responsible for this tragedy be
punished in accordance with the law.

Nevertheless, Venezuela abstained in the voting
on draft resolution S/2015/562 because it introduced
fractious political elements that could impact the
necessary cooperation and trust between the parties in
the ongoing investigation, which needs to determine
what happened in the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-l7. That needs to be done in order to
determine the necessary criminal responsibility to
bring to justice those responsible for that reprehensible
act. We believe that the reference in the draft resolution
to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
goes beyond the political and legal framework set out
in resolution 2166 (2014) - which established the
objective of determining the path to take in adopting
the relevant measures on this issue within the Security
Council.

The description of this incident as a threat to
international peace and security is untimely and
politicizes the handling of this case, which is in the
technical phase of investigation - making it a criminal
matter. On that basis, we believe that the Security
Council does not have the competence to establish an
ad hoc international criminal tribunal.

In no circumstances would we like to see to see
this deplorable incident and the suffering of the victims
be politically used as part of the conflict affecting this
region of Ukraine. Our country condemns this attack
against civil aviation. Such acts are inadmissible and
must not go unpunished. On this ocassion, we would
like to recall the highjacking of the Cubana de Aviacion
flight in 1966, which resulted in deaths of 73 innocent
civilians. The perpetrators of that heinous act still
enjoy impunity.

We must bear in mind that, through resolution
2166 (2014), it was agreed to conduct a technical
investigation of the incident. The investigation was to
be independent, transparent and impartial - following
the procedures and standards of the International Civil
Aviation Organization. The resolution also called for
the full cooperation of all the parties concerned. The
investigation into the causes and the search for the
perpetrators continues. We believe that such efforts to
obtain facts and the truth must continue. We therefore
believe we should encourage efforts to that end in
order to arrive at the facts. Let us not prejudge or
reach conclusions that are unfounded. We must avoid
the politicization of this affair within the Security
Council and continue with the investigations, which we
hope will produce results enabling us to determine the
causes of this deplorable incident and the responsibility
for it - with the cooperation of this organ. Venezuela
is fully prepared to contribute in any way to clarifying
this painful event.

