Ms. Loj: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the developments
in South Sudan since the release of the Secretary-
General's report (S/2016/950). As members have the
report before them, I will focus my comments on more
recent updates, progress and challenges.

While the Transitional Government of National
Unity that was reconstituted after the July crisis has
taken steps to improve security in Juba, the overall
security situation in South Sudan - in particular, in
the greater Equatorias, in parts of Unity, and Western
Bahr el-Ghazal - remains volatile. In the Equatorias,
recurring attacks on passenger and commercial
vehicles traveling along the main roads linking Juba
to the country's southern borders have resulted in
civilian casualties and disrupted the flow of much-
needed commodities and supplies, including food, to
Juba and other parts of the country. These attacks have
also exacerbated ethnic tensions in the Equatorias,
which have spread to other parts of the country i a
subject upon which I am sure my colleague Mr. Dieng
will elaborate on this following his recent visit. These
targeted attacks, as well as sporadic clashes between
the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) and other
armed groups in the Equatorias, have also resulted in
additional displacement and inflicted further suffering
upon the civilian population, with many fleeing to
Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The greater Bahr el-Ghazal region has also witnessed
an upsurge in violence involving the SPLA and armed
groups, with serious incidents in and around Wau and
Rajaf, seriously impacting civilians. Intercommunal
confrontations among once-peaceful neighbouring
ethnic groups have led to the displacement of a large
number of civilians in the once-thriving city of Wau,
including over 28,000 who are currently seeking safety
in a protection area established adjacent to the base of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).

In Unity, we are currently seeing significant
mobilization and violent confrontations between
opposition forces allied to Mr. Riek Machar and
elements affiliated with First Vice-President Mr. Taban
Deng Gai, which have allied themselves with the SPLA.
Fighting between the SPLA and pro-Machar opposition
forces in late October resulted in an influx of hundreds
of internally displaced persons (IDPS) to the UNMISS
temporary operating base in Leer. The instability, as
well as the looting and vandalism of humanitarian
compounds, have also prompted humanitarian agencies
to suspend operations in Leer, thereby creating yet
another area of significant civilian protection and
humanitarian concern.

The deterioration of the economy and the
increasingly fragmented conflict - often with ethnic
undertones - that we are seeing have placed the
country on a potential downward slide towards greater
divisiveness and risk of a full-scale civil conflict that
could render national cohesion almost impossible to
achieve. Much more needs to be done by the Transitional
Government to put a stop to these security incidents,
which contribute to an environment of instability and
violence, lead to displacement and exacerbate the
already dire humanitarian situation. The guns simply
have to be silenced if the suffering of the people is not
going to become even more dire.

We must also make greater efforts to stem the
increasing number of localized conflicts, intolerant
ethnic rhetoric and incitement to violence. That will
require the involvement of local leaders, religious
leaders and civil society representatives. The Mission
is undertaking a number of actions to support and
facilitate such nation-building activities.

Since the Security Council's Visit to South Sudan
in early September, the Mission has been engaging
with the Transitional Government of National Unity
at the political and technical working levels on the
implementation of the commitments contained in the
joint communique issued at the end of the visit. As
far as the Regional Protection Force is concerned, on
16 November the Transitional Government of National
Unity circulated a document to the members of the
Security Council that gives the impression that an
agreement has been reached between the Government,
the Security Council and the United Nations on the
provisions of resolution 2304 (2016) and that of the
4 September joint communique.

I would just like to clarify that on 16 November we
had a meeting with the Government on the Regional
Protection Force and the status of the implementation
of the joint communique, but we only received a copy
of the document after the meeting and on the same day
it was submitted to the Security Council. Therefore, we
have not had the opportunity to review its contents in
detail. We are currently consulting internally and with
Headquarters here in New York on the details before
formally responding to the Government. In that regard,
the mandate of UNMISS continues to be guided by
resolution 2304 (2016) and, in line with it, the Mission
will continue to report through the Secretary-General's
30- and 90-day reports to the Security Council.

As for the freedom of movement, the Government
has agreed that UNMISS will inform the Government
of patrols and movements but not await formal approval
to conduct such movements. However, challenges
continue to exist in implementing that in practice, since
commanders on the ground are either not informed
or are simply not willing to comply. However, we
did manage to conduct two patrols to Yei in Central
Equatoria last month following this procedure, thereby
enabling the Mission to get first-hand knowledge of the
dire situation in the area.

As for the bureaucratic procedures regarding
clearances of the military contingents, equipment
and so on, we have agreed with the Government on
the modalities for a one-stop shop, but it remains
to be implemented. We have also agreed with the
Government that staff in the Mission will be issued with
multiple entry visas, the issuing of which is expected to
commence this week.

I would be remiss ifI did not mention the dire
humanitarian situation, which is worsening every day
owing to the security situation and the deteriorating
economy. We now estimate that 4.8 million people are
severely food-insecure, and food insecurity has spread
to the Equatorias as well as to the Bahr el-Ghazal
region. Furthermore, because of the security situation
and a lack of seeds, farmers in those food-producing
areas are likely to miss the upcoming planting season.
Our humanitarian colleagues are doing their utmost to
reach people in need, but they continue to face obstacles
in terms of movement, bureaucratic procedures and
criminality.

Following the Security Council's Visit, a
humanitarian oversight committee has been established,
made up of members of the Cabinet and security
institutions as well as representatives of UNMISS
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. The first meeting took place on 26 October,
and a number of recommendations were made with
the aim of improving humanitarian access. However,
we have yet to see if they will translate into tangible
improvement for the humanitarian personnel on
the ground.

As I prepare to leave South Sudan after more
than two years as Head of the Mission, I would like
to make two points. First, the difference between
the success and failure of the peace agreement, and
of peace in South Sudan generally, depends on the
parties' commitment to pursuing its comprehensive
and inclusive implementation, with the firm backing
and support of regional and international partners.
Secondly, I urge all involved, and especially the South
Sudanese leaders, never to lose sight of the ultimate
goal - a peaceful and prosperous future for the people
of South Sudan.

Finally, I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank the Council for its support to me during my
assignment in South Sudan. It has been an honour to
serve the Organization and the people of South Sudan.
As a parting appeal, I would like to ask that the Council
not let South Sudan be pushed off the radar screen as
other pressing global challenges demand its time. The
people of South Sudan have suffered far too much
and for far too long. The victims of the conflict still
have hope and high expectations of the international
community. As I often say, we must not let the boys and
girls of South Sudan down, and we must put them at the
forefront of all our decisions on South Sudan.

