The President (interpretation from French): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of France.

By unanimously adopting resolution 1065 (1996)
extending the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG), the Council intends
solemnly to send a political message to the parties, and
especially to the Abkhaz party.

Political negotiations must be urgently resumed. The
Government of Georgia has made generous offers that
would allow Abkhazia to enjoy very broad political
autonomy. It is now necessary for the officials in
Sukhumi to accept the necessary compromises for the
good of the Abkhaz people. In particular, they must
renounce any separatist delusions. The future of Abkhazia
lies within Georgia, and the international community will
not support a settlement which does not fully respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia.

The obstacles to the return of refugees and displaced
persons must be removed. The conclusion of political
negotiations cannot be a prerequisite for this. By signing
the Moscow Quadripartite Agreement, the Abkhaz party
made a solemn commitment, which it must honour
without delay or preconditions. In this respect, the
development of the situation in the Gali region will test
the seriousness of the Abkhaz representatives. Continued
refusal to cooperate on this issue could only lead the

 

international community to condemn in the harshest terms
what would be tantamount to a deliberate policy of "ethnic
cleansing".

The deterioration of security conditions both for the
local population and for international personnel is another
subject for concern. The laying of mines in the Gali region
constitutes a terrorist act. The parties must take all possible
measures to prevent this and to arrest the perpetrators. This
is a pivotal issue which puts the credibility of the parties at
stake. In the meantime, France will give its full support to
the measures taken by the Secretary-General, and to those
which he plans to take to ensure the protection of
UNOMIG personnel.

France also fully supports measures to assist the
parties in making progress in political negotiations. This
is the object of the programme of human rights
monitoring in Abkhazia, which is an important
confidence-building measure, and which must be
implemented as quickly as possible. This is also the
purpose of the report which the Secretary-General has
been requested to make on ways to provide technical and
financial assistance for the reconstruction of Abkhazia
once a political settlement has been reached.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of

its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.15 pm.
