Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We express our thanks to
the briefers this morning. I want to say that, from day
one, climate and security was a top priority for Sweden
during our tenure on the Security Council over the past
two years. We listened to so many countries asking
the Council to better pursue this agenda based on the
realities on the ground. We have heard that again today,
but with further urgency - of course, without prejudice
to the mandates of other bodies inside and outside the
United Nations.

With conflict prevention as our point of departure,
we fully integrated climate-related security risks into
our country- and region-specific work. During our
two-year term, the Council clearly recognized the links
between climate change and security in a number of
distinct geographical contexts. The Council repeatedly
emphasized the need for adequate risk assessments
in order to make our conflict prevention efforts more
effective. I agree that there is a need for, and that it
would be useful to have, a stand-alone resolution of the
Security Council recognizing the connection between
security and climate change. But let us not forget, as I
said, that there are several decisions that are significant
enough to keep the Security Council busy and should
hold it to account when it comes to following up on
these issues. We very much welcome the steps taken by
the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Environment Programme to form a
coordination mechanism to that end, which we see as
an embryo of improved analysis of the common threats
that exist between climate change and security and
which need to be put to the Council on a more frequent
basis.

In July 2018, during our presidency of the Security
Council, we organized a thematic debate - as you,
Mr. President, are doing today - which demonstrated
broad and cross-regional support to take the agenda
forward. In that light, we thank the Dominican Republic
for taking up the baton and organizing today's timely
debate. We have now moved beyond the question of
whether climate change impacts peace and security;
this has been established and recognized. It is now
about what to do, how to do it and to do it now.

Some negative effects of climate change on
security are already evident, including water and food
insecurity, increasingly frequent extreme weather
and natural disasters and sea-level rise. Those are
phenomena that we know risk leading to loss of life,
displacement and competition over scarce resources and
social tensions, and indeed the triggering of conflict.
The fact that countries all over the world are reflecting
those threats in their respective national security
strategies just goes to show how real and widespread
the issue has become. We are entering into unknown
territory. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change special report Global Warming of I.5°C makes
that abundantly clear. The world has already crossed
some of its planetary boundaries - I think the briefer
from the World Meteorological Organization stressed
the same issues in his briefing this morning. Of course,
this has far-reaching consequences that are not yet
known, including on international peace and security.
I would like to make three brief practical suggestions
on the way ahead when it comes to addressing the more
immediate concerns.

First, the Council - and other key
decision-making bodies within and outside the United
Nations need comprehensive climate-related
security risk information, forward-looking analysis and
early-warning mechanisms to be able to make informed
decisions. That was already being called for in the
presidential statement driven by Germany on climate
and security in 2011 (S/PRST/2011/15) and must now
be made a reality.

Secondly, as we begin to better understand the
risks, there is a need to develop approaches that more
effectively address them, including through updated
mission mandates, programmes and allocation of
resources. We must also ensure that diplomatic
efforts, training and mission deployments, as well
as development policies, are informed by due risk
assessments.

Thirdly, we should increasingly consider
climate-related challenges within mediation efforts.

To meet the challenges related to climate and
security, we need a true institutional home for those
issues within the United Nations. The coordination
mechanism is an important first step and could be
further developed. We believe that the upcoming
climate summit in September would be the appropriate
venue to push this forward.

Finally, the Swedish Government will remain an
active partner on this urgent agenda by building on
our experiences from pursuing these issues on the
Security Council for the past two years. That includes
through our significant contribution to all the relevant
climate funds and our world-leading national policy on
cutting carbon emissions, which is now enshrined in
our national laws.
