Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
congratulate the Indonesian presidency for convening
this important meeting and welcome with appreciation
the insightful concept paper (8/2007/640, annex)
circulated prior to this meeting. Thank you,
Mr. Minister, for coming all the way from Jakarta to
chair this important meeting today. Your presence
honours us and enhances the value of the deliberations
of the Council on the role of regional organizations in
the maintenance of international peace and security.

As rightly mentioned in the concept paper, "Over
the years, there has been a plethora of efforts in
promotion of such an objective, including through the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1631 (2005)"
(ibid., para. 2). We fully share this vision of the
situation, which now calls for concrete action in order
to match the consensual recognition of the central role
of regional and subregional organizations as
instrumental mechanisms in the collective security
system.
Regarding the African continent, the Security
Council has held special meetings and has adopted
several presidential statements and resolutions,
including recently holding a summit meeting dedicated
to the African continent. The problems and possible
solutions are therefore fully identified.

Both the Security Council and the African Union
recognize the importance of having an effective system
of coordination between the United Nations, the
African Union and subregional organizations, such as
the Economic Community of West African States,
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Southern African Development Community,
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community,
the East African Community, the Arab Maghreb Union
and others.

We therefore welcome the steps taken towards the
implementation of the 2005 World Summit Outcome
decision on the 10-year process of sustained capacity-
building support within the African Union strategic
framework, as well as the reflection underway in the
Department of Political Affairs on how to better liaise
with the different regions, including by enhancing the
presence of the United Nations on the ground through
regional offices. Cooperation with local bodies,
particularly in the field of police training for
peacekeeping operations, should be stressed. In this
connection, we reiterate our call to the donor
community to assist the efforts under way on the
continent. The initiative recently launched by
Cameroon, the Ecole internationale des forces de
securite to train police from African countries, is a
good example.

Africa has been the ground for useful experiences
in peacekeeping, peacemaking and peacebuilding,
including the deployment of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, the deployment of
multinational forces and the bluehelmeting of African
regional and subregional forces such as in Burundi and
C6te d'Ivoire. All those experiences have had an
impact on the action of the United Nations, the reform
of its bodies such as the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO), and the philosophy of the
Organization in shaping a new vision of global
security.
07-58467
The concept paper you have distributed,
Mr. President, calls our attention to the important
question of the innovative initiative consisting of a
hybrid model being tested in Africa. While addressing
the Fourth Committee, Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Marie Guehenno of the DPKO recalled the
work being developed by his Department in
establishing the initial operating capabilities of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. In this connection, the multidimensional
presence in Chad and the Central African Republic -
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad - to be deployed by end of this
year in close concert with the European Union would
constitute a welcome development.

It is our hope that those experiences will serve as
catalysts for strategic partnerships with regional
organizations in order to maximize their impact and
increase the likelihood of successful peace and security
outcomes. Important lessons should also be drawn with
regard to the need for reducing the time between
decision and implementation. Those two experiences
will be decisive concerning the use of the model in
future circumstances.

Peacebuilding is also a question of great
importance for the African continent, in view of the
increasing number of countries in post-conflict
situations. The experiences under way in Burundi and
Sierra Leone point to the direction and to the need for
strengthening the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund. One of the lessons drawn from the
peacebuilding work in these countries and the presence
of peacekeeping operations is the need to improve the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. The United
Nations peacebuilding architecture should also take
into account the efforts of the African Union in the
establishment of a peacebuilding regional mechanism.

By creating the Organization of the African
Unity - which later became the African Union - and
by establishing subregional bodies, the African
continent recognized very early the importance of
those institutions and has spared no effort to preserve
them. Those bodies are therefore pivotal partners for
the United Nations. This partnership requires, inter
alia, adequate structures in the United Nations
Secretariat, a fluid communication channel and the
enhancement of the role of the mechanisms established
by the Security Council, including the Security
07-58467
Council's Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa.

Before I conclude, let me reiterate the view that
clearly there is added value in strengthened and
coordinated action between the Security Council and
the regional and subregional organizations. The
maintenance of peace and security is clearly better
served if this coordination becomes more real and
action-oriented. This debate today represents an
important contribution towards reaching this urgent
goal.

