Mr. Spoerri: The International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) very much welcomes this debate and
the Security Council's concern for conflict prevention.

It may seem unusual for the ICRC to speak in a
debate on conflict prevention and peaceful societies.
The ICRC does not engage in the politics of conflict
prevention, development and peace. We do, however,
engage in the suffering and deprivations of armed
conflict on a daily basis, and it is from that suffering
that we are speaking to the Council today. The ICRC's
mandate and mission mean that it sees first-hand the
devastation that armed conflict brings to people's
individual lives and to the fabric and institutions of the
societies in which they live. It is from this experience
that we want to address the Council with four general
observations.

First, the humanitarian consequences of prolonged
armed conflict are driving many millions of people
deeper and deeper into poverty. The humanitarian
consequences of armed conflict cause enormous
development reversals as infrastructure and basic
services are destroyed, people are forcibly displaced
and whole communities are impoverished by conflict.
In protracted conflicts in particular, we observe the
entrenchment of poverty for millions of people, which
will be extremely hard to reverse and is in stark contrast
to the ambitions of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) of the United Nations.

Secondly, the ICRC and other humanitarian
organizations are increasingly engaged in development
tasks in today's armed conflicts. In the absence of
conflict prevention and development institutions,
our humanitarian operations are frequently required
to support basic services and critical development
infrastructure in health care, water, sewerage,
electricity, heating, veterinary care, agricultural inputs
and food. In the absence of development investment,
millions of conflict-affected people depend on these
fragile services for their survival. In many armed
conflicts, particularly in urban settings, the ICRC
is supporting long-term services and sophisticated
infrastructure with short-term humanitarian budgets.
In many places, that means that we are engaged in what
may be described as "development holds" to prevent
even further degradation of infrastructure and services,
often for years at a time. To better meet these sustained
humanitarian needs, we need closer links between
humanitarian and development planning and financing.

Thirdly, several features of contemporary armed
conflict are in danger of making conflicts increasingly
intractable and protracted. We notice that conflict
spreads whenever it is not effectively addressed, and
does not stop at State borders. In many of our operations
today, we are managing a regional response to armed
conflicts that spread and damage people's lives across
whole regions, as, for example, is the case today in the
Middle East and the Lake Chad Basin. We also notice
that the fragmentation and mutation of armed conflict
contribute to the protractedness of armed conflict and
the increase of poverty and suffering. Many States and
many non-State armed groups are directly involved as
belligerents in several oftoday's armed conflicts. In our
experience, the active engagement of so many parties
to a conflict tends to create a momentum towards the
mutation and continuity of that conflict rather than its
resolution and termination.

Finally, we feel bound to observe that poverty
and suffering are much reduced in armed conflicts
in which international humanitarian law is widely
respected. It is evident to us that when international
humanitarian law is not respected, the prospects of the
people affected by conflict are significantly worsened
and the opportunities for peace are greatly reduced
by spirals of revenge and retaliation. These set in
motion new grievances and increase the intractability
of many armed conflicts today. We therefore urge the
Council to work actively with States to ensure respect
for international humanitarian law with the intention
of reducing suffering and poverty in armed conflicts,
de-escalating the levels of violence and shortening the
duration of armed conflict.

The ICRC thanks the Council very much for giving
us this opportunity to take part in this important
debate and to share our experience with it today. We
recognize the Council's determination to address
conflict prevention across all three pillars of the United
Nations work. We hope that our observations will help
to inform the Council's deliberations.

