Mr. Baali (Algeria): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the three countries representing Africa on
the Council - Angola, Benin and my own country,
Algeria. I would like, at the outset, to express our
satisfaction at the adoption of the resolution on the
situation in Darfur - a very important and sensitive
issue that has been before the Council for several
weeks and the subject of arduous and delicate
negotiations between the members of the Council.

The three African countries deemed it appropriate
to support the resolution for the four following reasons.
First of all, we believe that the international
community cannot be passive and indifferent with
regard to the ongoing humanitarian crisis unfolding in
Darfur, Sudan, and that it should express its concern
about the horrendous crimes committed against the
civilian population - crimes that have claimed and
destroyed many lives, forced hundreds of thousands to
flee their homes and inflicted unbearable suffering
upon the whole population.

As Africans, we believe that whenever and
wherever there is a conflict in Africa, we - more than
anyone else - have a special duty and a primary
responsibility towards our sisters and brothers when
they suffer and when their lives are at risk. That is why
the African Union acted so promptly and so decisively
in the case of Darfur. While we fully understand the
need for the Council to assume its obligations under
the Charter, we need to make sure that its actions
complement and support the efforts of the African
Union, which has taken the lead with courage and
determination in addressing the situation in Darfur.

Therefore - this is my second point - we can
only be satisfied with the fact that the resolution just
adopted contains a strong and unequivocal expression
of support for and endorsement of the leadership role
and the engagement of the African Union in addressing
the situation in Darfur in its various dimensions -
humanitarian, military and political - through the
deployment of monitors and a protection force, with
the possibility of creating a full-fledged peacekeeping
operation and the sponsoring of talks between the
Government of Sudan and the rebel groups, with a
view to reaching a political solution to the tensions in
Darfur.

We are particularly satisfied that the Security
Council has requested the Secretary-General to assist
the African Union with planning and assessment for its
mission in Darfur and that it has also requested
Member States to provide assistance, as needed, for the
African Union monitoring operations and to contribute
generously to the United Nations appeals to mitigate
the humanitarian catastrophe.

Now that the restrictions have been lifted, we
expect the international community to provide
sufficient assistance to the affected populations.

Thirdly, we are satisfied that the Security Council
has urged the parties to the N'Djamena Ceasefire
Agreement to conclude a political agreement without
delay and we note, in this regard, the strong appeal
made to the rebel groups to engage in peace talks
without preconditions.

Fourthly, we are satisfied that the Security
Council has chosen to keep the Government of
Sudan- which has started taking positive steps -
fully engaged and to call on it to follow through on the
commitments that it made in the communique of 3 July
2004, and we are hopeful that, at our next review, the
situation will have greatly improved on the ground.

In other terms, we hope that humanitarian
assistance will reach all internally displaced persons
and that significant progress will be made in
establishing credible security conditions for the civilian
population and humanitarian actors; in disarming the
Janjaweed militias and in bringing their leaders to
justice; and in promoting the political peace process.

In this regard, we would like to emphasize that
only then will the Council consider whether or not it
should envisage other measures.

Finally, I would like to thank the sponsors of the
resolution for the flexibility that they showed during
negotiations.

