Ms. Khaled (Bangladesh): We thank the Senegalese
presidency for convening this open debate. We
also thank the briefers for sharing their insights
and recommendations.

As a finite resource of the global commons, water is
fundamental to the three pillars of United Nations work
on development, human rights, and peace and security.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development has
articulated the interlinkages between water and wider
sustainable development. Water resources, and the
essential services they provide, are among the keys
to achieving poverty reduction, inclusive growth and
food, health and energy security.

Nearly 750 million people around the world continue
to lack access to an improved source of drinking
water. Access to safe drinking water and sanitation
are therefore duly recognized as human rights. The
sustainable use and management of water are vital for
promoting the dignity and well-being of all humankind.
The interface between water and international peace
and security is becoming increasingly self-evident.
A number of conflict situations around the world
can be directly or indirectly linked to some form of
water scarcity or water-related natural disasters, in
conjunction with other factors.

As stated in the concept note (S/2016/969, annex)
for this debate, water-related issues among countries
can often aggravate the sense of insecurity and act as
a potential trigger for inter-State or regional conflicts.
The Water Cooperation Quotient, developed by the
Strategic Foresight Group, makes an interesting case
about the lack of institutional cooperation in shared
river basins as an underlying cause for conflicts in
different parts of the world. There are a number of
instances in which effective dialogue and cooperation
among the States concerned in shared-basin areas
have helped prevent, avert or diminish the chances
of conflicts. In other instances, investment in water-
intensive technologies and innovations, including
through international partnerships, has effectively
mitigated the potential drivers of conflict.

In terms of conflict resolution, water may need to
be factored in as an essential component of sustaining
peace and peacebuilding in certain contexts. It might
be relevant for the Peacebuilding Commission to
consider, as part of its thematic discussions, the role
of water in promoting a comprehensive approach to
sustaining peace.

The particular needs of the most vulnerable,
including women and children, need to be mainstreamed
into our various approaches and analyses. In many parts
of the world, women and children must be freed from
the burden of fetching water on a daily basis so as to
open up enhanced opportunities for their empowerment
and education.

In that connection, water must be seen as an integral
part of the international development architecture, with
focus on meaningful global partnership in achieving
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6. The need to
mobilize enhanced resources and expertise for water-
related infrastructure and services should continue to
feature prominently in the United Nations development
discourse. We reiterate the call made by our Prime
Minister at the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in
Marrakech earlier this month to establish a global fund
on SDG 6 to support, inter alia, water-related research,
innovation and technology transfer.

The protection of water-related critical
infrastructure and essential services during armed
conflicts also deserves the international community's
priority attention. The severe impact of breakdowns
in water-related services and of restrictions in access
to water in certain conflict situations continues to
increase the vulnerability of civilian populations. The
relevant international humanitarian law provisions
stipulated in the 1977 Protocols Additional to the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 should provide guarantees
against indiscriminate attacks on or restriction to
water resources and installations by various parties to
armed conflicts There is a need for further informed
discussions on ensuring accountability for such
breaches and offences, in the light of the Rome Statute
and other applicable international law. We urge the
Global High-Level Panel on Water and Peace, among
others, to further consider those issues.

In Bangladesh we consider water to be the vital,
sustaining force of our economy, environment, ecology
and culture. As a lower riparian and low-lying delta
State vulnerable to climate change, we constantly
grapple with challenges relating to the availability of
fresh water, especially during the lean season. The
growing saline intrusion in our coastal areas, the
depletion of groundwater reserves in large urban areas
and the persistent challenge of arsenic contamination
of groundwater in certain parts of the country add
to the systemic constraints in our overall water use
and management.

Against the backdrop of such challenges, today
more than 98 per cent of our population have access
to safe drinking water, and more than 65 per cent have
access to safe sanitation. Open defecation, involving as
much as 42 per cent of the population in 2003, has been
reduced to less than 1 per cent.

As a member of the United Nations-World Bank
High-level Panel on Water, our Honourable Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina is scheduled to attend the
Budapest Water Summit 2016 next week. Among
other issues, Bangladesh will continue to advocate
for the efficient governance and management of water
resources, integrated management of shared river
basins and access to less water-intensive technologies
and crop varieties.

We commit to remain at the forefront of the
international community's efforts in building a water-
secure world for all.

