Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
am grateful to the Secretary-General for his report of
30 August (S/2017/745) and to Special Representative
Jean Arnault for the briefing he just delivered.
Moreover, we commend him on the efficient work that
he has carried out at the head of the United Nations
Mission in Colombia. The important announcement of
the Final Peace Agreement between the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia ~ Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) on the
Bilateral and Definitive Ceasefire and the Cessation of
Hostilities and the Laying down ofArms for 102 days is
generating hope that peace in Colombia, in addition to
being stable and lasting, will be comprehensive.

Following the adoption of resolution 2366 (2017)
on 10 July, establishing the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia and the culmination on 15 August
of the extraction of all weapons and the destruction of
all existing munitions in the 26 camps of the FARC-EP,
we have received encouraging news that underscores
steady progress in the consolidation ofthe peace process
in Colombia. It is extremely important that the United
Nations now give its full support so as to ensure a
successful political, economic and social integration of
the members of FARC-EP, and to implement measures
ensuring their security.

Without doubt, the report of the Secretary-General
once again reflects the commitment of the United
Nations to the peace process in Colombia, and shows
his receptiveness to the requests of the parties and
their readiness to take up without delay the verification
mandate with which it has been entrusted. It is
important to highlight that the report underlines that its
recommendations are the result of consultations held
with the Government of Colombia and the FARC-EP.
That is a key point because we must not forget that the
process must always be guided by the main stakeholders.

The detailed information provided with regard to
the mandates, size, structure and operational aspects
of the new Mission demonstrates the organization
and seriousness of the task that the United Nations
is carrying out, with the work that has already been
carried out by the current Mission and in cooperation
and continuous coordination with the United Nations
country team in Colombia, as well as the Government
of Colombia and FARC-EP.

We must now move towards implementing all
points of the Final Peace Agreement and enhance our
efforts to avoid delays and maximize interinstitutional
coordination so as to prevent any weakening of
confidence between the parties in the process, based on
respect for mutual obligations. We welcome the series
of mechanisms and measures that have already been
implemented for the reintegration of FARC-EP, and to
ensure that security measures are implemented, which
will benefit from the experience of the United Nations
system in thematic areas, such as gender issues, child
protection, human rights and ethnic and indigenous
issues. It is also important to know that the Mission
will be deployed with a View to ensuring its presence in
the rural areas most affected by the conflict, which are
also those in which the reintegration of the members of
FARC-EP is taking place.

The commitments that have been assumed, upheld
and championed by the parties, the measures and
mechanisms that are already under way to ensure
the implementation of those commitments, and the
important role played by the United Nations Verification
Mission are elements that together reaffirm our
confidence in the establishment of stable and lasting
peace in Colombia, which we is now on the verge of
completion. Uruguay therefore call on everyone to
spare no effort to provide every form of assistance that
the stakeholders in the peace process have requested of
the Organization. As we have on previous occasions,
we reaffirm our support for the peace process in
Colombia and for the main stakeholders, in the hope of
seeeing the National Liberation Army become one of
the leading actors in that process.

