Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia is deeply concerned by the ongoing
escalation of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Despite
the efforts of the international community to help settle
that conflict, it has proven impossible to achieve a
positive breakthrough. Moreover, the violence is
acquiring a logic of its own and its consequences are
assuming qualitatively new and more dangerous forms.
Breaking the spiral of confrontation would be in the

S/PV.4478

 

genuine interests of Palestinians and Israelis alike.
There can be no solution to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict by force of arms.

The only possible way out of the impasse is the
immediate adoption by both parties of corresponding
measures, starting with the implementation of the Tent-
Mitchell plan forthwith. On the Palestinian side, this
would require putting a halt to any action threatening
Israel's security and the lives of civilians, as well as
arresting and bringing to justice all those participating
in terrorist activities. Israel, for its part, must cease its
destruction of the structures of Palestinian national
autonomy end the isolation of President Yasser Arafat
and halt its extra-judicial assassinations, invasions of
Palestinian towns and blockades of Palestinian
territories.

Russia calls on both sides immediately and
unconditionally to take these steps so as to meet each
other half-way, to end the violence and to resume the
negotiating process. In the interests of eradicating
terrorism and of creating conditions of security, there
must be cooperation between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority, headed by its legitimate leader, Yasser
Arafat.

International efforts must also be intensified to
overcome the crisis and to restore the situation to the
political track. It is equally important that further
concerted action be undertaken by the United Nations,
Russia, the United States, the European Union and the
interested Arab States, including with respect to the
new peace initiatives.

We are pleased to note among Palestinians and
Israelis alike a growing understanding of the need to
overcome these negative dynamics. A delegation of the
Palestinian-Israeli coalition for peace is currently in
Moscow, composed of eminent politicians and
parliamentarians from Israel and Palestine. The resolve
of Israeli and Palestinian politicians to work to re-
establish trust deserves our respect and support.

In close cooperation with all interested parties,
Russia will continue firmly to work to ensure a
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East conflict
on the basis of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973);
the principles of the Madrid conference, in particular
the principle of land for peace; and existing
agreements. Our common goal is to establish lasting
peace based on equal security for Israel and other
States and peoples of the region and to ensure that the
Palestinian people enjoy their national rights, including
their rights to self-determination and to the creation of
a viable sovereign State.

