The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

At the outset, Bolivia joins in the expressions of
condolences with the respect to the tragic incident that
took place in China. Our solidarity and thoughts are
with the families of the victims. We wish a speedy
recovery to the injured.

Bolivia would like to thank the Chef de Cabinet
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, Mr. Chergui, and the African Union
High Representative for the Peace Fund, Mr. Donald
Kaberuka, for their briefings. Our gratitude also goes
to the delegations of Egypt, Ethiopia and Senegal for
having taken the initiative to convene this meeting.

Bolivia pays tribute to the work of the President
of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-
General of the United Nations for the outcome of the
first annual African Union-United Nations conference,
which took place in April. We encourage its commitment
to strengthen dialogue and improve cooperation and
coordination mechanisms through common objectives.
The African Union has responded in a timely way to
the new threats to peace and security in Africa. Clear
examples of this fact are the 2007 deployment of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, the Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord's
Resistance Army, as well as the backing provided to
the Lake Chad Basin Commission as they set up the
Multinational Joint Task Force to fight Boko Haram.

Some of the achievements that I referred to have
allowed the United Nations the African Union to forge
a strategic partnership that, over the past 15 years, has
incorporated innovative and fresh ways of working,
particularly when it comes to peace operations. Peace
operations deployed by the United Nations in Africa are
a key instrument in the ongoing quest for the embedding
of peace and security on a permanent basis in those
countries that currently face serious political and social
crises. They are also a useful tool when dealing with
threats such as humanitarian crises and terrorism.

Bolivia would like to underscore the rising level of
strategic partnership between the Security Council and
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
Both organs are committed to developing a structured
and balanced relationship while also strengthening
partnership through mutual support and consistent
technical support, with respect to political issues as
well as peacekeeping operations. We hope that the
meeting scheduled for September will be successful.
The Council stressed that joint consultative analysis
and planning with the United Nations are crucial in
formulating joint recommendations on the reach of
mission resources. Resolution 2320 (2016) was adopted
to that end, by which the Security Council expressed
its willingness to consider options in response to the
African Union's own proposal to finance 25 per cent of
the cost of such operations by 2020. Such a mobilization
of resources would make a significant contribution to
the African Union peace and security programme. We
urge donor countries and the international community
in general to continue to contribute actively and to
fulfil the commitments they have undertaken in the
framework of cooperation and under resolution 2320
(2016).

Bolivia believes that the success of peacekeeping
operations depends on close cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, and on the role
that has been conferred, inter alia, on women in such
processes. We stress the need for both organizations
to ensure that women and the gender perspective are
fully integrated into all activities related to peace
and security.

Finally, Bolivia believes it important to give the
African Union a more proactive role in taking its own
decisions on issues of concern to it, in full respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of all its members. It is also essential to respect the
principle of African solutions for African problems if
we are to succeed in our common endeavours.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The meeting rose at 11.40 am.
