Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): As we
meet here, there are millions of displaced persons and
refugees across the Middle East, in particular children,
who have spent the past few weeks in the bitter
cold under heavy rain and snow. The international
community must respond to calls to address the causes
that led to their displacement, whether in Palestine,
Syria or Iraq. In the meantime, the international
community must enhance humanitarian assistance to
refugees and help host countries, particularly Jordan,
in this humanitarian mission, which we undertake on
behalf of humanity and the international community.

I should also like to express our appreciation to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East for their
efforts to alleviate the effects of the difficult weather
conditions on refugee communities in the Middle East.
I also want to thank those Governments that have
helped by providing necessary support, which, although
greatly appreciated, is far less than what is required.

Last year was one of the toughest and harshest years
for the Palestinian people in the occupied territories.
Their sincere aspirations for peace were struck down
by the halt of peace negotiations at the end of March,
despite the appreciated and unprecedented efforts of
United States Secretary of State John Kerry. That halt in
negotiations was followed by political tension, as well
as a vacuum that led to deadly violent confrontations
in various parts of the occupied Palestinian territories,
particularly the Gaza Strip. According to the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 2014
witnessed the greatest number of casualties among
Palestinians since 1967, largely due to the unjustifiable
Israeli aggression in the Gaza Strip. More than 2,000
Palestinians - mostly civilians, in particular women
and children 4 were killed. Infrastructure, such
as health and education services and facilities, was
destroyed. Half a million Palestinians were displaced
in 2014, and 22,000 Palestinian homes were either
destroyed or rendered uninhabitable.

Last year saw settlement expansion and the forced
displacement of Palestinians. In 2014, the Israeli
Government continued to announce the construction
of new housing units in disregard of repeated
condemnations by the international community. The
number of settlers in the West Bank increased by 4 per
cent over the previous year, according to figures from the
Israeli Government itself. The number of Palestinians
displaced in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
also increased by 6 per cent in 2014 as a result of the
forced displacement of Palestinians and the policies
of occupation. Even the Al-Aqsa Mosque suffered last

year, with two unprecedented incidents - the first
being its closure and the second the storming of the
site - not to mention a series of attacks by Jewish

settlers and extremists on Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
provocative visits by members of the Israeli right and
the Knesset, all in disregard of the feelings of millions
of Muslims around the world.

Jordan - based on the Hashemite guardianship
and custody of the Islamic and Christian Holy Sites
in East Jerusalem assumed directly by His Majesty
King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein - will continue
to stand against all Israeli violations and incursions
into the Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Jordanian efforts under
the leadership of His Majesty the King succeeded in
providing relatively better access to worshippers and
increasing their numbers as compared to previous
months.

By the end of last year, both Palestinian and Israeli
parties moved in two different directions. Israel chose
to continue its settlement policies and to enact laws
that threatened the two-State solution. The Palestinian
leadership, for its part, chose to resort to this
international organization in pursuit of the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people to live in freedom and
dignity in their own independent State. Today I will not
warn again of the consequences of continuing with the
status quo. We have all witnessed episodes of violence
and tension, to which I have already referred to and
which will be repeated even more gravely, with wider
ramifications, if the international community fails to
achieve a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.

What I do want to repeat and emphasize today is
the urgent need to work this year to urge the two sides
to build on the efforts made by United States Secretary
of State John Kerry, and engage in negotiation through
a serious framework in which all unilateral measures
come to an end. Such negotiations have to lead to the
enactment of a two-State solution within a reasonable
period, and an end to the conflict through resolving all
core issues - Jerusalem, refugees, security, borders
and water issues - in accordance with international
terms of reference and the Arab Peace Initiative in all
its elements, one that meets and fully protects Jordan's
vital interests associated with each of those issues.
Jordan is directly involved in all those issues. The
success of such endeavours requires a genuine, actual
Israeli movement in this direction. It requires that
Israel show seriousness and commitment to peace and
the two-State solution through action, work and halting
all violations, attacks and unilateral measures that are
already illegal, and engaging in good faith in serious
negotiations.

The situation in the Middle East, including the
deadly events of last year, took up 23.8 per cent of the
meetings and consultations of thr Security Council,
despite the fact that the Council in 2014 adopted only one
official document on the Isreaeli-Palestinian conflict,
namely, presidential statement S/PRST/2014/l3, which
Jordan submitted and which called for a ceasefire in the
Gaza Strip on the eve of Eid Al-Fitr. As a matter of fact,
the Security Council has not adopted any resolutions
on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict since 2009, despite
the historic record of resolutions that the Council was
able to adopt over the past decades - resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and many
others - that form the international terms of reference
and legitimacy considered as the basis for the solution
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Such facts must prompt us to conduct a genuine
review of the required role of the Security Council
this year vis-a-vis finding a solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. They also prompt us to work
together unanimously and consensually in coordinated
fashion, within a framework that supports direct
negotiations in the Council, to develop a frame of
reference for such negotiations, end the occupation and
establish an independent, fully sovereign and viable
Palestinian State on the June 1967 border with East
Jerusalem as its capital, in the framework of a two-
State solution, living in peace and security side by side
with Israel and all countries and peoples of the region.

One ofthe prominent reasons that lead to extremism
is the failure to find a just and comprehensive solution
to the Palestinian cause, which Jordan, under the
leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah, considers
the core of the conflict in the region. We in Jordan are
at the forefront of regional and international efforts to
combat terrorism and extremism and their supporters,
particularly through initiatives aimed at promoting
dialogue among religions and cultures, and explaining
the true concepts of Islam, the religion and its message
of tolerance - such as the Amman Message, Common
Word and the World Interfaith Harmony Week. Jordan
will spare no efforts in working to combat terrorism
with other States by all legitimate and legal means
through the mechanisms of joint international action.
What we are doing to achieve this goal reflects the
complex danger of terrorism, which also requires
that we confront it militarily, on the security front
and ideologically, as well as emphasizing the fact that
terrorism has no religion or race. Moreover, linking
terrorism with any religion, race or region, intentionally
or unintentionally, is the very best way to give publicity
to extremists, terrorists and the enemies of humankind,
including their deviant thoughts.

Jordan stresses the need for a political solution to
the crisis in Syria that ends bloodshed and achieves
a political transition, in line with the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. It must be a political
solution that restores security and stability to Syria and
its people, rebuilds Syrian national, including among
all components of the Syrian people, and provides for
the return of refugees to their homes. The absence of a
comprehensive solution to the Syrian crisis will ignite
sectarian conflict in the region. Jordan, as a country
hosting more than 1.5 million Syrians is exhausted.
It has exceeded its limits in providing assistance to
Syrian refugees, particularly in the light of our limited
resources and inadequate international support. We
appeal today to the international community, now more
than ever, to shoulder its responsibilities in supporting
Jordan and other host countries to enable them to
continue to perform this important humanitarian role.

In conclusion, let us work together to make 2015
the year of achieving peace and security in the Middle
East. The peoples of our region are eager to do so.

