Mr. Mantovani (Italy): We wish to welcome the
presence here with us today of the Foreign Minister of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, His Excellency
Mr. Thambwe Mwamba, and we acknowledge the
participation in our work of the Foreign Minister of
Belgium, His Excellency Mr. De Gucht, as well as of
the Permanent Representative of Rwanda, Ambassador
Nsengimana.

By authorizing a temporary increase in the
capacities of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC),
by clarifying its priorities and by strengthening its
operational autonomy, the Security Council has
shouldered its responsibilities as regards the
Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the larger Great Lakes
region. We are fully aware of the remaining
constraints, and we call for rapid deployment of the
additional troops envisaged in resolution 1843 (2008),
as well as for a swift handover of MONUC's civilian
tasks to other international agencies. Nevertheless, we
are confident that MONUC is now placed in the best
condition to ensure the protection of civilians, to
support the creation of viable security institutions and
to facilitate the disarmament and reintegration of
combatants.

Chances are that the new MONUC will have to
deal with a less tense situation, thanks to the positive
dynamic catalyzed by regional and international
mediation efforts under the leadership of Special
Envoy Obasanjo and of the regional mediator,
Mr. Mkapa.

The developments of the political process ignited
by the Nairobi summit proved once more that political
will is the only real ingredient for the stabilization of
the eastern Congo and that there is no military
solution to this conflict. Only by cutting all forms of
solidarity - political, economic and ideological - with
the violence of armed groups and by granting justice to
the victims of violence, whoever the authors may be,
will we pave the way for sustainable peace in the Great
Lakes. No peacekeeping force, no matter how robust,
will or should be a substitute for political inertia, in
Congo or anywhere else.

That being said, the United Nations has a moral
and political duty to protect civilians from extreme
violence and humanitarian suffering, despite the
absence of peace and political stability. In the twenty-
first century, the world expects no less than this of the
United Nations. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo the Security Council has shown itself able to
respond to this expectation, but the positive impact of
that response, in terms of the credibility and relevance
of the Organization, will not be sustained if the
Council does not apply the same conditions for all the
victims of warfare and institutional failure in the
eastern Congo as in any other critical situation on the
verge of unprecedented humanitarian disaster and
chaos - for instance, Somalia.

