Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank you, Sir, for having given us the opportunity
today to debate the important question of inter-mission
cooperation in peacekeeping operations.

I thank you, Sir, for the concept paper that you kindly
circulated to the Council for this debate. Finally, I also
thank Mr. Herve' Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Ameerah Haq,
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support, for their
very useful briefings.

Inter-mission cooperation has assumed greater
importance at a time when peacekeeping operations
are facing a number of problems, especially financial,
due to the difficult global economic situation. United
Nations concern about inter-mission cooperation is such
that, since 2004, the Council has remained seized of the
matter through presidential statements and resolutions.
The complexity of establishing a peacekeeping
operation has prompted the United Nations to reflect
on appropriate measures to address possible emergency
situations in a region where a peace mission is already
deployed. The merit of such an initiative includes the
reduced time and cost of deploying a new mission.

The Security Council had recognized the need and
the value of inter-mission cooperation when through
resolution 1951 (2010), it authorized a temporary
transfer from the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) to the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI). At the time, there was a need to deal
with the deteriorating situation in Cote d'Ivoire, which
posed a risk to the peace and security of the region.
The two missions then worked together seamlessly to
tackle the problem of illicit transboundary trafficking
and manage refugee flows.

Before that resolution, the Council, in its
presidential statement of 25 March 2004 addressed
cross-border issues in West Africa and requested the
Secretary-General to

"encourage the United Nations missions in
West Africa to share information and their
logistic and administrative resources as far as
possible, without impeding the satisfactory
execution of their respective mandates, in order
to increase their effectiveness and reduce costs"
(S/PRST/2004/7, p. 2).

While welcoming that cooperation, we reiterate
that we must not forget to consider a number of
parametres, including operational effectiveness,
compliance with initial mandates and the views of the
troop-contributing countries. Indeed, a mission should
be deployed to another country in a manner that avoids
creating or promoting a resurgence of the insecurity
that necessitated the mission's establishment in the first
country. The means used and the troops deployed must
be identified within a determined time frame, as was
fortunately the case with UNMIL and UNOCI.

We also believe that greater effectiveness
necessitates a judicious distribution and coordination
of the required tasks, with a specific identification
of responsibilities in the chain of command. Clearly,
the desired result is to optimize the peace mission's
potential for success at a reduced cost. Inter-mission
cooperation makes sense only if it is carried out within
the same region.

The temporary transfer of a portion of the equipment
and the forces of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon to Syria to the United Nations Supervision
Mission in Syria was also a rapid response to a situation
that required urgent action.
It is well established that the cost and scarcity of
certain types of equipment, such as aircraft vital to
the success of peace missions, requires us to consider
pooling them. Inter-mission cooperation can provide a
solution to that problem.

As in the redeployments in West Africa and the
Middle East, we believe that cooperation should
exist among missions operating in other parts of the
world when there is a need, particularly in Central
and East Africa with, of course, the consent of the
troop-contributing countries and under a well-defined
mandate. The Departments ofPeacekeeping Operations
and Field Support have significant roles to play in that
area. In that regard, we welcome the publication of the
2012 United Nations Infantry Battalion Manual, which
provides some details on inter-mission cooperation.

Inter-mission cooperation should not only involve
the redeployment of troops and equipment; it should
go further to include the sharing of information
and intelligence. Such action is especially useful in
combating all forms of cross-border trafficking, which
persists with total impunity, for example, on the border
between Liberia and cote d'Ivoire.

The same applies in combating the Lord's Resistance
Army, which calls for inter-mission cooperation in
Central and East Africa among, for example, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African
Republic and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. My delegation welcomes such
cooperation, which makes it possible to follow the
movements of that dangerous criminal group and to
track down its perpetrators.

Beyond the will to accelerate and improve such
action, we believe that above all, in redeploying a
mission, the risks must be assessed in real time as part
of operational planning. In that regard, any Council
resolution authorizing the creation of a peacekeeping
force must, in our view, take into account the
environment in which it will be deployed, and include,
if possible, a provision relating to cooperation between
the new mission and other missions operating in the
region. Such cooperation could then be adapted as the
security situation developed. Such a precautionary
measure is valuable in providing from the start a
clear mandate based on a strategic concept that takes
neighbouring missions and areas of cooperation into
account, as well as defined responsibilities relating to
the chain of command.

My country is convinced that if inter-mission
cooperation is well organized, it could become an
effective tool to contribute to the deployment of a
rapid intervention force in cases where it could take
several months to put together a mission in normal
circumstances.

