Mr. Kim Young-mok (Republic of Korea): First
of all, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
holding this open debate on the critical situation in the
Middle East.

In our previous statement in this Chamber last
week, my delegation joined other Members of the
United Nations in urging the participants immediately
to put an end to the violence and to move promptly to
dialogue and negotiations for a peaceful resolution of
the crisis. Today my delegation reiterates the same call
to the leaders of the two parties.

My delegation welcomes the increased
engagement on the part of the international community,
in particular the visit of United States Secretary of
State Colin Powell to the region and the efforts of the
"quartet". We hope that these efforts will help turn the
vicious circle of violence into a meaningful ceasefire
and dialogue.

At this stage, my delegation's utmost concern is
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the
Palestinian territories, particularly in the J enin refugee
camp. The current situation is deplorable. Under no
circumstance can one justify the excessive use of force
or the extra-judicial treatment of civilians. In addition,
international humanitarian workers should be
guaranteed full access to provide needed relief to the
affected area and to the civilians therein.

In this context, the Republic of Korea calls on the
responsible parties to respect international
humanitarian law and to exercise maximum restraint.
We also call for the full and immediate implementation
of Security Council resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002), in particular the withdrawal of Israeli troops
from Palestinian cities.

My delegation commends the Secretary-General's
devotion and continuous efforts to bring peace to the
region. We share his view that, under these
circumstances there is a pressing need for effective
means to ensure the implementation of Security
Council resolutions and other peace initiatives. We
believe that his proposal this morning to send a
multinational force to the region merits serious and
careful consideration by all States Members of the
United Nations.

