Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Ireland is fully associated
with the statement made yesterday by the
representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union.

Since the Council adopted resolutions 1397
(2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002), the situation in
the Middle East has grown ever more critical and
perilous. Resolution 1397 (2002) affirmed a vision of
what could be achieved by the parties trusting
themselves to take essential steps of faith and courage
towards the goal of two States, Palestine and Israel,
living side by side in peace, within secure and
recognized borders.

Instead of seeing progress towards this goal, the
international community in recent weeks has watched
events spiral out of control. Security Council
resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) have not been
implemented, including by the failure of Israel to
withdraw from the Palestinian-controlled territories as
demanded by the Council.

Our debate today, therefore, takes place at a time
of sadness and anger, felt across the world, at what has
been happening in the region. Violence and blood-
spilling on a daily basis have affronted the conscience
of the world. No other words will do. The demands of
the Security Council have not been heeded. Rules of
honour, legal and moral, on how people should treat
each other have been broken with what seems like
careless indifference and disregard. The situation has
been and remains an unacceptable affront to the values
that we in the United Nations, and the wider
international community, cherish.

Ireland greatly appreciates the role of the
"quartet" in recent weeks in seeking to turn the tide of
violence. I want to pay special tribute to Secretary
Powell for his unflagging work in the region over the
past period. It must be clear to all of us that it is now
more important than ever that a strong, vigorous level
of engagement by the international community be
sustained and intensified over the coming period in
order to advance a political dynamic and achieve an
end to violence. Left to themselves, the parties will
remain paralysed and frozen.

Ireland fully accepts that the Government of
Israel has a right and a duty to protect its citizens from
terrorist attacks. We totally condemn the practice of
suicide bombings, which have killed many innocent
Israeli civilians. These attacks on innocent civilians
must stop for good.

We know from our own experience in Ireland the
fear that is generated by acts of terror and the
disruption that these acts cause to normal life. We also
know from our own experience that it is not enough to
fight terrorism by military means alone. Such a
struggle would be interminable. The root causes of
conflict must also be addressed, and this battle can only
be fought by political means.

It has also been the case - and it remains the
case - that any actions by Israel must be
proportionate, and must also be in accordance with
international humanitarian law. The actions that have
been taken over the past two weeks in the West Bank
have been far from proportionate. The reports we have
received, and the accounts we have had from the
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Welfare Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) and from universally
respected non-governmental organizations, as well as
the briefing we received yesterday from Secretary-
General Annan, make it clear that Israel has the most
serious questions to answer about the conduct of its
operations.

A security force is not entitled to bombard houses
inhabited by civilians, or systematically to bulldoze
their houses and leave them without shelter. One can
never justify refusing for several days to allow access
for humanitarian assistance to the civilian population,
or to leave a population without food, water and
shelter. Nor can there be any justification for refusing
to conduct, or permit to be arranged, an emergency
operation to rescue people trapped in rubble until it
was too late. We cannot regard all this as other then a
serious breach of international humanitarian law.

Israel must now cooperate fully with UNRWA
and other agencies in allowing humanitarian relief to
reach people who are without food, water, shelter and
medical services. Water and electricity supplies must
be restored. The curfew in Jenin must be lifted.

Israel must also cooperate fully with the United
Nations Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and non-governmental organizations to help
them establish what has happened in Jenin and
elsewhere and to give the world a full and accurate
picture of events. Ireland fully supports the call for an
independent investigation. Furthermore, we
specifically request the Israeli Government to allow the
High Commissioner, Mrs. Mary Robinson, to enter
Israel and the Palestinian areas to fulfil the mandate
given to her by the United Nations body charged with
the protection of human rights, and to do so now.

As the Secretary-General has several times told
the Council, there is no military solution to this
conflict. Far from advancing peace and security, the
use of force embitters people and corrodes trust, and
puts off the day of peace. Ireland calls on the
Palestinian Authority to do all in its power to prevent
acts of violence against civilians. We call on both sides
to implement fully resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002). In particular, we call on Israel to do fully and
totally, now, what it should have done, at once,
following resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002):
withdraw from all the Palestinian-controlled areas,
including Ramallah, Bethlehem and Gaza. The
restrictions on the movement of Chairman Arafat must
be ended.

My authorities are seriously concerned at the
declared intention of the Israeli authorities to establish
a tight cordon around the Palestinian-controlled areas
after they have evacuated, permitting movement
neither in nor out. What are its intentions for the
population of these areas? Are they to be kept in
permanent captivity? What economic activity will
sustain them? Who will provide their security, now that
the Palestinian security structures have been
systematically destroyed? What civil structures can be
envisaged in such conditions?

Ireland shares the Secretary-General's deep
concern at the danger to regional security presented by
the attacks launched across the Blue Line. The Council
has determined that resolution 425 (1978) has been
implemented in respect of Israel's withdrawal from
Lebanon. The relevant Council resolutions require that
all concerned do all in their power to ensure respect for
the Blue Line in its entirety.

Mutual trust has completely broken down
between the parties. We in the Council, and the
international community in general, must redouble our
efforts to help both sides move out of this dire impasse.
We therefore welcome the proposal by the Secretary-
General for an international force to provide the
security environment, and the space, for a return to
political negotiations. My authorities regard this as a
serious and important contribution to the efforts to
resolve this issue. We urge the parties to give it the
most careful consideration, and also urge others in the
international community to persuade them of the help
that it could offer towards helping them to emerge from
the present deadlock.

We have also listened very carefully to what has
been said regarding an international conference. We
agree that a well-prepared and inclusive conference,
called for the purpose of setting in motion negotiations
aimed at achieving the vision, enshrined in Secretary
Powell's Louisville speech and in the initiative of
Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, and endorsed
at the recent summit of the League of Arab States and
in our own resolution 1397 (2002), is worth the most
careful consideration by the parties and by the
international community. It must be for each
participant to nominate its own representative to the
conference.

The Israeli and Palestinian people must live
together side by side. Every Israeli, and every
Palestinian, has to recognize this. The Palestinian
people are entitled to their national aspirations, and it
is the denial of these aspirations for so long that is the
primary cause of the present crisis. Israel is entitled to
secure and recognized borders. The political, security
and economic and humanitarian tracks must now be
engaged with all speed and determination, so that a
political settlement can be reached based on resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002).

