The President (spoke in Spanish ): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to the President
of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and current
Chairman of the African Union, His Excellency Mr.
Olusegun Obasanjo.

I also welcome very warmly the President of
Namibia, Mr. Sam Nujoma.

I also welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, at this
meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of members to
document S/2004/755, which contains the text of a
letter dated 22 September 2004 from Nigeria addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

Before giving the floor to the Secretary-General
and President Obasanjo, I should like, in my capacity
as Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Spain, to make some general comments on the item
under discussion.

We all join in appreciating the tremendous efforts
that President Obasanjo of Nigeria and the African
Union are undertaking to find a solution to the very
grave problem of Darfur, a satisfactory solution that
would put an end to the suffering experienced by so
many people. The Security Council cannot overlook
the needs of 1.2 million refugees and displaced persons
and tens of thousands of victims, as well as the threat
of a regional crisis.

Last week I was able to visit Sudan. In my trip I
was able to perceive the complexity of the conflict in
Darfur. There are no simplistic lessons or solutions to
be found. I had the impression that the humanitarian
situation is beginning to improve, however slowly,
especially in the refugee camps where international
assistance is being effectively delivered. This, without
any doubt, is a first step and the most urgent one that
needs to be taken.

Nonetheless, the attacks on the civilian
population, although somewhat lessened, do not appear
to have stopped entirely. For this reason, it is essential
that the cease-fire agreement signed by the parties in
April in N'djamena be respected. The Security Council
notes that the Government of Sudan needs to disarm
and control the Janjaweed militias and put an end to
the attacks on the civilian population. At the same
time, it must insist that rebel groups, the Sudan
Liberation Army and the Justice and Equality
Movement, fulfil their obligations under the cease-fire
and cantonment arrangements.

It is in this area that the work being done by the
African Union observer mission is extremely
commendable. It will help to find a peaceful solution to
the crisis. Their commitment is helping to save lives in
Darfur and demonstrates Africa's will to manage and
resolve its own conflicts. The Council has recognized
this fundamental role and has supported the expansion
of this mission. The international community is ready
to provide logistical and financial support for the
African Union's efforts in this regard.

At the same time, the African Union is
sponsoring the Abuja peace negotiations, which have
been given fresh political impetus by President
Obasanjo. However, this process, which is crucial to
make any solution last, has its ups and downs. The
rebel groups and, of course, also, the Government of
Sudan, must understand that the international
community expects them to negotiate in good faith and
in a reasonable spirit that will enable them to reach an
agreement that can be implemented as early as
possible.

We must also not forget that in the south of Sudan
there is another conflict that has been going on for
more than 20 years and has caused indescribable
suffering. Unfortunately, the last phase of this process
has been negatively affected by the events in Darfur.
We must be watchful to ensure that the Naivasha
negotiations can be concluded successfully. This will
also have very positive effects on Darfur.

For all these reasons, the Council will continue to
give Sudan all the necessary attention. It will continue
without any doubt to be a question on our agenda. I
hope that its future work will benefit from what
President Obasanjo will be good enough to tell us
today and from the work that he will continue to do in
the future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.

