Mr. Simonovic' (Croatia): I welcome the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Judge Agius, as well as Prosecutor
Brammertz, and thank them for their comprehensive
briefings today, as well as for their respective reports.

Let me start by reiterating Croatia's full support for
the mission and work of the Mechanism. Croatia remains
a strong supporter of international criminal justice.
Croatia has done its part in ensuring accountability.
Many trials have been completed to date, and some are
still ongoing as our institutions continue to investigate
and prosecute war crimes committed during the war in
the 1990s.

When it comes to the Mechanism's ongoing work,
2020 will be a significant year with the completion
of important cases, in particular the appeal of the
case Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladic and the Prosecutor
V. Jovica Stanisic' and Franko Simatovic' trial case.
They are of the utmost importance to the legacy of
accountability for aggression against Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the last decade of the
twentieth century, especially because the crucial case
against former Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic
unfortunately did not end up with a verdict.

More than a quarter century after the establishment
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), thousands of victims and their loved ones are
still waiting for justice to be served. We expect all
cases to be completed within the planned deadlines and
without any delays, and we encourage the Mechanism
to maximize its efforts to that end. Also, we hope that
the contempt of court proceedings in the Prosecutor
v. Petar Jojie and Vjerica Radeta case will soon be
resolved, and we once again underline the need for
Serbia to fully cooperate with the Mechanism.

Croatia is committed to continuing constructive
and effective judicial cooperation with other States
of the region in war crimes matters. We recognize
the increasingly urgent need to end impunity and
overcome the legacy of the past, including through
justice for all victims of past atrocities. As time passes,
it becomes more and more difficult to hold perpetrators
accountable for their crimes. But as we have said many
times, meaningful cooperation is not a one-way process,
and we expect other States to show their willingness to
actively engage and contribute to improving relations.

Croatia is continuously undertaking activities
towards Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, with the
aim of improving cooperation in the prosecution of war
crimes. In the past two years, the Ministers of Justice of
Croatia and Serbia have met several times and two joint
commissions have been established. One would work
on a bilateral agreement on cooperation regarding the
prosecution of war crimes and the other on the exchange
of lists of persons accused or convicted of war crimes.
The commissions have worked but have not made any
recommendations yet. We express our hope that the
commissions will resume their work shortly. Also,
with respect to Bosnia and Herzegovina, we expect
improvement in the transfer of cases from Bosnia and
Herzegovina to Croatia.

Last month, Croatia marked another mournful
anniversary of the tragedies and atrocities of war in
the autumn of 1991. Besieged for three long months
and levelled to the ground, the city of Vukovar and its
inhabitants suffered a fate unseen in Europe from the
Second World War up until that point. White crosses
at the Vukovar cemetery stand today as a reminder of
the massacre and of the victims exhumed from mass
graves in and around the city. A few days before the
anniversary, a memorial plaque commemorating
the commander of the Yugoslav People's Army and
the Serbian paramilitary forces during the attack on
Vukovar was unveiled in a Serbian army complex in the
city of Novi Sad. That is only one recent example that
shows that Serbia is still, unfortunately, not willing to
face its own past and its role in the war that it initiated
in the 1990s. Such decisions and moves by Serbian
authorities go against Croatia's efforts to build good-
neighbourly relations, and we call on Serbia to stop
glorifying war crimes. Croatia stands ready to cooperate
with its neighbours and assist them in overcoming the
remaining obstacles to facing the past as a precondition
for lasting peace and meaningful reconciliation.

The unresolved fate of missing persons is highly
ranked on Croatia's list of priorities. The suffering of
the families of missing persons demands that ofus, and
we are pursuing all our efforts to trace and identify
the fate of our missing nationals or their remains. To
that end, Croatia is also holding dialogue with other
States and international organizations in the hope
of accomplishing results, and every year headway is
made. Unfortunately, Serbia still shows no readiness to
open all its archival records. Political will should be
shown in Belgrade, and we call on the Serbian political
leaders to focus on those efforts rather than on divisive
political rhetoric, which only perpetuates antagonism.
Cooperation in addressing the issue of missing persons
remains a key element of our dialogue and a part of the
criteria that Serbia needs to meet under its European
Union accession negotiations. We are ready to continue
dialogue that will produce tangible progress on
those issues.

Croatia remains firmly committed to the
development of good relations and cooperation with
neighbouring States, and we strongly support their
aspirations towards European Union membership
based on the full compliance with clear and well-
known criteria, especially with regard to the rule of
law, including full cooperation with the Mechanism.
Our commitment to the European path of the whole
Western Balkans region is visible in the priorities ofthe
forthcoming Croatian presidency of the Council of the
European Union during the first half of 2020. We will
strive to keep the enlargement of the European Union
as one of the key topics on our European agenda.

In conclusion, Croatia stands ready to continue to
extend our full support to the Mechanism, expecting it
to complete its mandate in time.

The meeting rose at 11.55 am.
