Mr. Rivas (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia fully endorses the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Peru on behalf of the Rio
Group. We thank the Ambassador of Spain,
Mr. Inocencio Arias, chairman of the Security
Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), for his
assessment of the work accomplished during the eighth
work programme of the Committee and for submitting
the ninth work programme, for the three-month period
extending from October to December 2003.

We welcome the progress the Committee has
made since it was created in implementing worldwide
resolution 1373 (2001), on the basis of the principles of
cooperation, transparency and equal treatment, and in
achieving its goal of maintaining and strengthening the
international community's consensus on the importance
of combating terrorism. We support the Chairman's
initiative of identifying difficulties in the Committee's
structure and functioning.

The question the Council is considering today is
fundamental for a country such as Colombia, which is
defending democracy and the human rights of its
citizens from the attacks committed daily by three
terrorist organizations. The current Government has
found approximately 30,000 persons belonging to
armed organizations that can be considered terrorists
due to the nature of their acts. In the approximately 1.2
million square kilometres of our national territory, of
which almost 400,000 square kilometres are jungle, the
lack of a State presence in many areas has been taken
advantage of by terrorists. Of 1,100 municipalities, 170
had no police presence.
In the first year of the mandate of President
Uribe, the policy of democratic security that has been
applied to uproot terrorism in the country yielded its
first results. A police presence has been extended to
151 municipalities, the number of homicides has
dropped 22 per cent, the number of massacres has
fallen 35 per cent, kidnappings have been reduced 34.7
per cent, illegal detentions on the highways have
dropped 49 per cent and the number of internally
displaced people has been reduced by 66 per cent. The
reduction of all these types of crime is significant, but
their levels continue to be alarming. No country can
accept such circumstances.

The progress made in protecting our fellow
citizens encourages us to continue our efforts to
vanquish terrorism, in rigorous conformity with the
law. We require more extensive powers that remain in
keeping with the rule of law. Currently, the
Government is preparing an amendment to the
Constitution to allow the public forces of order, in
cases of terrorism, to deploy specialized personnel to
carry out arrests, searches and communications
interceptions. That amendment will include democratic
safeguards so that an independent public prosecutor
can subsequently take immediate action and the office
responsible for oversight of the civil service can be
informed, as well as the Congress, which possesses
responsibility for political control. The powers
proposed in this amendment are considerably weaker
than laws in effect in democracies that do not have our
degree of terrorist risk.

A few weeks ago, before the General Assembly,
President Uribe said that,

"In Colombia's current situation, terrorism,
illicit drugs, violence and insecurity are really the
same thing. We plead for a commitment from the
world so that we are able to completely defeat
drugs. We implore the world not to harbour our
terrorists, to help us confiscate their goods and
only to open their doors to help peace processes."
(A/58/PV1 7)

That is why my delegation requested to speak at
this debate, in order to insist on the need for the CTC
and the Security Council to take up fundamental issues
that we had already brought forward in the debate last
23 July.

First, in spite of the fact that in resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1456 (2003) the Security Council expressed
concern at the close links existing among terrorism,
transnational organized crime, the use and illicit
trafficking of drugs, money-laundering and illicit arms
trafficking, it is necessary for the Committee and the
Council to deal with those links more thoroughly. That
is essential if we take into account that to the degree
that the controls imposed by resolution 1373 (2001) on
the financing of acts of terrorism meet with success,
terrorists will increasingly resort to these types of
crime to finance their activities. In Colombia, this has
been occurring for several years now, and today drug
trafficking and money-laundering have become the
principle source of financing for the terrorist groups
operating in the country.

That is why we insist that the nature of terrorist
acts must be defined not just according to the place
where they are committed or by their national or global
reach, but also by the roots of their financing and the
money used to finance them. It has been demonstrated
that the international financial networks used by
terrorism are similar to those used in the illegal
trafficking of drugs and arms. It is urgent that the
frontal war against terrorism include the campaign
against its related crimes on the basis of the principle
of shared responsibility.

Secondly, terrorism is a single phenomenon,
regardless of the form it takes. Any terrorism, domestic
or international, must be rejected and fought with the
same determination. It cannot be any other way, since it
challenges democratic principles that respect life and
fundamental freedoms of individuals - principles
cherished by our peoples and this Organization.
Moreover, any terrorism can become a threat to
international peace and security.

Finally, we emphasize the need to carry out a
serious study on the feasibility of the CTC and the
Security Council drawing up a general list of world
terrorist organizations similar to the one maintained by
the 1267 Committee on Al Qaeda and the Taliban. We
do not think that a prior formal definition of terrorism,
which has not been possible to achieve in the past 30
years, is necessary in order to begin to draw up that
list. Anyone who perpetrates, in the words of General
Assembly resolution 49/60, "Criminal acts intended or
calculated to provoke a state of terror in the general
public", is a terrorist, regardless of motivation. We
must, once and for all, rid ourselves of the political
content of the topic of terrorism in order to be able to
fight it in all parts of the world for what it is - a
serious crime against the life and liberty of peoples and
a serious threat to civilization.

While reiterating our support for the work carried
out by the Security Council and the CTC in the fight
against that universal scourge, I wish to inform the
Council that Colombia is taking steps domestically to
ratify counter-terrorism conventions to which it is not
yet a party. We therefore reiterate our appeal for
cooperation on the part of the international community
with regard to legal and police activities, as called for
in resolution 1373 (2001), to successfully fight
terrorism.

In that area of international cooperation, we must
emphasize that the United Nations has the capability,
the experience and the moral authority to help all
countries and regions throughout the world beset by the
scourge of terrorism.

