The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Gabon.

Gabon would like to reaffirm its commitment to
the international nuclear non-proliferation regime, of
which the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons is the cornerstone. On 22 March, my
delegation expressed deep concern (see S/PV.6502)
about the cases of sanctions violations by Iran, in
particular of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007). We
called on the Iranian authorities to respect the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, to comply with the
requirements of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, and to return to the negotiating table with the
E3+3. We also noted that re-establishing confidence
between Iran and the rest of the international
community in that regard was at stake.

Today, like my colleagues, I would like to thank
Ambassador Nestor Osorio for presenting his report.
My delegation welcomes the in-depth consideration by
the Committee's members of the recommendations
contained in the final report of the Panel of Experts
submitted to the Committee and to the Council on
7 May, in accordance with paragraph 29 of resolution
1929 (2010).

Likewise, we welcome the work done by the
Panel of Experts, whose preparation of notices should
facilitate the implementation of some of their
recommendations on nuclear activities, ballistic
missiles, conventional weapons and their means of
delivery, export controls, maritime and other transport,
and financial and trade restrictions.

In that regard, my delegation urges the
Committee to consider all possible steps to enable the
full implementation of the recommendations, and to
continue the consultations undertaken on its
programme of work during country visits in order to
gather the necessary information for it to carry out its
mandate.

In conclusion, Gabon continues to be concerned
about the violations and ongoing uranium-enrichment
activities by Iran. We continue to call on the Iranian
authorities to comply with the requirements of the
International Atomic Energy Agency and to return to
the negotiating table with the E3+3.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Ambassador Osorio.
12

