Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): Allow
me first to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Tom Koenigs, for his statement,
which clearly highlighted the progress made as well as
the challenges that remain to be met.

In supplementing the statement that will be made
soon by the Permanent Representative of Portugal on
behalf of the European Union, I would like to offer the
following comments.
Both the most recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2007/555) and the briefing of Mr. Koenigs
heavily underscored the need for a comprehensive
approach as well as the need for further coordination.
Belgium fully shares that view and in particular
emphasizes the importance of proper coordination
between the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) and Operation Enduring Freedom.

The considerable increase in opium production is
very worrisome, in particular given the ties between
drug traders and the rebels, as well as the negative
effects of drug money on State institutions which are
still fragile. The Afghan Government must shoulder its
responsibilities and take the necessary measures. That
is also necessary in the framework of the struggle
against corruption and the advancement of good
government.

Afghan capacity in the area of security and the
rule of law must be strengthened to enable the
authorities to take over. In that context, Belgium
welcomes the launching of the European Union Police
Mission. As proposed by the Secretary-General, my
delegation encourages the Afghan authorities to
consider the simultaneous organization of legislative
and presidential elections in the near future.

In the human rights field, Belgium deeply regrets
that 15 people condemned to death were executed last
week and requests that the Afghan authorities reinstate
as quickly as possible the moratorium on executions.
Belgium also regrets that the National Acton Plan for
the Women of Afghanistan has not yet been
implemented.

My country condemns most strongly all attacks
on civilians and the Afghan and international security
forces. The recent suicide attacks in Kabul demonstrate
once more the cost in human lives that the non-respect
for the fundamental values of a society by those who
oppose the process under way, can cause. That should
convince the Afghan authorities and the international
community to pursue the efforts begun with respect to
the rule of law, as the sole guarantee to ensure that the
Afghan population retains confidence in its institutions
or, more simply, in its future.

At the regional level, neighbouring countries can
make a significant contribution to peace and security in
Afghanistan. In that context, my delegation is pleased
to note the recent international initiatives designed to
strengthen cooperation between Afghanistan and its
neighbours. The joint declaration that concluded the
Afghanistan-Pakistan peace jirga organized in Kabul in

August 2007 is an important step towards
strengthening relations between Afghanistan and
Pakistan.

My delegation welcomes the adoption on
19 September of resolution 1776 (2007) extending by
one year the mandate of the International Security
Assistance Force. Since 2002, Belgium has been
contributing to ISAF. Since October, the Belgium
contingent has been reinforced and now numbers 367
men and women deployed in Kabul but who are also
contributing to the provincial reconstruction team in
Kunduz. In taking over command of the international
airport in Kabul, Belgium will be devoting particular
attention to the training of Afghan airport personnel so
that they can eventually take over the management of
the airport.

Finally, as Chairman of the 1267 Committee,
Belgium continues to believe that the sanctions regime
imposed on the Taliban, Al-Qaida and their associates
is a powerful instrument in combating terrorism in a
general manner and in working for the stabilization of
Afghanistan, in particular.

