Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix for this morning's update on Lebanon.
The recent developments along the Blue Line are indeed
worrisome, as they threaten Israel's territorial integrity
and Lebanon's stability.

We are deeply concerned about the discovery of
tunnels on Israeli territory. We note that a total of four
tunnels have been identified and that those tunnels
were built from the Lebanese side. Tunnels crossing the
Israeli-Lebanese border are a clear violation resolution
1701 (2006). It is important that further technical
investigations now be conducted independently and
in accordance with the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). Lebanese
authorities must ensure urgent follow-up actions in
accordance with their responsibilities pursuant to
resolution 1701 (2006). UNIFIL's monitoring and
reports of violations of the resolution are crucial, and
the Security Council should be kept informed. We
condemn all violations of resolution 1701 (2006) by
both sides, including the almost-daily Israeli violations
of Lebanese airspace.

We call on all parties now to show restraint and
de-escalate tensions. UNIFIL plays an important role
in sustaining peace in Lebanon and in the region as a
whole. We welcome that UNIFIL has now stepped up
its efforts to preserve stability, and we emphasize the
importance ofUNIFIL's close cooperation with both the
Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israeli Defense Forces.
It is crucial to avoid any misunderstandings that could
lead to escalation. We therefore encourage the parties
to make full use of UNIFIL liaison, coordination
and tripartite mechanisms in the de-escalation of
any tensions.

The paramilitary capabilities of Hizbullah remain
a clear risk to the stability of Lebanon and elsewhere.
The provisions in resolution 1559 (2004) must be
swiftly implemented, including the provision on the
disarmament ofall Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias.

We welcome positive signs that a Lebanese
Government is to be formed soon. That is needed for
Lebanon to be able to take steps towards a politically
and economically stable and secure future. We welcome
President Aoun's renewed commitment to developing
a national defence strategy once a Government is
formed. We encourage political leaders to support the
President in that endeavour. Building the capacity of
the Lebanese Armed Forces is important and requires
an increased focus. We strongly encourage continued
efforts in this regard, including in the maritime sector,
to enable an incremental and controlled reduction of
UNIFIL's naval component in future. We also encourage
increased efforts to ensure that the LAF model regiment
in southern Lebanon becomes operational as soon as
possible.

There is full unity in support of Lebanon's
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence, as demonstrated by the high-level held
conferences in Rome, Paris and Brussels earlier this
year. The international community must now continue
to assist Lebanon in delivering on its commitments
and build on the results of those conferences. Lebanon
must stay on its path towards stability and peace. This
is important not only for Lebanon, but for the entire
region.

