Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): I would like to thank
the Polish presidency for convening today's debate on
recommitting us to the central responsibility of all
peacekeeping missions, the protection of civilians.
I also thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres,
Mr. Yves Daccord, Director-General ofthe International
Committee of the Red Cross, and Ms. Hanaa Edwar for
their briefings.

The protection of civilians is best served, first,
by preventing conflicts and their escalation; secondly,
by resolving conflicts through political means
when prevention has failed; thirdly, by ensuring
accountability for those responsible for crimes against
civilians during armed conflicts; and fourthly and
most importantly, by putting people and the protection
of civilians at the centre of United Nations political
and peacekeeping action. Today's debate underscores
the pivotal importance of the protection of civilians,
especially as civilians continue to account for an ever-
growing percentage of victims in armed conflicts.
Rwanda strongly condemns all attacks on civilians
caught in situations of armed conflict. Civilians are
never casualties of war; they are always victims of war
crimes, either because they are deliberately targeted
or because they are used as human shields by parties
to conflicts.

Rwanda underscores that the protection of civilians
should be prioritized in all United Nations peace
operations in order to effectively prevent and respond
to violations of international law in situations of armed
conflict. In that regard, I would like to highlight four
points on how the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians address the political commitment to
protecting civilians and improving the effectiveness
of United Nations peacekeeping operations, given the
circumstances that are defining today's challenges.
First, the Kigali Principles are a set ofbest practices
aimed at strengthening the protection of civilians in
United Nations-mandated peacekeeping missions. They
are based on lessons learned and represent a concrete
blueprint aimed at shaping the practices of peacekeepers
in accordance with their mandate, including in volatile
situations. Over the past decade, the international
community has vastly increased the demands it places
on peacekeepers and has often asked them to do more
with much less in ever more challenging environments.
A 2014 report of the United Nations Office of Internal
Oversight Services (A/68/787) found that in 507
attacks reported on civilians between 2010 and 2013,
peacekeepers almost never used force to protect those
under attack. The report made three recommendations:
first, enhancing operational control over contingents;
secondly, improving the clarity of peacekeepers' tasks
at the tactical level; and thirdly, improving the working-
1evel relationship between peacekeeping operations and
humanitarian entities. The Kigali Principles directly
address the second recommendation, and I would like
to take this opportunity to commend the peacekeepers
who are effectively implementing them on the ground.

Secondly, I want to emphasize that the Kigali
Principles do not supersede the Charter of the United
Nations, nor do they contradict the principles of United
Nations peacekeeping or go beyond a mission's mandate.
After all, all United Nations peacekeeping missions'
mandates are decided by the Security Council.

Thirdly, the Kigali Principles do not exclude the
use of force. As stated in paragraph 3 of the Kigali
Principles, we agree

"to be prepared to use force to protect civilians,
as necessary and consistent with the mandate.
Such action encompasses making a show of force
as a deterrent; interpositioning our forces between
armed actors and civilians; and taking direct
military action against armed actors with clear
hostile intent to harm civilians."

Fourthly, the Kigali Principles were born ofa desire
to improve our understanding and implementation
of the protection of civilians. We have sometimes
been the target of criticism and questions about
their origin. I would like to say that the origin of the
Kigali Principles is very clear. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Poland visited Rwanda last
month. The origin of the Principles dates back to 1994,
when we Rwandans were left to fend for ourselves.

We learned from our tragic history and have since
worked relentlessly to make our humble contribution
to the effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
with respect to fulfilling the noble and sacred duty
of deterring violence against civilians and protecting
civilians in situations of armed conflict.

Lastly, enhancing the protection of civilians in
armed conflict requires a paradigm shift from conflict
management to prevention. States bear, and will
continue to bear, the primary responsibility to protect
civilians. However, when warring parties specifically
target civilians and that protection is not provided, it
is our collective responsibility as States Members of
the United Nations, particularly the Security Council,
to ensure that the protection of non-armed civilians,
internally displaced persons, United Nations agencies
and humanitarian actors who live and work in complex
and deadly environments remains a priority task for
United Nations peacekeepers when present on the
ground. That is our collective responsibility as United
Nations Members and will continue to inform Rwanda's
commitment to peacekeeping, both in the African
Union and at the United Nations.

