Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the European
Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia
and Slovenia - and the associated countries Cyprus,
Malta and Turkey, as well as Iceland, align themselves
with this statement.

 
The European Union welcomes your initiative, Mr.
President, to focus discussions of the Council during the
month of January on Africa, and today on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We also warmly welcome the
presence at this important meeting of the heads of State of
Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mozambique, Rwanda, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe. I
would also like to acknowledge the participation in this
meeting of ministers from the Governments of Belgium,
Burundi, Canada, France, Mali, Namibia and the United
Kingdom, as well as the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity.

This meeting of the Council clearly demonstrates that
there is the political will in the region and the international
community to advance peace and security in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the wider Great Lakes region.
But peace and security in the region are only achievable if
firmly rooted. The European Union believes that the Lusaka
Agreement is the most viable basis for a resolution of the
conflict.

The European Union regrets that adherence to the
provisions of the Lusaka Agreement by the parties has been
far from complete, and that implementation is way behind
schedule. Without a full and sustained commitment to the
Ceasefire Agreement, the international donor community, of
which the European Union represents a major part, will find
its ability to contribute to the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo limited.

The presence of the leaders of the States signatories to
the Lusaka Agreement in New York this week, however,
presents a critical opportunity for the parties to set this right
and make clear their commitment to the Agreement and its
implementation. We hope that one of the results of this
week's discussions will be a clear and credible declaration
to this end. Such a declaration would offer a firm basis for
further deployment of the United Nations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

There are a number of other key targets for this week.
The European Union believes that progress must be made
to establish the essential institutions and channels that will
form the framework for the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement. In this connection, the European Union
considers that the Joint Military Commission has a crucial
role to play, and we encourage efforts towards integration
of its work with that of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
European Union also stresses the need to ensure a peaceful
and permanent process of disarmament, demobilization and

...-J "Mu-MMJ A-tuvv

 
reintegration of the militia groups currently operating in
the region. We also hope to see progress this week
towards an outline of how this will be achieved. Finally,
the European Union stands ready to give its support to the
national dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which it considers to be an essential element of
the reconciliation process. Funding by the European
Union is available to assist the political dialogue as soon
as the parties themselves show their firm readiness to
initiate the process. In this context, the European Union
welcomes the appointment of Sir Ketumile Masire as the
facilitator for the national dialogue and stands ready to
help him discharge his mandate. The European Union
stresses the need for the dialogue to begin at an early
date.

These are the objectives which we hope the parties
will work towards this week.

The European Union considers that the United
Nations, and the Security Council in particular, has a
crucial role to play in the peace process. It is the
European Union's intention to provide the support needed
to ensure the success of MONUC in its second-phase
expansion and a subsequent third-phase peacekeeping
presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For
the second phase, we welcome the recommendations of
the Secretary-General on the deployment of 500 military
observers with a United Nations force. In this regard, the
European Union stresses that it is essential to ensure
adequate United Nations military protection.

As is clear from the very highest level of
representation of the countries in the Great Lakes region
here today, a settlement of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo needs to be considered within a
regional framework. That is why the European Union
reaffirms its support for an eventual international
conference on security and cooperation in the Great Lakes
region to address and resolve the underlying causes of
conflict in the region. The European Union encourages
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and all African
countries concerned to begin preparatory work as soon as
the main elements of the Lusaka Agreement have been
implemented and announces its readiness to cooperate
with the parties by providing technical and financial
assistance in this regard.

The European Union remains deeply concerned at
the immense human suffering caused by the conflict to
the civilian population of the region, in particular the
dramatic situation faced by the large number of refugees
 

and internally displaced persons. We emphasize the
importance of access by humanitarian organizations to all
people in need. The European Union reiterates the
importance it attaches to the respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law, particularly regarding the
protection of children and the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of child combatants.

The European Union is fully committed to supporting
initiatives that will bring peace to Africa. It is also actively
engaged in assisting African countries to develop their
economies. However, assistance for the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo can
be made only under the necessary conditions of peace and
security. The European Union therefore appeals to the
leaders gathered here today to take this historic opportunity
to bring peace to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
the wider region and to all its people.

