Mr. Grigoryan (Armenia): At the outset, we
would like to congratulate Peru on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July, and to thank it for its choice ofthe theme oftoday's
open debate. We thank the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Executive
Director of the Counter- Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the invited international
consultant for their briefings.

Terrorism continues to pose significant threat to
international peace and stability. Horrific terrorist acts
have been perpetrated in many parts of the world in
recent years. Undoubtedly, enhanced cooperation at
both the regional and the international levels is crucial
to countering and addressing the multifaceted threats
posed by terrorism and transnational organized crime,
which quite often appear to be closely interlinked.

The Security Council has recognized and expressed
concern over the connection between transnational
organized crime and terrorism in several of its
resolutions, most recently in resolution 2462 (2019),
which Armenia co-sponsored. The nature and scope
of the linkages between terrorism and transnational
organized crime vary by context. The sustained
and comprehensive engagement of all States and
international, regional and subregional organizations
is as critical as ever if we are to better understand the
links that exist between terrorists and transnational
organized crime.

We express our support to the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism in its activity aimed at improving
visibility, advocacy and resource mobilization for
United Nations counter-terrorism efforts.

We are glad to note the enhanced cooperation
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED). CTED conducted its follow-
up visit to the Republic of Armenia in 2018 to assess
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and
subsequent counter-terrorism resolutions. Armenia's
relevant national security and law enforcement
authorities reaffirmed their unequivocal commitment
to contributing to fighting terrorism and its financing
in all its forms and manifestations so as to ensure
further compliance with the counter-terrorism
resolutions of the Security Council and in line with
CTED recommendations.

Armenia has made considerable efforts to strengthen
its anti-money-laundering/counter-financing of
terrorism regime, having conducted a thorough national
risk assessment and introduced its national strategy for
combating money-laundering and terrorism financing.
We have significantly improved our legal framework
on terrorism financing and the freezing of terrorist
assets. Armenia has strengthened operational access
to the relevant tools and databases of INTERPOL
and cooperates in counter-terrorism matters with the
relevant regional and international organizations.

We pursue also cooperation with Anti-Terrorism
Center of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS), relevant structural units of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Council of Europe, and advance collaboration in the
bilateral format. We actively participate in the regularly
conducted joint operations of CSTO member States to
counter drugs and arms smuggling and information
and communications technology-related threats and to
combat threats arising from foreign terrorist fighters,
which are closely interlinked with terrorist and
organized criminal groups.

The relocation of foreign terrorist fighters from the
Middle East, particularly to the conflict areas in the
OSCE and CIS regions, poses a serious threat to regional
security. Foreign terrorist fighters returning from
conflict zones in the Middle East import their violent
practices and disseminate virulent extremist ideas,
thereby contributing to the radicalization of societies.
Da'esh-style executions and other atrocities are already
not limited just to the Middle East. Unfortunately, the
events of April 2016 in our region proved the validity
of our concerns.

Armenia reiterates its full commitment to working
with the relevant United Nations bodies and Member
States to redouble collective efforts to fight international
terrorism and its links with organized crime, in
whichever form it takes and wherever it happens.

