Mr. Lelong (Haiti) (interpretation from French):
Your skill and experience, Mr. President, have ensured
the effective and efficient work of the Security Council
during this month of July, for which we congratulate you.
We also congratulate Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, who so
remarkably conducted the work of the Council in the
month of June.

The continuous efforts of the international
community to support the determination of the Haitian
people to defend its democratic process have contributed
to the restoration of constitutional government, after the
coup d'e'tat of 30 September 1991. Since that time, it
continues to support our people in its quest for economic
well-being and the consolidation of democratic victories.

Despite difficulties of all kinds that have been
encountered, appreciable results have been achieved. The
Haitian people fully enjoys its civil and political rights.
Fundamental freedoms are respected. The reform of our
institutions is off to a good start. The Haitian National
Police is in operation and is recording constant progress,
although at a slower pace than desired. The judicial and
the criminal systems are slowly improving. The primacy
of law over force is gradually establishing itself as
custom. Archaic structures and attitudes are being entirely
reversed. The rule of law and the establishment of
development focused on the human being are being
institutionalized. We are witnessing the development of a
national policy that attempts to respond to the needs of
the majority. Long-term projects have begun to replace
emergency programmes and humanitarian activities.

Nevertheless, serious problems persist. The
precariousness of the economic situation, together with
the lack of relief agencies, places additional dangerous
pressures on the foundations of our still young core
institutions. Social tensions are sharply exacerbated by the

 

perennial postponement of popular claims whose legitimacy
and urgency cannot be challenged. The proliferation of
criminal acts and organized crime, previously unknown in
Haiti, creates a pernicious climate of insecurity and alarm
among the population. This wave of criminal violence,
added to the demonstrations of discontent caused by the
difficult economic situation, puts the Haitian National
Police, a fledgling and underequipped force, to a stiff test.
In that connection, we must underscore the new and
growing challenge posed by the deportation by certain
Governments of Haitians guilty of criminal acts without any
prior consultation with Haitian authorities on follow-up or
custody of these dangerous elements, who once in Haiti
engage in all kinds of illicit and criminal activities. We
have also witnessed the emergence of drug trafficking, car
theft, armed robbery, abductions and weapons trafficking.

These alarming elements have been underscored by the
Secretary-General in his report of 19 July on the situation
in Haiti, for which we thank him. In a still troubled climate,
he recognizes justifiably that despite definite progress the
Haitian National Police is not capable of meeting alone all
the challenges that face it. The Government is making
intensive efforts in concert with the international
community to complete as quickly as possible the training
of this institution that was set up just two years ago.
However, certain important tasks have yet to be carried out
in order for it to achieve the proper degree of
professionalism and efficiency. These tasks, by their nature,
will continue to require the assistance of United Nations
personnel.

We are convinced that the United Nations Transition
Mission in Haiti (UNTMIH) - which the Secretary-
General recommends be established to relieve the United
Nations Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH), whose
mandate expires tomorrow - will be able to help the
Haitian authorities complete their work and prepare a
smooth transition to another type of commitment to Haiti
by the international community. A sustained commitment,
particularly by international financial institutions, is
necessary to promote a successful programme of integrated
and sustainable development that will guarantee the stability
of the country.

The draft resolution before the Council for
consideration responds to these concerns, and we invite the
members of the Council to adopt it unanimously.

The delegation of Haiti would like to thank the
members of the Caucus of the Non-Aligned Movement and
of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States that
have supported our request. Our gratitude also goes out to
the group of Friends of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
and particularly to the United States of America and
Canada for their decisive political and financial support
for the Mission. I would also like to underscore the
understanding of China and the Russian Federation. Our
sincere thanks also go out to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Enrique ter Horst, the
commanders of the military and civilian elements and the
men and women who accompany the Haitian people
along the road to the social and economic reconstruction
of their country.

