Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, and the Force
Commanders for their comprehensive briefings. Allow
me express our deep appreciation to them for their
efforts and sacrifice in the service of international
peace and security and stability in conflict areas.

Over the past two years, the United Nations has
witnessed the development of the peace and security
framework, a process that has been based principally on
the review of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
In the face of the varying security situations that
vastly complicate conflict, we are duty-bound to
reform peacekeeping operations and to provide the
capabilities necessary to confront the new challenges.
Hence, peacekeeping operations should be considered
in the framework of a response continuum to conflict
situations so as to insure that the mandates of these
operations include integrated political, programmatic
and operational approaches, which can be summarized
in the following six points.

First, no peacekeeping operation should be
unrealistically burdened with objectives that go beyond
the mission's capabilities or that do not take into account
political and security realities on the ground.

Secondly, exit strategies for operations are
needed. They should have clear criteria and a set time
frame, which should be reviewed periodically so that
the Council can adapt and develop mandates based
on field requirements, as opposed to engaging in a
predetermined, cost-cutting exercise.

Thirdly, strategic partnerships have to be built with
the host countries. Such partnerships should be based
on national ownership, conciliation and negotiation,
thus contributing to the success of peacekeeping
operations and avoiding hindrances that may affect
their performance.

Fourthly, we must concentrate on building national
security capabilities so as to enable the State concerned
to take up its civilian-protection responsibilities and
avoid State dependency on the peacekeeping operation,
which would only complicate and make more difficult
the exit in future.

Fifthly, we must create an integrated United Nations
system for multidimensional assessment that takes into
account the effectiveness of the United Nations peace
and security architecture as a whole, in a way that
ensures the integrity of roles undertaken by the various
United Nations and international organs, programmes
and agencies, and all according to a holistic view to
achieve the sustainability of peace and address the root
causes of conflicts.

Sixthly, the partnership between the Secretariat
and troop-contributing countries should be enhanced
in implementing the zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping operations
within the general framework adopted by the General
Assembly in resolution 71/278 of 10 March.

Let me take this opportunity to stress Egypt's full
support for peacekeeping operations. That is reflected
in our desire to participate in the most difficult United
Nations peacekeeping operations, particularly the
those in the Central African Republic, Mali and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We provide the
highest possible level of pre-deployment training, as
well as the appropriate equipment required to implement
the mandate.

