Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Allow me to express
my delegation's deep appreciation to you, Sir, for
having convened this open debate, which provides us
an opportunity to share views on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Not so long ago, my delegation delivered a
statement in this Chamber in which we highlighted
the significance of the transformative events ushered
in by the wave of revolution in the Middle East
inspired by a yearning for freedom and change. The
international community has not been oblivious to the
changing dynamics in the Middle East. While we as
the community of nations respect the aspirations and
the will of the people of that region to live in peace and
dignity, we have a role to play in helping them achieve
lasting peace and a sustainable livelihood.

As the people of the Middle East continue to strive
for a better future, we need to play our part in helping
them reconstruct, develop and build strong, inclusive
and sustainable institutions of governance. Because we
wish for the citizens of the Middle East what we wish
for ourselves, we stand ready and willing to contribute
in whatever way we can in shaping the Middle East
landscape in order to improve the quality of life of the
people.

It is for this reason that, under volunteer platforms
such as CAPMATCH, my country pledges to support
the people of the Middle East through tried and studied
lessons of electoral conduct, democratic governance,
public administration and the strengthening of
enforcement agencies.

There is no doubt that the Middle East of yesteryear
is completely different from the Middle East we know
now. It is a Middle East that is undergoing rapid
socioeconomic and cultural transitions as part of
globalization. Every day a new story unfolds, a new
chapter in history is written and a new beginning dawns
on the horizon.

Turning to the situation in Syria, my delegation
continues to be concerned about the continued
perpetration of violence and the increasingly
deteriorating humanitarian situation in that country,
which now has the potential to turn into a humanitarian
catastrophe. The people of Syria continue to endure
incalculable hardship and violent repression at the
hands of the Al-Assad regime. Millions remain
internally displaced, while others have sought refuge in
neighbouring countries.

In that regard, my delegation will continue to
condemn such attacks perpetrated against innocent
civilians, in particular women and children. We call
on the international community to continue its efforts
to exert pressure in order to bring the perpetrators of
those heinous crimes to justice.

We specifically call on the Security Council, as the
custodian of international peace and security, to live
up to its obligations, enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. How long will we remain bystanders
while fellow human beings continue to be subjected to
indignity and to be massacred by the very people who
purport to have their interests at heart?

On the question of Palestine, Botswana has stated
and continues to consistently express its position in
various forums, including this body, that there is merit
in the two-State solution. We believe in the coexistence
of Israel and Palestine living side by side as two
sovereign States that share not only a border but also
a common desire for peace, security and prosperity.
It is also imperative that all relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions be respected by both
parties.

In that regard, we encourage all parties involved
in the peace process to sit at the negotiating table and
to embrace dialogue. We specifically urge the State of
Israel to cease the construction of settlements in the
Gaza Strip and to enable the negotiation process to
proceed, free of intimidation and pressure.

In conclusion, Botswana reiterates the point that a
stable and peaceful Middle East that is free of violence,
with nations living side by side in harmony, is not only
good for the peace and security of the region, which has
enormous potential. It will also provide an environment
conducive to a prosperous and peaceful Middle East.

