Mr. Teesalu (Estonia): We very much welcome
today's discussion and thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing the open debate.

Estonia, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, fully
endorses the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Switzerland. I would also like to make
a few additional remarks in my national capacity.

Estonia cannot yet speak first-hand about the
everyday work of the Security Council since we have
never served as one of its members, but we truly believe
in the positive impact of open and inclusive processes.
Estonia has therefore put forward its candidacy in 2005
for a non-permanent seat in the Security Council for
the period 2020-2021. The elections for that period will
be held tomorrow and we truly hope that the States
Members of the United Nations deem us worthy of
the position.

As a member of the ACT group, Estonia advocates
greater accountability, coherence and transparency in
the Council's activities through increased inclusiveness
and targeted action. We believe that a more open and
inclusive process will have a positive impact on the
decision-making of the Council. Through transparency,
we will achieve better results in maintaining and
sustaining peace.

The note by the President (S/2017/507, annex),
known as note 507, is a valuable document that compiles
many of the Council's current working methods and
helps us to continue the discussions on how to further
enhance the decision-making process of the Council.
However, ifwe are to make a real difference in bringing
more efficiency to the Council's work, we need to
concentrate on the implementation of note 507 and
other presidential notes.

The effectiveness of the Council's decisions is
maximized if all members, including the non-permanent
members, are fully involved from the beginning in a
coordinated and inclusive manner. We are fully aware
that there are discussions and situations that need to
be dealt with behind closed doors, but we encourage
Council members to hold open meetings whenever
possible and seek interaction with the wider membership
and other organs, as well as civil society. It is important
that the decisions made in the Council be explained to
the wider membership in a transparent manner.

The Security Council's working methods should
support and strengthen its capacity to prevent conflict.
That includes strengthening the Council's situational
awareness, and in that regard the Secretariat can
play an important role in providing information
and highlighting the developments that could lead
to instability. Therefore, it is necessary to continue
discussions on the issues with countries, as well as with
regional organizations, as stated in Article 31 of the
Charter of the United Nations.

As a member of the ACT Group, Estonia fully
subscribes to its code of conduct regarding Security
Council action against genocide, crimes against
humanity or war crimes, which calls upon the permanent
members of the Security Council to voluntarily and
collectively commit to not using their right to veto to
block Council action aimed at preventing or ending
situations involving mass atrocity crimes.

In conclusion, Estonia commends the work of
Kuwait in chairing the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. It
is in our interest that working methods reinforce our
efforts to fulfil the obligation ofthe Security Council to
maintain international peace and security. Estonia will
be supporting calls in the future for greater empathy,
equality and efficiency in the working methods of
the Council.

