The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as Secretary of State of the United States of
America.

The United States welcomes this ministerial session of
the Council and the opportunity it affords to recognize and
support a new quality in Africa's relations with the world.

In many nations, difficult reforms are producing
economic growth and progress towards democracy.
Although enormous problems remain, we must not let them
blind us to the new African leaders who are quietly
emerging with intense determination to create new African
realities; to replace autocracy and internal strife with
democracy, stability and the rule of law; to battle poverty,
corruption and despair instead of domestic rivals or hostile
neighbours; to become engines of growth rather than
outposts of isolation; and to stand before the international
community not as supplicants, but as true equals.

Ours is a supporting role. We must listen carefully to
what African leaders and African citizens have to say about
the challenges they face and the solutions they favour. We
must be clear about what our own interests are, and about
what we are prepared to do to help Africans to guide
change in directions that create new opportunities for their
people.

We are requesting that the Secretary-General report on
how we can better identify sources of conflict, prevent or
resolve them, and help Africans lay the groundwork for
peace and prosperity. And we take this opportunity to urge
support for the Secretary-General' s reform proposals, which
provide an important opportunity for the United Nations
to use better its resources to address security,
humanitarian and development needs in Africa.

Our starting point is peace and security, the
Council's traditional responsibility, but we should take
this opportunity to look at the broad picture of our
interactions with Africa.
A decade ago, Africa was the scene of multiple
conflicts fueled, in large measure, by cold-war rivalries
and, in southern Africa, by the Vicious and destabilizing
effects of apartheid.

Today the greatest threats to peace are posed by civil
strife caused by ethnic tensions or by straightforward
competition for resources and power. These threats are
aggravated by the lack, in some societies, of strong and
representative institutions of government and by economic
prospects so poor that hope is starved and desperation fed.

In this environment, a security strategy must include
political, economic and humanitarian components. But to
implement these components, a climate of relative safety
must be established and maintained. The United Nations
is central to meeting those challenges through its
peacekeeping operations, good-offices missions, and
emergency relief programmes.

Throughout Africa, the United States supports the
role of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in
preventing and responding to crises, and we are assisting
its plan to build a Conflict Management Centre and
improve its ability to react quickly to emergencies. We
urge the Secretary-General to strengthen the ties between
the United Nations, the OAU and Africa's regional
security organizations in recognition of the work they are
doing.

In Liberia, we congratulate the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) for its
success in helping to end the civil war and monitoring
democratic elections.

We also commend the efforts of the ECOWAS C-5
group of Ministers to bring peace to Sierra Leone, and we
are strong supporters of the peace process there. In
Angola, as one of three observer States to the Lusaka
Protocol, we endorse strongly the efforts of the United
Nations, supported by the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), to ensure full implementation. We

 

will use the powers of this Council to penalize any party
that fails to meet its obligations.

The United States is also working, in partnership with
Africans and donors, to enhance the ability of African
nations to respond when peacekeeping is needed. This is a
capacity-building initiative with long-term goals that is
openly conducted and aimed solely at preventing, ending
and alleviating the consequences of conflict.
The United States would also welcome the Secretary-
General's ideas on improving the overall response of the
international community to complex humanitarian
emergencies in Africa, including the transition from crisis
to development.

We should pay special attention to lessons learned
during the past four years in the Great Lakes region and
consider steps for ensuring that refugee camps are not used
as a safe haven for war criminals or as a base for military
operations, as well as steps for achieving justice and
accountability in the aftermath of large-scale Violations of
human rights. And we suggest that the Secretary-General
outline a comprehensive approach for the issues still
confronting the Great Lakes: preventing further conflict and
promoting human rights, democratization and
reconstruction.

In shaping his ideas, we urge the Secretary-General to
consult closely with leaders in the region and to encourage
a spirit of mutual respect and mutual responsibility. At the
same time, Africans themselves must reject the culture of
impunity that has protected those guilty of gross violations
of human rights or the export of terror to other nations. In
this regard, let me say today that there can be no
compromise with Libya when it comes to terrorism. With
respect to the case of Pan Am 103, the responsibility for
the effect of this Council's actions on the people of Libya
does not rest with us. It rests squarely on the Government
of Libya. We must be united in our demand for full
compliance with this Council's resolutions. To do less is to
insult the memory of those who died so tragically and to
deny the victims' families the demands of justice.

United Nations efforts also play a central role in
Africa's plans for development - development that gives
citizens more opportunity, government more capacity and
peace a firm foundation.

Today we know that in Africa, as elsewhere, the
primary impetus for economic growth must come from the
private sector. That requires strategies that make indigenous
investment rewarding and foreign investment welcome. It
requires privatization, more open markets and regulatory
and financial reform. And it requires efforts to improve
education, training and health care, so that all people, men
and women, may reach their potential.

Today we know that aid cannot substitute for reform.
But that does not mean stepping back from the good that
only aid can do.

Last year the United States contributed more than
$1.5 billion in direct humanitarian and development aid,
plus another $1 billion through multilateral organizations
such as the World Bank and the African Development
Bank. In addition, more than 2,400 Peace Corps
volunteers are working in Africa in a total of 29
countries. And President Clinton has proposed a
Partnership for Economic Growth and Opportunity to
stimulate commerce, reduce debt, encourage investment
and provide technical aid.

It is no accident that Africa's current economic
upturn is paralleled by a growing embrace of democratic
principles.

Today more than half of the 48 countries in sub-
Saharan Africa have leaders chosen in elections that were
deemed by international observers to have been free and
fair. This is important politically and economically,
because development depends on people. A democratic
people free to exchange ideas, publish thoughts, organize
labour and invest capital will build a richer - and
ultimately more stable - society than a people shackled
by repression.

Free elections are a necessary part of democracy, but
they are not sufficient in themselves. The United States is
committed to working with Africa and the international
community to help develop durable and effective
democratic institutions, such as legislative assemblies,
judiciaries and an independent press. We have
democracy-building programmes in 20 countries and are
also helping to strengthen civil society in order to
improve governance and bolster the rule of law.

Finally, we welcome Africa's increasing
contributions to the solution of global problems that
concern us all, such as the proliferation of crime,
terrorism, environmental degradation and the spread of
infectious disease. Today, the greatest divide in the world
is not between East and West or North and South - it is
between those trapped by the grievances and

 

preconceptions of the past and those who have the vision
and courage to shape the future.

We are all here this morning to salute the Africans
who have that vision and courage and to make sure we
have the vision and determination needed to support them.

I am pleased to announce my own plans to Visit the
continent before the end of the year, to meet with leaders
and people there and to make as real as I can America's
commitment to stand with Africans as they realize long-
delayed aspirations for true freedom, growing prosperity
and simple human dignity.
President Nelson Mandela once said that, in the
history of nations, generations have made their mark by
appreciating critical turning points and seizing the moment;
that better life will be achieved only if we shed the
temptation to proceed casually along the road - only if we
take the opportunities that beckon.

Let us take that road together.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council met on 25 September
1997, at the level of Foreign Ministers, to consider the
need for a concerted international effort to promote
peace and security in Africa.

"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment
to Africa in keeping with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. The Council also
reaffirms the principles of political independence,
sovereignty, and territorial integrity of all Member
States.

"The Security Council notes that African States
have made significant strides towards democratization,
economic reform, and respect for and protection of
human rights in order to achieve political stability,
peace, and sustainable economic and social
development.

"Despite these positive developments, the
Security Council remains gravely concerned by the
number and intensity of armed conflicts on the

continent. Such conflicts threaten regional peace,
cause massive human dislocation and suffering,
perpetuate instability and divert resources from long-
term development. The Security Council reaffirms
the responsibility of all Member States to settle their
international disputes by peaceful means and its own
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council welcomes the important
contributions of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), including through its Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, as
well as those of subregional arrangements, in
preventing and resolving conflicts in Africa, and
looks forward to a stronger partnership between the
United Nations and the OAU, as well as subregional
arrangements, in conformity with Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. The Council
supports enhancement of the capacity of African
States to contribute to peacekeeping operations,
including in Africa, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations. The Council highlights the
important contribution of the African Nuclear-
Weapon-Free Zone Treaty to international peace and
security.

"The Security Council fully supports the
engagement of the United Nations in Africa through
its diplomatic, peacekeeping, humanitarian,
economic development and other activities, which
are often undertaken in cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations. The United Nations
makes an important contribution to the efforts of
Africa to construct a future of peace, democracy,
justice and prosperity. The Council underlines the
importance of the commitment of the United Nations
through the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and other humanitarian organizations to
assist the efforts of African States to address
humanitarian and refugee crises in accordance with
international humanitarian law.

"The Security Council considers that the
challenges in Africa demand a more comprehensive
response. To this end, the Council requests the
Secretary-General to submit a report containing
concrete recommendations to the Council by
February
 

1998 regarding the sources of conflict in Africa, ways
to prevent and address these conflicts, and how to lay
the foundation for durable peace and economic growth
following their resolution. Because the scope of this
report may extend beyond the purview of the Security
Council. the Council invites the Secretary-General to
submit his report to the General Assembly and other
relevant bodies of the United Nations for action as
they deem appropriate, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.

"The Security Council al'l'irms its intention to
review promptly the recommendations of the
Secretary-General with a View to taking steps
consistent with its responsibilities under the Charter of
the United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1997/46.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present

stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose m 12.15 (km.
