Ms. Bolaflos Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, let me commend the leadership
and the work carried out by Chile during its presidency
of the Security Council this month. I would also like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General ad interim for
Political Affairs Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen for his
informative briefing.

Guatemala remains steadfast in holding that
diplomacy and dialogue are the best way to achieve a
long-term solution in each of the conflicts affecting
the Middle East. We continue to believe that a political
solution to the differences that have divided the region
for years, is the only solution that can provide stability
and lasting security. That could not be truer than
in the case of Palestine. Since the suspension of the
latest peace talks in April 2014, we have witnessed the
rapid deterioration of the situation between Israel and
Palestine. Moreover, the essential two-State solution
seems increasingly elusive. In that respect, we agree
with the many voices saying that a political future is
necessary to fulfil the legitimate needs of both peoples
and lead to a final and fair agreement. However,
achieving that goal will require the necessary measures.

That is why the international community must play
an active role in supporting and promoting the peace
process. We value the principle of shared responsibility
and therefore believe that the active participation
of both the Quartet and the Security Council in the
peace process can serve to generate new momentum
and thereby enable the parties to take further steps
with greater responsibility towards a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace. The parties must make genuine
and renewed efforts including, inter alia, the total
lifting of the blockade, an end to the construction of
illegal settlements, refraining from provocative acts,
a cessation of rocket-fire, and ensuring the legitimate
security concerns of Israel and the existence of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security.

Finally, as is well known, Guatemala strongly
values and supports all international instruments
established to protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms, especially the Rome Statute. That is why
we support the universalization of those instruments
and reject any attempt to prevent other States from
accessing them. In that regard, we do not see Palestine's
accession to the Rome Statute as an obstacle to peace
or to direct negotiations seeking a final agreement on
all underlying issues. The promotion of an environment
conducive to peace, accountability and respect for
human rights cannot but help to relaunch the peace
process between the parties.

We recognize the enormous challenges facing the
parties in their search for a political solution, both
nationally and internationally, but that is the only road
available. It is our political and historical responsibility,
as States members of the international community, to
support all measures that can help in achieving the goal.

