Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Mr. Minister,
as President of the Security Council and would like
to thank you for having organized today's meeting.
We are also grateful to the invited briefers for their
comprehensive statements. We would like to single
out the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Zerrougui, to protect children affected by armed
conflict in various parts of the world.

We have very carefully reviewed the Secretary-
General's report (S/2015/409) prepared for today's
meeting. We share its concerns regarding the dire
situation of millions of children affected by armed
conflict throughout the world. Of particular concern is
the new trend of violence against children carried out
by terrorist organizations and other groups that espouse
ideologies of extremist violence. The cynicism of Boko
Haram is horrendous, characterized by its abduction of
a large group of girls, an event that shocked the entire
world.

The weakening of State institutions in countries
in the Middle East and North Africa has created a
breeding ground for the growth of violent extremism
and terrorist activity. Before the eyes of the world,
the so-called Islamic State has seized large swathes of
territory, declaring them a caliphate and establishing
its order there. Children are among the first victims
of such groups. Terrorist groups use the Internet and
various social media not only to recruit children and
young adults as fighters, but also as suicide bombers.
The number of instances of killing children and
of sexual violence and mass abduction of children
continues to grow. Increasingly, these crimes have
become hallmarks of today's armed conflicts.

We decisively condemn violations of the norms
of international law, international humanitarian law
and international law relating to human rights and the
rights of refugees with regard to children, regardless
of who commits them. Both premeditated attacks
and the indiscriminate or excessive use of force are
unacceptable. Justifying civilian deaths 4 including
those of children - by the unavoidability of so-called
collateral damage is equally unacceptable. In this vein,
and of particular concern, the deteriorating situation
in Yemen and the tragic situation of children in Syria
present yet another argument for the rapid resolution
of these conflicts. Concerns for the safety of children
should be a constant priority in any peacekeeping
operation or counter-terrorism activity.

Unfortunately, children continue to die because
of armed conflicts throughout the world. We continue
to be concerned by the plight of children in south-
eastern Ukraine. As a result of an armed conflict that,
as defined by the International Committee of the Red
Cross, is not international in character, that country has
seen mass violations of children's rights to life, security,
safety, health, education and medical treatment. Since
May of this year, in the conflict zone, over 68 children
were killed and 176 wounded. Artillery and mortar
attacks from Ukrainian forces destroyed kindergartens,
schools, clinics, hospitals, maternal wards and
orphanages. As a result of Kyiv's de facto economic
blockade of territories not under its control, children
in the conflict zone are deprived of food, drinking
water, drugs and medical assistance. Large-scale
humanitarian assistance provided by Russia to residents
of the Donbas region is meant to help children as well.
Since the beginning of the conflict, over 100 children
have received expert medical treatment in Russia. Only
a few days ago, group of sick children and their parents
from Donbas reached Moscow by plane. There were
14 children in that group. They all suffer from various
problems. Some have been injured by shelling and
others are extremely ill.

Clearly, large-scale Violations against children, in
various armed conflicts require that special attention
be given to their rehabilitation - providing them
with psychological, medical and legal assistance.
The protection of children is the responsibility of
Governments, and most States affected by armed
conflicts are striving to improve the situation of
children in their countries. They have a right to expect
help in their efforts from the United Nations system as
well as civil society organizations. We are encouraged
that in today's resolution 2225 (2015) significant
attention is given to issues of national responsibility for
the protection of children, their rehabilitation and their
reintegration. Furthermore, we welcome the decision to
consider the abduction of children as another criterion
for inclusion of parties to an armed conflict in the
annex to the annual report of the Secretary-General on
this topic.

We hope that the new Security Council resolution
will reinforce the reporting and monitoring mechanism
and the activities led by Malaysia's thematic Working
Group. Since its inception pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1612 (2005), the Working Group
has achieved a great deal in improving the situation of
children in a number of countries affected by armed
conflict. To ensure maximum efficiency in this work,
it is important - and in this regard we fully support
our Malaysian colleagues - to expand constructive
cooperation with the Governments concerned.

