Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I also thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
for his briefing. I align myself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I will
concentrate on three points.

First, the Bosnian people clearly demonstrated their
discontent in February. As Mr. Inzko has highlighted,
the demonstrations expressed the growing mistrust of an
elite that has, to date, failed to create functioning State
institutions, meet its people's needs or provide prospects
for the future. Regrettably, the protest turned briefly
violent, but luckily resulted in property damage only.
However, it called into question institutional viability.
It showed that Bosnians wish to have their voices heard
and will recognized in creating a trustworthy political
class with integrity. That is the basic lesson to be drawn
from the citizens groups known as plenums that were
created following the February demonstrations.

We support a peaceful expression of the emerging
political awareness, through strong civic participation
in October's general elections. As we look forward,
the electoral campaign must enable those desiring
to lead Bosnia to prove that they are able to meet
the expectations of all Bosnians, particularly in the
socioeconomic sphere.

February's demonstrations have proved that
Bosnians - some of whom never knew the country
of Yugoslavia - today desire a new future. We must
endeavour, together, to provide them with long-term
prospects.

The prospect of European integration offers the
only viable way forward for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and that prospect should act as a catalyst for the
transformation of the country. We reiterate our
commitment to seeing Bosnia and Herzegovina join
the European Union as a united and sovereign country
that enjoys full territorial integrity. That hope is widely
shared by the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
whom the European Union has never lost its appeal. We
want to see that mutual desire translated into reality.

The European Union has a full role to play in the
socioeconomic area in particular. In launching the
initiative to promote growth and employment, the
European Union is involved in two ways in Bosnia and
Herzegovina: by intervening directly in response to the
economic needs of the population; and by supporting
the country's authorities to take the necessary reform
measures to allow the emergence of a sustainable
economy. However, it remains true than the leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina will need to undertake reforms
in the future to make their country more functional.

Finally, while the European Union mission,
Operation Althea, retains a residual ability to support
the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the European
Union must intervene primarily in the area of capacity-
building to allow the Bosnian security forces to operate
independently.

The framework inherited from Dayton remains the
framework for action by the international community
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The High Representative,
Mr. Inzko, who is the guarantor of the peace accords,
has our full support, and we commend his impartial
work to support the emergence of a State that is united
and responds to all of the aspirations of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We recall that all parties have
an obligation to cooperate with him and his services
under the very terms of the agreements, in particular to
provide him with the required documentation.

We also call on all the constituent parts of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to put an end to all nationalist
rhetoric and stop any action that divides the country.
Our message is clear: there can be no questioning of
the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The future of Bosnia and Herzegovina requires
increasingly close cooperation between its constituent
entities. Intercommunal reconciliation is crucial to
consolidating the sense, by all parties, that they belong
and have a shared history and destiny. It is in that
spirit of reconciliation that France is involved in the
commemoration of the First World War in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to which Mr. Inzko referred earlier.

