Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I agree with my colleague.
But I will add to his words. I wish to express, first of
all, my delegation's appreciation to you personally,
Mr. President, and to the Malaysian team for your
efficient conduct of the Council presidency during
the month. My delegation appreciates the diligent
manner in which the presidency has acted in reacting to
emergencies and efficiently conducting consultations.
We also thank the presidency for the very timely open
debate on children and armed conflict (see S/PV.7466),
and for shepherding the adoption of resolution 2225
(2015), focusing on the recruitment and abduction of
children.

Looking back at the agenda of the Council in June,
I wish to share some thoughts on the working methods
and key developments in the Council's discharge of its
responsibilities under the Charter ofthe United Nations.
The Council has been consistently opening more doors.
Hardly has there been a day in June when the Council
has not met in public. Only a few of the briefings by the
Secretariat were in consultations, while the majority
were delivered in the Chamber.

We are happy to note and to encourage the progress
made in the delivering of briefings by the Secretariat.
Such briefings should not duplicate the contents of
the reports of the Secretary-General. As the Council
is always pressed for time in consultations, we expect
briefers to be succinct and to focus on critical issues.
I believe that during this month, the Council wrote a
letter to the Secretariat in that regard.

Speaking of format, it was unfortunate that at the
joint briefing of the three subsidiary bodies dealing
with counter-terrorism on 16 June (see S/PV.7463),
the Council deviated from its existing practice, as
non-Council members were not granted the right to
participate in the discussions pursuant to rule 37. Such
meetings provide a rare opportunity for the broader
membership to share ideas and concerns with the
Council regarding the global threats of terrorism and
non-proliferation and ways to address them in working
together with the subsidiary bodies.

We are also concerned that, due to the protracted
process of the selection of a new Ombudsperson to the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime, a gap may occur between
the terms of the incumbent and the new Ombudsperson.
Such a scenario would be not only contrary to the
Council's decisions, but would also undermine the
credibility of the Al-Qaida sanctions regime. We
expect the Secretariat to take all necessary steps to
ensure a smooth and orderly transition beyond 13 July,
including the further extension of Ms. Prost's contract,
if necessary.

This month the Council held a very useful briefing
with United Nations Force Commanders (see S/PV.7464).
I thank Malaysia for organizing that. Further efforts
should be made to allow Force Commanders to engage
more frequently in such interactive dialogue, while
Council members should focus on questions rather than
on statements, because on that particular occasion this
month, 70 per cent of the time was taken up by Council
members, while we listened to the briefers only 30 per
cent of the time. In the months ahead we look forward
to further discussions on the review of peacekeeping
operations.

I wish also to commend the work of the Security
Council Affairs Division (SCAD) for the prompt,
professional and high quality service that it has
provided to Council members consistently, against
the background of jam-packed and tight monthly
programmes of work. The monthly statistics on
Security Council activities hardly capture the full scope
of the work. Numerous interactive dialogue and Arria
Formula meetings - there was mention of three such
meetings this month - and many more substantive
other matters compete with consultations and briefings.
May I suggest to SCAD that the monthly statistics as
of now should reflect also the number of interactive
dialogue meetings held and substantive other matters
addressed in consultations.

Many situations on the ground call for consistent
attention from the international community. I would
like to focus on only three of those that were addressed
by the Council this month: Burundi, Syria and Ukraine.

The Arria Formula meeting on barrel bombs once
again reminded us about the plight of thousands of
civilians in Syria under constant attack by their own
Government without a glimmer of hope in sight. While
only a political solution of the crisis can occur in Syria,
the cruel, senseless and indiscriminate bombing of
civilians must stop immediately. The Council can and
must act.

The situation in Burundi has preoccupied the
Council in June. The first round of elections was held
yesterday against the advice of the African Union, the
East African Community, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the United Nations to
postpone them. Some 10,000 Burundians voted over
the weekend with their feet as they fled the country.
The Council has to remain vigilant in order prevent the
worst happening in the country.

As we follow the steady erosion of the ceasefire
regime by the actions of the regular Russian troops and
illegal armed groups in the Donbas very closely and
with great concern, we are worried that Russia wants to
strip itself ofresponsibility, and that it is not facilitating
the work of the Trilateral Contact Group and its working
groups. In June, the Council held an urgency meeting
(S/PV.7457) to react to major breaches of the Minsk
agreements and resolution 2202 (2015) in Marinka and
Krasnogorivka by the Russia-backed militants. We
have to remain vigilant as militants have now amassed
substantial troops, tanks and heavy weapons on the
contact line. The situation there is very, very fragile.

The United Nations Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights has consistently
flagged, for a number of months in a row, reports of
sophisticated heavy weaponry and fighters being
supplied from the Russian Federation. We look forward
to hearing Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights Ivan Simonovic' address the Council on the
human rights situation in occupied Crimea and certain
parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. A genuine
and inclusive political dialogue will remain impossible
while the fighting continues and the terms of the truce
are neglected. The Minsk agreements establish a clear
sequence of necessary actions.

Finally, we welcome the letter sent to you,
Mr. President, onbehalfofthe Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, containing proposals related
to the forthcoming appointment of the next Secretary-
General. We believe that the group's call to initiate the
discussions at the Council regarding those proposals is
timely and should be taken in consideration.

Let me conclude by wishing best success to the
ambassador of New Zealand for the country's upcoming
presidency in the month of July. New Zealand may
count on our support.

