Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
should like to thank Mr. Perricos and Mr. Zlauvinen for
their reports.

The United Kingdom is grateful to the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM), the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency's (IAEA) Iraq Nuclear
Verification Office for the roles they played in
monitoring Saddam's weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) programmes and determining whether his
regime was complying with the disarmament
obligations placed on it by the Security Council from
1991 onwards.

The United Kingdom would like to draw the
attention of the Security Council to the report of the
Special Adviser to the Director of the CIA, which
catalogues the state of Iraq's disarmament and the
residual stocks of WMD material. UNMOVIC has
previously reported to the Council on chemical
weapons finds made by the coalition forces.

The United Kingdom welcomes the commitment
made by the Government of Iraq to respect and apply
existing international commitments and obligations to
the non-proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons. In particular, we welcome the
Government of Iraq's full constitutional commitment to
taking disarmament forward. That includes
preparations to accede to the Chemical Weapons
Convention, its intention to agree an additional
protocol to its Safeguards Agreement with the

International Atomic Energy Agency, and the
establishment of a National Monitoring Directorate to
oversee and control the movement of dual-use items.

We are not closing the file on weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq, but we are changing the approach.
We look forward to the Government of Iraq's report to
the Security Council on its progress in adhering to all
applicable treaties and international agreements, in
harmonizing Iraqi export legislation with international
standards, and on the progress made by the National
Monitoring Directorate in its work.

It is the United Kingdom's assessment that for
some time neither UNMOVIC nor the IAEA's Iraq
Nuclear Verification Office have been in a position to
carry out their functions in a way which serves the
aims of disarmament and non-proliferation. Instead,
therefore, we should now move forward and focus on
ensuring that Iraq itself continues to take steps to
support the international non-proliferation regime and
itself adheres to disarmament and non-proliferation
treaties and related international agreements. For our
part, the United Kingdom will continue to help Iraq to
do just that, both as a friend of Iraq and as a partner
within the Multinational Force. But we also encourage
Iraq's neighbours and the international community
more broadly to cooperate with Iraq and assist it in
implementing its non-proliferation obligations and
building capacity in the relevant areas.

