Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to join speakers before me in welcoming the
Permanent Representative of Cote d'Ivoire and wishing
him every success in his work.

At the outset, we thank all the delegations of
Member States for their flexibility during the conduct
of the negotiations on resolution 2428 (2018), and we
thank the United States delegation for cooperating in
the negotiations on the draft text. We also welcome
the important and positive developments and the
efforts made by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) to achieve a comprehensive
political settlement. In that regard, we want to stress
our full support for those efforts, while we also share
the serious concern of other member States about the
continuing conflict in South Sudan and its disastrous
consequences for the civilian population and for peace
and stability in the region.

The twenty-first report of the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism has confirmed the existence of continuing
severe violations of the ceasefire that are worrying for
all ofus. But we believe in the importance and necessity
of the mediation efforts of IGAD and the African Union
countries, which should continue with the support of
the international community and the Security Council.
African crises first and foremost demand African
solutions if they are to achieve permanent settlements.
I believe that the technical extension in resolution
2418 (2018), the previous one on this topic, represents
an opportunity to give the negotiations more time
for achieving progress, while highlighting the tools
that the Charter of the United Nations provides to
the Security Council. The annex to today's resolution
accords with the role of those who have been positively
involved in the political process. We hope that today's
resolution represents an opportunity that can enable the
various parties in South Sudan to pursue their talks in
order to achieve a comprehensive, just and appropriate
settlement that puts an end to the conflict and stops the
flow of more arms into the country so as to preserve
people's lives, support peace and save South Sudan
from the destructive cycle of war.

