Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, my delegation would like to congratulate
you on again including this important matter in the
programme of work of the Council. As has been said
by other delegations, reviewing the process of
implementation of resolution 1308 (2000) is something
that we have not done for over two years.

Other delegations have referred to the
relationship between AIDS as a threat to peace and
security and its devastating impact on the societies of
countries affected by it. My delegation agrees with
those comments, but, for the sake of brevity, I will now
focus specifically on the question of the
implementation of resolution 1308 (2000) in Spain.

Resolution 1308 (2000) urged Member States to
develop national strategies over the long-term for
education, prevention, testing and voluntary
confidential counselling and treatment for their
personnel in connection with HIV/AIDS as an
important part of their preparation to participate in
peacekeeping operations.

Spain, through its Ministry of Defence and in
cooperation with the Ministry of Health, has developed
a yearly programme of prevention on HIV/AIDS in its
armed forces. That programme works in several areas.
Among them we would emphasize the following:
education, through campaigns and information days
addressed to military personnel to educate them on the
mechanisms of transmission of the disease and on
measures of prevention; training, through the updating
and continued refining of military health personnel's
education regarding HIV/AIDS; epidemiological
activities designing programmes and surveys for
epidemiological monitoring of HIV/AIDS infection and
the identification and prevention of high-risk
behaviours; and finally, prevention, providing to
Spanish personnel who are to be deployed in
peacekeeping operations, as part of their individual
health equipment, preventive materials for preventing
HIV/AIDS. With these activities, Spain has
endeavoured to fulfil what was laid out in resolution
1308 (2000) in this very specific but important area,
facing the enormous challenge raised by AIDS.

In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that Spain's
commitment in the light of this challenge can be seen
not only in this sphere, but also at the domestic level,
through the national anti-AIDS plan, and at the
international level, particularly through Spain's
contribution to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria, which currently totals nearly
$50 million.

