Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I should
like at the outset to thank the Secretary-General for his
report and Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for the
additional briefing he has just given. We would also like
to commend you, Mr. President, and the delegation of
Bangladesh for convening this open briefing.

 

Although the situation in Sierra Leone has been
generally stable recently, many elements of instability still
remain in the country. The Revolutionary United Front
Party (RUFP), in particular the actions of Mr. Sankoh and
its failure to cooperate with the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), has become the major roadblock
to the peace process. We are deeply concerned at the slow
pace of progress in the process of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of the ex-
combatants. We are also deeply disturbed by the
humanitarian situation in Sierra Leone, which remains
serious, and by the human rights violations which continue
to occur.

We concur with the Secretary-General's analysis, in
part VII of his report, of the four main steps in the peace
process. In this regard, we would like to emphasize our
view that the RUFP must unconditionally implement the
obligations undertaken under the Lome Agreement and
cease its opposition to and confrontation with the
Government and UNAMSIL. It should be actively involved
in the DDR process and cooperate with UNAMSIL in
gaining access to the eastern and northern part of the
country, and it should put an end to looting, kidnapping and
other forms of human rights violations. We urge Mr.
Sankoh to keep his promise on this issue.

Secondly, the international community should continue
to support the peace process in Sierra Leone in various
ways. We appreciate the positive efforts and the results
achieved by Mali, the current Chairman of the Economic
Community of West African States. We thank in particular
Nigeria and other troop contributors to UNAMSIL, and we
welcome the donor conference to be held later this month
in London. We also hope that the parties concerned will
continue to provide assistance in response to the United
Nations consolidated inter-agency appeal for Sierra Leone,
with a view to alleviating the humanitarian situation in that
country.

Thirdly, we commend the Secretariat for its high
degree of efficiency in deploying UNAMSIL. We also hope
that UNAMSIL will continue, within the mandate given it
by the Security Council, to fulfil its unique and important
role in the peace process in Sierra Leone.

Finally, we are in agreement with the proposal to
extend the interval between reports of the Secretary-General
from 45 to 60 days.

