Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation once again
thanks the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his briefing
and his hard work on this issue. The convening of this
meeting is undoubtedly further proof of the willingness
of the Security Council to support Mali in the face of
the complex and multidimensional challenges it faces,
and allows us to renew our firm commitment to the
stabilization of this country.

We welcome the peaceful conduct of the recent
presidential elections that led to the re-election of
President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita and the formation
of a more representative Government with significant
female representation. In wishing him success in
his functions, we recall that progress in the full and
inclusive implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali must remain one of the main
priorities of the new Government. Indeed, the peace
agreement remains the ideal inclusive and consensual
framework for restoring peace and stability in Mali. It
is therefore essential that the signatory parties redouble
their efforts to ensure the diligent implementation of all
the provisions of the Agreement.

However, my Government welcomes progress
made in the priority action timeline and especially its
road map, such as the creation of interim authorities
in the five regions of northern Mali; the redeployment
of the army in several cities of the country and the
gradual resumption of mixed patrols composed of
elements of the Malian defence and security forces; the
pro-Government movements of the Platform coalition
of armed groups and the Coordination des mouvements
de l'Azawad in Kidal and Timbuktu, as agreed in 2016
in the framework of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism; and the start of the preregistration phase
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants, which is crucial. These are all
undoubtedly positive steps to build trust between the
security forces and the various local armed groups.

While it is true that the lack of implementation of
the commitments undertaken can be partly explained
by the lack ofpolitical will of the parties concerned, we
must accept that there can be no lasting stability in Mali
if the agreement is not fully implemented. Therefore,
after the holding of the presidential elections and the
coming legislative elections, substantial progress must
be made in mobilizing all actors in order to make
further important gains towards the implementation of
the key institutional and security reforms outlined in
the agreement and in resolution 2423 (2018).

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea will continue
to support any initiative aimed at promoting ownership
of peace processes in unstable countries and regions of
the world. That is why we gladly welcome the signing
of the pact for peace on 15 October. As Mr. Lacroix
has pointed out, this new partnership among the United
Nations, the Malian Government and the signatory
armed movements does not replace the 2015 agreement,
the priority action timeline or even the March road
map. Instead, it symbolizes the renewal of the parties'
commitment to giving significant impetus to the
implementation of the peace agreement and serves
as a catalyst to strengthen the inclusive nature of the
political process. Similarly, its objective should not be
to reinvent what has been agreed, but rather to allow
for the effective implementation of the commitments
undertaken in the framework of the peace agreement,
with a clear and well-defined time horizon.

In that context, we must also reaffirm our
satisfaction with the operational support provided by
Operation Barkhane to MINUSMA, which must focus
primarily on mechanisms to improve its operational
capacity, including the security of its personnel. In
addition, the stabilization of the situation in central
Mali, the focus of continuous terrorist attacks,
requires a comprehensive solution. We reiterate that
any response to violent extremism must go beyond a
military approach. We should focus on a humanitarian
and sustainable response that can meet the political and
economic needs of the population and peoples of Mali.

I conclude by endorsing the words of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, who recently stated at a high-level meeting
on Mali and the Sahel:

"We cannot stress enough that for lasting peace
to be built in Mali, the inclusion of all sectors of
society is needed. Although it is true that violence
cannot be halted without the involvement of the
armed parties, it is also clear that without the full
participation of other components of society, the
achievements already obtained will remain fragile,
reversible and at the mercy of any disagreement
between the parties. The stabilization of Mali means
the stabilization of the neighbouring countries and
that the entire Sahel region and beyond. That means
that the signatory parties to the Peace Agreement
bear a great responsibility."

