Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2337
(2017). My delegation thanks Senegal warmly for its
leadership. From the beginning, France supported
the efforts led by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and its African partners.

The 1 December elections in The Gambia were
carried out in a way that is beyond reproach. They
illustrate a phenonemon that may be commonplace
elsewhere, but that is nonetheless extraordinary in West
Africa. Democratic governance and respect for the will
of the people are now taken for granted - a situation
that none would wish to reverse. Last year, six of the
10 elections in the region led to a transition in power.
Elections are taking place in a tranquil atmosphere and
there is no thought of questioning their legitimacy. I am
referring to Ghana, as the most recent example, but also
to Nigeria, the Niger, Benin and Burkina Faso.

In The Gambia, the challenging of the results of
the election by President Jammeh - even though
he himself recognized them - was unanimously
condemned by Economic Community of West African
States, the African Union and the Security Council.
They all called on Mr. Jammeh to respect the sovereign
decision of his people and to agree to hand over power
to President Barrow, in accordance with the Gambian
Constitution. Since then, the countries of the region
have spared no effort to reach a peaceful resolution
to the crisis, pursuant to the charters of ECOWAS
and of the African Union. The Heads of State and
Government of ECOWAS met on 17 December. The
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
met on 13 January specifically to deal with this topic.
And the Security Council adopted a clear presidential
statement (S/PRST/2016/ 19) on the matter.

France commends the tireless efforts of ECOWAS,
the mediation efforts of President Buhari, President
Johnson-Sirleaf, and President Mahama, who visited
Banjul and have been in constant contact with Gambian
stakeholders. In particular, we commend the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mohammed Ibn Chambas, who has done everything
in his power to ensure a peaceful transition. We also
welcome the efforts of Morocco and Mauritania, which,
in a final push, used their diplomatic skills to ensure
that President Jammeh accepted to step down from
office in a dignified way at the end of his term.

We often refer in the Security Council to the need
to strengthen preventive diplomacy. The Gambian
crisis is an excellent example in that regard. No effort
was spared by any of the actors involved to achieve a
peaceful transition of power to the President-elect. At
present, Mr. Jammeh continues to refuse to heed theoe
appeals, in spite of all the guarantees provided by his
successor to accord him the respect due him as former
President of the Republic. Mr. Barrow took the oath
of office this morning and today he is the legitimate
President of The Gambia. That is why France thought
that it was essential for the Security Council to make
its position known and to adopt a resolution that sends
a clear message to Mr. Jammeh today. We welcome
the fact that resolution 2337 (2017) was adopted
unanimously and that the Security Council has thereby
expressed its full support to the efforts of the region to
resolve this crisis.

