Mr. Lupan (Moldova): Despite the fact that
Moldova is a country affected by small arms and light
weapons and has a frozen conflict on its territory,
due to time limitations and the fact that my country
has aligned itself with the statement made on behalf
of the European Union, it is my honour to address the
Council exclusively in my capacity as Chair-designate
of the second Open-ended Meeting of Governmental
Experts under the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects,
which will take place from 1 to 5 June at United Nations
Headquarters in New York.

Taken together, the United Nations Programme
of Action and the International Tracing Instrument
constitute an important global framework that enables
us to tackle the complex issue of the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons. It is therefore heartening
that the Security Council has continually recognized
the significance of the United Nations Programme of
Action during its debates on the issue, as well as in its
presidential statements and its first resolution on small
arms and light weapons adopted in 2013 (resolution 2117 (2013).

At the forthcoming Meeting of Governmental
Experts under the Programme of Action, it is anticipated
that States will focus on recent developments in small
arms and light weapons technology. Recent trends in
such technologies have important implications for how
the issue of small arms and light weapons should be
addressed in the future. Modular weapons now exist that
can be fitted with different components, making their
marking and tracing more complex. Weapons can now
be printed using three-dimensional printing technology
and, although its reliability is not yet high, it still can
potentially lead to placing undetectable weapons in the
wrong hands. Metals can increasingly be replaced by
polymers, which can also hamper detection.

Such trends present new challenges and complicate
efforts with respect to the tracing of illicit weapons.
However, on the positive side, new technologies, such
as biometric or radio frequency identification, could
enhance stockpile management and capabilities in the
marking, recordkeeping and tracing of weapons. A
number of States have specifically indicated the need to
discuss, at the second Open-ended Meeting, the outflow
of small arms and light weapons into illegal circulation,
including into the hands of terrorists, non-State actors or
unrecognized entities. The need to ensure appropriate
action and control by States over small arms and light
weapons and their marking, transfer and tracing, as
well as over brokering activities, inter alia, has also
been identified.

Taking into account the fact that the focus of this
year's second Open-ended Meeting is on recent trends
in marking and tracing small arms and light weapons,
the opportunity to discuss those and other related
issues will allow us to thoroughly consider how we can
ensure that the United Nations Programme of Action
and its International Tracing Instrument stay up to
date and to guarantee their continued full and effective
implementation. The upcoming Meeting will also
provide a platform for all States to discuss needs and
good practices, which may feed into concrete results at
the Programme of Action's review conference in 2018.

Resolution 2117 (2013) stresses the need to make
real progress in preventing, combating and eradicating
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
Real progress is what we need in order to save lives
from carnage and destruction and to ensure stable
and sustainable development around the world, now
and post-2015. There can be no development without
security, without respect for international law and
without respect for human lives. Real progress in
preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons is what all United
Nations Member States must work together to achieve
at every forum, including the Security Council and
at the forthcoming second Meeting of Governmental
Experts.

