Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I should like to
welcome you, Mr. President, and to thank you for
having organized and for presiding over this important
debate. I also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Asha-Rose Migiro and Special Representative Sarah
Cliffe for their statements.

There is unanimity on the fact that it is better and
cheaper to prevent and resolve conflicts. It is much
more difficult and costly to keep the peace and deal
with the consequences of the outbreak of conflict,
especially when they degenerate into war or mass
atrocities. My delegation is therefore convinced that
optimizing the use of preventive diplomacy tools,
including early warning, mediation and peacemaking,
has immense benefits. Without durable peace and
stability, sustainable development cannot be attained.
Conflict prevention is thus a key component of
peacebuilding.

The need to focus on more effective utilization of
preventative diplomacy tools to avoid lapse or relapse
into conflict is more urgent than ever before. The
African Union (AU) and its subregional organizations
have put in place mechanisms and structures for
conflict prevention, mediation and resolution. These
mechanisms have made some timely and useful
interventions, and a lot more can be achieved.

Operationalizing the AU Continental Early Warning
System and its linkage with the subregional systems of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the Southern African Development
Community, the East African Community, the Common
Market for Eastern and Southern Africa and the
Economic Community of Central African States will
provide comprehensive monitoring and analysis. That
will facilitate decision-making on the most appropriate
preventive or response actions at either the continental
or subregional level.

Given the ongoing strengthening of the strategic
partnership between the AU and the United Nations,
the prospects for optimum use of preventive tools and
capacities are greater. The African Union has shown its
commitment to promoting and upholding constitutional
order, democracy, good governance and rule of law for
sustainable peace and development. It is enhancing its
mediation and peacemaking efforts through
mechanisms such as the panels of the wise and eminent
persons. Former Presidents Mkapa, Buyoya, Obasanjo,
Chissano and Mbeki, to mention a few, have played
important roles in efforts to resolve conflicts in a
number of countries.

The increasing cooperation among AU and
United Nations mediators, as well as special envoys, is
a welcome trend. It is important to emphasize that the
primary responsibility for preventing conflict rests with
national authorities and national actors. Consequently,
initiatives by regional or international partners should
be aimed at supporting national efforts in a well-
coordinated manner.

In our View, there are three key challenges that
must be addressed to ensure the optimal use of conflict
prevention tools.

First, timely and robust preventive responses and
actions are needed. In a number of cases, warning
signals of impending violent conflict are given in good
time, but often they are not matched with prompt
action. That may be due to a number of factors,
including political sensitivities, vested interests or lack
of adequate capacity at national, subregional or
regional levels.
Secondly, in spite of universal concurrence that
conflict prevention is far less costly, there is a
paradoxical reluctance to provide adequate and
predictable resources for it. There is instead greater
willingness to allocate more resources for
peacekeeping. It is time we invested more in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding.

Thirdly, there is a need to focus more on
addressing the root causes and drivers of conflict to
ensure durable peace, stability and development. The
key causes and drivers of conflict include proliferation
of small arms, bad governance, human rights
Violations, marginalization, high unemployment levels,
resource scarcity and, in some cases, poor management
of abundant resources.

This debate provides yet another opportunity to
focus on optimizing conflict prevention tools,
particularly in Africa. The prospects are bright and
challenges are surmountable. Let us sustain this
momentum by actively prioritizing, supporting and
investing in conflict prevention and conflict resolution.

