Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for presenting her twelfth report to the
Security Council as requested under resolution 1970
(2011).

The current political and security situation in
Libya continues to present tremendous challenges and
hampers ongoing efforts by the Presidency Council of
the Government of National Accord to restore peace
and stability to the country, including ending impunity
for crimes of serious concern to the international
community. Malaysia continues to believe that the
formation of an effective and credible Government
of National Accord is crucial in bolstering Libya's
commitment and capabnility to promote and restore
the rule of law, to address impunity and to bring all
perpetrators of such crimes to justice. We call upon
all parties in Libya to redouble their efforts to bridge
differences, find common ground and work closely
together towards the swift and full implementation of
the Libyan political agreement.

Despite the significant security challenges in the
country, we are encouraged by the continuing efforts
and commitment of the Libyan authorities to comply
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, as well
as the ongoing cooperation rendered by the Libyan
Prosecutor-General's Office. That is a good foundation

on which to further build upon.

The Widespread violence and impunity in Libya,
particularly by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
which continues to be the most prolific perpetrator
of grave crimes and violations of international law in
the country, alongside other violent extremist groups,
remains of concern. We reaffirm the Security Council's
strong condemnation of such atrocities and reassert the
call for accountability. At the same time, allegations
of such crimes being perpetrated against civilians by
other parties to the conflict should also be a matter
of concern. Those allegations must be thoroughly
investigated and accountability must be pursued so
that impunity is addressed, with a view to building
trust and confidence and towards promoting national
reconciliation.

This will be Malaysia's last opportunity to engage
on the important issue of addressing impunity and
accountability for the most serious crimes in Libya
before ending our term as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council. Since joining the Council
some 22 months ago, we have been fully invested in
the United Nations-led facilitation efforts for a Libyan-
owned and Libyan-led process to restore peace, stability
and security to the country. Despite the enormous
challenges that continue to plague the country, there
have been some positive developments and milestones
achieved in that regard. Those gains must be preserved
and built upon if Libya and its people are to progress
beyond the current situation.

In concluding, I wish to reaffirm Malaysia's full
support for the efforts of the United Nations and the
international community to assist Libya to prevail over
adversity and achieve a lasting political settlement and
stability. Looking beyond our term in the Council, we
wish to also reaffirm our continuing support for the
people and the Government of Libya.

