Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We
are very honoured by your presence, Mr. Minister, and
we wish to thank you and Mexico for the initiative you
have taken. At this crucial time that initiative could not
have been more timely. It opens a new stage in a
continued process the purpose of which is to tackle
current challenges to international peace and security
through greater cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations.

Speaking after the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Greece, I of course fully endorse everything
he has said. Given the late hour, I should like to focus
briefly on one aspect that is of particular interest to us,
and that is cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in the area of conflict
prevention.

Conflict prevention involves not only profound
knowledge of the situation on the ground, but also
direct intervention vis-a-vis the causes of conflicts,
those that might destabilize the situation and provoke
armed confrontations. For all these reasons - and the
Secretary-General himself has indicated that these are
among the ten basic principles in his report in 2001 -
it is vital to include a strategy for prevention in all
United Nations policies, as well as the efforts of the
national Governments principally responsible for
conflict prevention and the cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations with the common
purpose of preventing any situation that might be likely
in the short or longer term to result in a conflict.

We believe that in many instances the ideal
instrument for becoming familiar with the true nature
of the situation in the field is the regional and
subregional organizations themselves. For that reason
we feel there is a need for the greatest possible
cooperation by the United Nations, and particularly
with the Security Council, with these organizations,
through strengthening the various existing channels of
communication and interaction.

The Minister has just referred to the recent
European Union conference on conflict prevention. I
will not dwell on that, as he has covered that ground.
But we do regard it as a good initiative that might serve
as a model for other organizations. It did serve, inter
alia, to put into contact with each other many actors
whose cooperation is necessary in conflict resolution.

In the General Assembly we are also currently
discussing the process of conflict prevention, and we
hope that will be fruitful. My delegation unreservedly
supports that discussion.

