Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by welcoming the Permanent
Representative of Iraq. We are also grateful for the

report of the Secretary-General and the briefing by
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe, and for the briefing
by Ambassador Khalilzad on behalf of the
multinational force.

My thanks also go to you, Mr. President, for
convening this quarterly meeting to know about the
situation in Iraq. The rationale for the meeting is clear.
We gathered to hear reports from the Secretariat and
the multinational force about the situation the ground.
We will also be hearing the assessment of the
Permanent Representative of Iraq on behalf of his
Government.

In the view of my delegation, it is entirely logical
that the Iraqi representative should have the
opportunity to give us his views, together with the
reports from the Under-Secretary-General and the
representative of the multinational force. In keeping
with paragraph 29 of the note by the Council President,
in document S/2006/507:

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council agrees that, when
non-members are invited to speak to the Council,
those who have a direct interest in the outcome of
the matter under consideration may speak prior to
Council members, if appropriate."

(spoke in Spanish)

Therefore the Council should have heard from the
party having direct interest, in this case the delegation
of Iraq, before members took the floor. That would
simply give us a clearer view of the situation we are
discussing and would allow the Council to comply with
its mandate in a more efficient and effective manner.

My delegation's position on this matter is not
new. In fact, three months ago, concerning the same
agenda item, we raised the same point, speaking after
the delegation of Iraq. We felt our concern was clear.
Perhaps it is necessary to return to this matter in our
consultations. We hope we can give full effect to the
criterion set out in paragraph 29 of the note by the
President to which I just referred.
Like other Council members, Costa Rica
welcomes and supports the efforts by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI), the
United Nations specialized agencies and the
non-governmental organizations, which are pursuing
their difficult tasks in a highly unstable security

08-3196]
situation. As long as the political, security and
humanitarian problems persist in Iraq, the foundations
of a federal, democratic, pluralist and unified State -
which we all hope to see one day - will remain
fragile.

In this regard I wish to recall to the words of the
Secretary-General that Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe quoted: "Whatever one's previous views on
Iraq, the whole world has a responsibility and an
interest today in helping bring peace and prosperity to
the people of that country". Costa Rica therefore calls
on the Council to give priority to further pursuing the
political processes of national reconciliation, dialogue
and strengthening the legitimacy of the Iraqi
authorities. In that connection, the review of the
constitution and the promulgation of other necessary
laws to achieve those objectives are of priority
importance.

Costa Rica also urges the Council to support
more broadly the participation of Iraq and its people
and authorities in the reconstruction of the country. In
short, Costa Rica urges UNAMI, the United Nations
agencies, the neighbouring countries and the
international community present in Iraq to step up their
endeavours to favour growing prominence of the
people and Government of Iraq in the construction of
their own future.

My delegation is very concerned to see the results
of the UNAMI report on the situation of human rights
of Iraq. We consider that the violent daily death of
human beings for political, ethnic, religious and gender
reasons is not the course by which to promote justice
and the reconciliation of Iraqi society. Therefore we
welcome the fact that Iraq has ratified the Convention
against Torture, and we urge ratification also of its
Optional Protocol and strict implementation of those
two important international instruments.

We are also particularly concerned to hear the
statement by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, on 25 April, in which she referred
to the situation of Iraqi children as intolerable. My
country also condemns sexual and gender-based
violence, exemplified by the crimes of honour - an
unquestionably abominable practice. It is thus essential
to continue to work on the definition and correct
implementation of mechanisms for accountability and
to strengthen justice as necessary and unmistakable

08-3196]
steps in strengthening the process of national
reconciliation, the rule of law and the fight against
impunity.

