Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): Let me convey
to you, Madam, the warmest congratulations of the
delegation of Mali upon the accession of your country,
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, to the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of April. At the same
time, let me say how proud we are to see a woman from
the Middle East presiding over the Security Council. I
would also like to pay a just tribute to France for the
skill with which it guided the work of the Council last
month.

I would also like to express the deepest gratitude of
His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, President
of the Republic of Mali, and the Government and the
people of Mali to our shared Organization, the United
Nations, and its Member States for the ongoing,
multifaceted support they have provided to the peace
process in Mali since January 2012, when the most
serious crisis in the history of our country began.

I take this opportunity to express and reaffirm the
confidence of the Government of Mali in international
mediation, being led by Algeria and comprising the
United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the European
Union, the Organization for Islamic Cooperation,
Burkina Faso, Mauritania, the Niger, Nigeria and Chad.
I welcome France's role and contribution in Mali and all
of the sacrifices that have been made.

I take this opportunity to commend the personal
commitment of the Secretary-General to seeking peace
and reconciliation in Mali. I also take this opportunity
to pay tribute to Mr. David Gressley for his great service
in our country and to wish him the greatest of success
in his future endeavours, in Africa or elsewhere.

I extend the heartfelt thanks of the Malian people
to all friendly nations and international partner
organizations that have shown their solidarity with Mali
by sending their children or their experts to defend the
values binding us together as humankind. I pay solemn
tribute to the memory of those who lost their lives in the
line of duty in Mali, defending human dignity, freedom
and democracy.

The Government of Mali notes the report of
the Secretary-General of the United Nations on
developments in the situation in Mali (S/2015/219),
which is before the Council for consideration today.
However, we are given pause by the claim that all
Malian parties have violated the ceasefire. In this
regard, I must underscore that the Government of Mali
has never violated the ceasefire. I discussed this very
point with my friend Herve Ladsous yesterday, and I
think it would be difficult at this point to offer evidence
to support that claim. The verification and observation
mechanisms set up for this purpose, the Mixed Technical
Commission on Security and mobile joint observation
and verification teams, led by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), have never reported any violation
of the ceasefire whatsoever by the Malian armed forces
or security forces to the Malian authorities.

Council members will recall that, on 25 June 2014
in this very Chamber (see S/PV.7210), the Security
Council adopted resolution 2164 (2014), extending
the mandate of MINUSMA. In paragraph 4 of that
resolution, the Security Council:

"Reiterates its demand that all armed groups
in Mali put aside their arms, cease hostilities
immediately, as well as reject the recourse to
violence and urges all such groups that have cut
off all ties with terrorist organizations and who
recognize, without conditions, the unity and
territorial integrity of the Malian State, to engage
in an inclusive dialogue open to all communities of
the North of Mali".

In addition, in paragraph 3 the Council:

"Urges in particular the Malian authorities
to launch without delay an inclusive and credible
negotiation process with the signatory and adherent
armed groups of the Ouagadougou Preliminary
Agreement, and those armed groups in the North
of Mali that have cut off all ties with terrorist
organizations and committed unconditionally to
the Agreement".

Finally, in paragraph 7 the Council:

"Urges further the parties in this negotiation
processtocoordinatewiththe SpecialRepresentative
of the Secretary-General for Mali, with the goal of
securing a durable political resolution to the crisis
and long-term peace and stability throughout the
country, respecting the sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of the Malian State".

Instead of proceeding with a tedious reading of the
entire resolution, I would like simply to observe that, by
the provisions I have just quoted, the Security Council,
in its great wisdom, essentially entrusted to the Malian
negotiating parties and the international community
the task of playing a three-part symphony on the stage
of peace and long-term reconciliation in Mali.

While the Government of Mali has fully and
completely played its part by engaging in good faith in
the peace process launched on 16 July in Algiers and
initialling, at the same time as the Platform of northern
movements, the agreement submitted to the parties
by the international mediation, the Coordination of
northern movements did not do likewise, instead
refusing to go in that direction, despite numerous calls
from the international community. This attitude betrays
a great defiance of the international community, which
through the mediation had spent eight long months of
intense effort, sacrifice and patience to bring peace and
stability to Mali and the region.

I recall to underscore this fact that, in accordance
with relevant provisions of resolutions and declarations
of the Security Council, the Government of Mali, under
the guidance of the Head of State, President Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita, engaged in inclusive inter-Malian talks
under the auspices of the Algerian-led international
mediation. After eight long months of intense
negotiations, the parties to the inclusive inter-Malian
talks concluded and initialed a draft agreement for
peace and reconciliation in Mali, with the exception of
our brothers from the Coordination of movements, who
asked for additional time to consult with their base.

For its part, the Government of Mali has always
honoured its commitments. Indeed, in initialing the
draft agreement, with full responsibility - and despite
the fact that its memorandum, which included 12
pages of amendments and was distributed to members
of the international mediation, was not taken into
account - the Government of Mali has shown good
faith in seeking a dynamic compromise that would
make it possible to achieve a just and lasting peace to
the crisis affecting our country, in strict compliance
with the principles laid down by the President of
Mali - namely, respect for Mali's territorial integrity,
national sovereignty, and unified, democratic and
secular nature.

Let me recall that, at all stages of the inclusive
inter-Malian talks, the Malian Government has
organized campaigns to raise the awareness of Mali's
stakeholders, including political parties, civil society,
community leaders, refugees and displaced persons,
armed and security forces, with a view to obtaining
the massive support of the population for the process.
That is why, after initialing the agreement, Malians, in
a broad public movement, formed a national alliance for
peace and unity in Mali, and organized huge marches
in all the major cities of the country to show their
commitment to peace, and to demand the signature of
the agreement by all parties. The Malian Government
initialed the agreement, with the strong support of the
vast majority of Malians, who only aspire to peace.
We have launched a momentum that we should not
squander. Yes, Malians are ready for peace. They are
tired of war. They want to turn this dark page in the
history of our nation, which is united and indivisible.
They want to move forward. They want to be heard.
They want, above all, to be understood and respected.

As I speak, exactly 40 days after the initialling of
the draft agreement, it is clear that the Coordination
still has not initialed the compromise document, in spite
of the commitment made on 9 June 2014 in Algiers, to
peacefully resolve the conflict in northern Mali through
a comprehensive and final peace agreement with the
Government of Mali; but also in spite of the numerous
appeals by this Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council; and moreover, in spite of the
17 March visit to Kidal by the international mediation
to bring the Coordination into the peace process, and
ask it to assume its responsibility.

Members will agree when I say that the refusal
to initial and sign an agreement reached at the end
of an inclusive process carries huge risks for peace
in Mali, throughout the region and beyond. It creates
an atmosphere that is not conducive to building the
confidence so vital to all stakeholders in order to
pursue the peace process; it paves the way for unhealthy
initiatives that could jeopardize what has been so
carefully built over eight long months of negotiations.
The Coordination's refusal to initial the draft agreement
also promotes the attempts of terrorist groups and
drug traffickers to destabilize northern Mali, the
entire Sahel region, and beyond. That can be seen in
terrorist attacks, as mentioned earlier by Mr. Ladsous.
The terrorist attacks perpetrated for the first time in
Bamako on 7 March caused the loss of five lives; there
were also attacks and abuses perpetrated in the towns of
Gao, Kidal, Nampala, Boni, Diafarabe, M'Boullikessi,
Dialloube', and elsewhere, with numerous casualties
that included Malians and non-nationals, civilians and
members of the military.
I must say that the negotiation process was also
marked by direct and indirect consultations with all
Malian stakeholders, sometimes without the mediation.
Some direct discussions often took place in our hotel
rooms very late at night or early in the morning, as well
as in the corridors. I should point out that it was not
the Government of Mali that put an end to negotiations.
The mediation, after having listened at length to
all the Malian stakeholders, including civil society,
proposed the initialed draft as a dynamic and balanced
compromise to permanently resolve the current crisis
in our country. We welcome the courage and spirit
of compromise of our brothers and sisters from the
Platform of movements and the self-defence groups,
which clearly chose unity and peace for our country.
We believe that many of our brothers and sisters from
the Coordination of movements only want peace.
They have told us as much, and we believe in their
good faith. However, their voices can barely be heard
alongside those few radicals who, for ulterior motives
and through stalling tactics and prevarication, want to
obstruct peace.

The Security Council and good will should help
those who want peace to make their choice with
courage and to make it known. We ardently appeal to
the Coordination of movements to seize this historic
opportunity to make peace. The first step is to initial and
sign the draft agreement for peace and reconciliation
because there is no alternative to peace. Neither is there
an alternative to this agreement, which, after all, is
only a framework for the parties' ongoing commitment.
It is therefore unacceptable that the peace process in
Mali, the hope of 15 million Malians, should be held
hostage by a group of radical, extremist individuals.
Those who, despite all, choose to obstruct the path to
peace leave the international community no choice but
to isolate them and to treat them as such by imposing
sanctions on them in conformity with the 6 February
statement of the Security Council (S/PRST/2015/5). We
therefore welcome all initiatives intended to encourage
our brothers in the Coordination to become part of the
movement and to ensure that in the month of April, the
decision is made to initial and sign the agreement.

In that regard, we are encouraged by the
announcement made by Algeria of the initialling
ceremony by the Coordination of movements, scheduled
for 15 April in Algiers. We hope that it will lead quickly
and without precondition to the signing by all parties
of the agreement for peace and reconciliation in Mali.
I wish to stress that such must take place without prior
conditions.
The status quo raises the issue of national,
subregional, regional and even international security.
We ask that the Security Council not be distracted by
the radical wing of the Coordination, which manipulates
the public to make it seem as if they have rejected
the agreement. Today, the international community,
similarly to what it has done in other regions, should
make every effort to eradicate the terrorists, drug
traffickers and forces hostile to the peace agreement
in Mali. The work already begun in that vain should be
completed.

I have come before the Security Council to make
several requests. First, I call on the Council to endorse
the agreement initialed on 1 March, as the African Union
Peace and Security Council did in its communique of
27 March in Addis Ababa, a copy of which has been
circulated.

Secondly, I call on the Council to lend its full
support to the agreement initialed with France at
Algiers on 1 March in the framework of the mediation.

Thirdly, I would like the Council to continue to
exert the necessary pressure to bring the Coordination
of Movements to sign off on the agreement without
delay, prior to its signing at Bamako in April, and, if
need be, to consider measures including those set out in
the 6 February presidential statement, namely, targeted
sanctions against those who impede the Algiers peace
process. I emphasize that I am referring to obstacles
here, as we are not calling for sanctions for those who
have not signed off on the agreement. That is not the
goal. Those who have not signed off on the agreement
can take their time, and consultations can continue
to convince them to do so before the train leaves the
station, which must then be able to move at a sustained
pace. I am talking about those who have not signed
off and who are going to oppose the agreement's
implementation - and it is up to Governments, the

international community and the mediation to take the
necessary response.

Finally, I came to ask the Council not to condone any
resumption of talks in Algiers - under any guise - for
the simple reason that such an option is unacceptable to
my Government and the international mediation, for it
runs the risk of setting a very dangerous precedent for
the Security Council. I take this opportunity to reiterate
that the Government of Mali has never closed the door
to dialogue with our brothers in Coordination, or with
any of our other brothers willing to extend a hand in
peace. But for us and for the mediation, the negotiations
are completed. One must therefore face reality, and all
efforts must now aim for the implementation of the
agreement. Against that backdrop, the Government
of Mali has begun to take various steps towards
implementation. Regional development agencies have
been set up in the context ofthe regionalization provided
for in the agreement; the date of municipal elections
has been postponed to ensure the participation of all
communities in the local polls; and awareness-raising
campaigns about the agreement have been conducted in
all regions of the country, as well as in Bamako and in
refugee camps in neighbouring countries.

In conclusion, I would like to recall that we are at a
crucial stage ofthe Algiers process. The Government of
Mali has assumed all ofits responsibilities by committing
itself to the peace process in good faith. The Platform
of Movements has done the same. The international
mediation, led by Algeria, has unanimously initialed
the agreement. France has also initialed, as Ijust said,
and the United States of America has made a statement
in support.

We welcome the unity of action of the international
mediation, which continues to be essential to the
success of the peace process in Mali. In turn, today the
Security Council must face up to its responsibilities.
The eyes of the Malian people are on the Council.
And the countries of the region and those throughout
the world that love peace and justice are watching the
Council as well.

