Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Like other members, my
delegation extends a warm welcome to United States
Senator Joseph Biden and thanks him for his remarks.

We are gratified at the reiteration of the strong
commitment of the United States to the United Nations
and look forward to the resolution of the issue of the
two scales on the basis of the necessary compromise
and flexibility on the part of Member States, as well as
on the basis of principles such as the capacity to pay.
We are confident that, given the strong commitment of
the United States towards the United Nations, which

S/PV.4245

 

has been demonstrated in many areas of the work of
the United Nations, including the important area of
peacekeeping, an amicable solution is possible.

My delegation also welcomes Mr. Jacques Paul
Klein, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Coordinator of United Nations Operations
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, back to the Council, and
we thank him for his comprehensive, candid and
extremely useful briefing. My delegation is also
grateful to the Secretary-General for his latest report
on the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH).

Five years after the signing ofthe Dayton Accord,
its implementation continues to required the sustained
support and active engagement of the international
community. We are gratified that much has been
achieved during this period. The main pillars of
international assistance in Bosnia and Herzegovina -
namely the Stabilization Force (SFOR), the Office of
the High Representative and UNMIBH - continue to
play pivotal roles in their respective areas of the
implementation of Dayton. We note that their work has
not been easy and that progress in the peace
implementation process has been frustratingly slow and
difficult.

My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
affirm once again our full support for Mr. Klein's
leadership and to commend the efforts of the Mission
to further consolidate the development of the
foundations of effective, democratic and sustainable
law enforcement agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We note that some of the measures that UNMIBH
has implemented through the targeted and more
inclusive concept of operations have begun to bear
fruit and that the Mission has made additional progress
in many core mandate areas. In this regard, we fully
support the development of a comprehensive Mandate
Implementation Plan, which sets specific targets,
projects and time-frames for the implementation of the
six core programmes. We believe that it is a step in the
right direction.

Clearly, as was stated by Mr. Klein, the success
of the whole project depends very much on the
provision of adequate resources and on the cooperation
of the parties concerned. We earnestly hope that the
urgent appeal of the Secretary-General to Member
States to contribute to the funding of the priority
projects of UNMIBH and to the Trust Fund for the
Police Assistance Programme will be met. We would
add that resources may be contingent upon the attitude
of the parties to working with UNMIBH in the
implementation ofits mandate.

We regret that the continued political and
administrative obstructions by certain quarters in some
parts of UNMIBH's area of operation have been the
main cause of delay in the work of the Mission.
Political obstructionism and interference with the
implementation of the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina cannot be tolerated. The cooperation and
constructive role of political leaders are of paramount
importance and without them the international
community's efforts will not be successful. We will
therefore not tire in urging the parties concerned to
demonstrate their commitment and to cooperate with
UNMIBH in the establishment of an effective,
democratic and multi-ethnic police force and judiciary
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The UNMIBH judicial system assessment
programme (J SAP) has carried out important work that
can contribute significantly to the ongoing efforts to
reform the Bosnian judiciary. My delegation strongly
supports the continuation of this work and underlines
the need for concrete follow-up actions in this area. We
therefore welcome the establishment of the
Independent Judicial Commission, which will lead the
implementation of the judicial reform programmes. We
hope that the Commission will be able to start its work
as soon as possible and we support the idea that
UNMIBH will assist it even after the mandate of the
JSAP has been completed. This will ensure continuity
in the work ofthe JSAP and the Commission.

We are gratified that the Border Service has been
consolidated and will soon be fully deployed. This, and
the establishment and integration of multi-ethnic police
in both entities - the Federation and Republika
Srpska- must continue to be strongly pursued. We
particularly note in this context the increased illegal
migration and trafficking in human beings, which have
become a major problem in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We believe that the full deployment of the State Border
Service and increased cooperation between the two
entities' police forces - such as through the Joint
Entity Task Force - will have to address this problem.

We welcome the success of UNMIBH's project to
form a Bosnia and Herzegovina police contingent for a
United Nations peacekeeping operation and the

S/PVAZAS

 

subsequent deployment of 26 Bosnian police officers in
East Timor. It is also encouraging that preparations are
already under way for the establishment of a military
peacekeeping contingent of Bosnia and Herzegovina
for a similar purpose.

My delegation is also encouraged to see the
recent increase in minority returns, which, according to
rough estimates, are more than double the number of
such returns in the same period last year. We appreciate
the contribution of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees in this regard.
However, we note that the overall return process
remains slow. Further determined efforts should
therefore be made to promote the return process.

The refugee problem is, of course, at the heart of
the existing insecurity situation, due to the absence of
law and order and to political and administrative
obstruction. This underscores the need for more robust
efforts by the local police to help create a safe and
secure environment, the provision of sufficient funding
for the reconstruction of destroyed villages and the
creation of employment and economic opportunities.

At the same time, political and administrative
obstruction of the return process must be addressed
effectively. We note with concern that the
implementation of property legislation in certain areas,
particularly in eastern Republika Srpska and the Croat-
controlled municipalities of Herzegovina remains
dismal, mainly due to political and administrative
obstruction.

The continued emphasis on the reconciliation
process must remain a high priority for international
efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The consequences
of ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity in the
country must be addressed through justice. We reiterate
the importance we attach to the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which the
international community should continue strongly to
support.

In his report, the Secretary-General has
highlighted the threats posed by the continued presence
of war criminals and war crimes suspects not only to
the peace process, but also to international personnel in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The arrest and prosecution of
all indicted war criminals not only serve to mete out
justice, but also contribute towards accomplishing the
long-term goal of national reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That is why my delegation has stressed
time and again the importance of bringing to book the
leading war criminals Karadzic and Mladic.

We also believe that the work being undertaken
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization in the reconstruction of historic
religious sites and the efforts of the High
Representative and of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to assist the families of the victims
of the Srebrenica massacre will go a long way towards
promoting reconciliation.

