Mr. Gone (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your delegation's assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month, and to express our
confidence in the effectiveness with which you will lead
the Council's work. My delegation is ready to assist you
in carrying out your task. We are very pleased to be
participating in today's open debate on the subject of
peace operations facing asymmetrical threats, giving
us an opportunity to discuss this important topic.

The frequency and complexity of the increasingly
murderous acts of violence committed against civilians
and peacekeeping operations personnel by anonymous
combatants who belong to no legal, recognized
institutions have become a real concern at a time when
there has been a sharp increase in violent conflicts.
President Alassane Ouattara drew the international
community's attention to the issue of terrorism and
asymmetrical threats with his reference, in the general
debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-first
session, to the terrorist attack at Grand Bassam in Cote
d'Ivoire, noting that

"[t]he world must mobilize against terrorism and
fight it with the utmost resolve and determination
before it inflicts irreparable damage and trauma on
our countries and societies" (A/71/PV14, p. 21).

More than ever, the problem of asymmetrical threats

is becoming a major issue for international peace and
security and therefore deserves all the attention that the
United Nations and its Member States can give it. The
asymmetrical war is becoming even more worrying,
since its focus has now expanded beyond traditional
State institutions and is also directed at civilians and
peacekeepers. Only yesterday, the media informed us of
the tragic deaths of a Blue Helmet deployed to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and two civilians, along
with seven others seriously wounded, following an
ambush supported by improvised explosive devices.
That act of terror brings the number of peacekeepers
killed in Mali since 1 January to 35, and MINUSMA's
total losses to nearly 70 in the space of three years. My
delegation takes this opportunity to honour the memory
of the brave soldiers who have sacrificed their lives to
protect United Nations values.

Faced with this kind of complex situation,
peacekeeping operations must adapt to the local
environment. The concept note (S/2016/927, annex)
for today's debate outlines some of the relevant
measures, which include making peacekeeping
operations' mandates more robust and strengthening
their operational capacity, along with the capacities
of national institutions and stakeholders; training;
giving support to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) processes and reforming security
sectors.

My country's 12-year experience of hosting a
peacekeeping operation, the United Nations Operation
in cote d'Ivoire, has taught us that in addition to
the aspects I just mentioned, it is vital to stress the
importance for such operations, when it comes to
fulfilling their mandate, of building close and trusting
relationships with the local population. That involves
more thorough training regarding the local context and
a willingness on the part of United Nations forces to
be seen more as a partner for peace and security than
a foreign force whose sole task is to lay down the law
about people's daily lives. From that viewpoint, focusing
on young people, opinion leaders and local notables
is a very relevant approach. Peacekeeping operations
personnel would also benefit from extensive training in
tactics and in joint actions with forces on the ground.
The planning of peacekeeping operations should be
preceded by an appropriate technical evaluation of the
challenges and forces involved, and regular reviews
should be conducted once the United Nations force is
deployed on the ground.

Dealing effectively with asymmetrical threats
in peacekeeping operations also requires close
collaboration between the United Nations system, local
authorities and non-State actors, and coordination
and synergy are determining factors in that regard.
Such collaboration should be supported by regular
meetings and information exchanges. Strengthening
the operational capacities of the host country's security
and defence forces, as well as assistance in educating
young people and cooperation with local media,
from a preventive point of View, can all contribute to
reducing asymmetrical threats. Where measures for
consolidating the local security infrastructure are
concerned, supporting DDR processes and security-
sector reform is equally important. In the case of
my country's successful DDR process and security
sector reform, the authority in charge of disarmament,
demobilization and social reintegration benefited from
the assistance of the United Nations Operation in
cote d'Ivoire, particularly where marking and storing
collected weapons were concerned.

As rightly stressed in the concept note, cooperation
between peacekeeping operations and all counter-
terrorism institutions and organizations is proving to
be critical. In that regard, the Security Council and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in particular
should continue and strengthen their adherence to the
recommendations of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the Secretary General's Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism. The host country, for its
part, must strive to resolve the causes that generated
the conflict.

In conclusion, I reiterate my delegation's gratitude
for the opportunity to consider this issue of extreme
importantce to the entire international community
context, and especially to our region, West Africa.

