The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

I thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) for her tenth report on Libya and for her
statement today.

Ijoin others in expressing our deep concern about the
ongoing conflict in Libya. The lack of security is having
a clear adverse impact on the Prosecutor's investigation.
The United Kingdom shares the Prosecutor's concerns
set out in her report. Extremely grave crimes are still
being committed by all parties and their allies. Civilian
deaths are still increasing, and violence is still being
used to try to achieve political goals. We condemn all
these acts. We echo the Prosecutor's call for States to
investigate and take action against nationals of their
countries who may have committed crimes in Libya.
The violence must stop; there can be no military solution
to the current crisis. We call on all Libyans, political
parties and civil society alike, to support the ongoing
efforts of the United Nations. A political settlement
establishing a Government of national accord is long
overdue. A political settlement remains the best way to
bring peace and security to the Libyan people and to
tackle the terrorist and extremist threat.

Tackling impunity for atrocities will also be
important in the coming months. Judicial cooperation
between the Office and Libyan authorities is vital
in that regard. We encourage the Libyan Prosecutor
General and the Libyan representative to the Court to
continue to engage with the Prosecutor. We also urge
all States to support the Prosecutor in her investigation
and to assist the Libyan authorities in their efforts to
build the rule of law.

We thank the Prosecutor for her briefing on the
cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi. We are concerned about the reports of
torture and inhumane acts in Al-Hadba prison, and
we support the action taken by the Prosecutor with the
Libyan authorities. We note that the Prosecutor's Office
is still of the view that the case against Mr. Al-Senussi
remains inadmissible. We are also concerned about the
death sentence handed down to Mr. Al-Qadhafi. Libya
has failed to comply with requests for cooperation by
the ICC, including its request for Mr. Al-Qadhafi's
surrender. We reiterate that Libya is obliged to
cooperate fully with the ICC and the Prosecutor, as
set out in resolutions 2213 (2015) and 2238 (2015), and
we call on Libya to surrender Mr. Al-Qadhafi without
delay. We look forward to the Prosecutor's further
views following receipt of the report of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya on Mr. Al-Qadhafi
and Mr. Al-Senussi's trials, the full judgement of the
Libyan court and other relevant information.

We note the Prosecutor's concerns regarding
resources and recognize the financial and capacity
constraints faced by her Office. We are working to
arrive at a budget outcome that will both meet the needs
of the Court and be sensitive to the resources available.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.

