Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We express
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his briefing
on the latest report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Iraq (S/2017/357) and the activities of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
We also join others in expressing sympathy and
solidarity with the people and Government of Iraq on
the recent terrorist attack.

We have been following the recent developments in
Iraq. The fight against terrorist and violent extremism
remains an important priority and we welcome the
progress made by the Iraqi Government, the Peshmerga,
the Popular Mobilization Forces and local fighters, with
the support of the international coalition, in dislodging
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) from
western Mosul following the liberation of the eastern
part of the city. We appreciate the coordination
between the Iraqi security forces and other forces,
which has been indispensible for the progress achieved
recently, and we believe this will remain very critical
in completely defeating ISIL. This kind of coordination
will also have meaningful impact, not only in fighting
against terrorism, but also in tackling other serious
political and security challenges in the country.

The significant advances in the fight against ISIL
has not been without its challenges. The humanitarian
situation, particularly the situation of displaced people,
and a significant number of civilian casualties should
be of concern. With regard to the alleged use of
chemical weapons, we take note of the views expressed
by the Iraqi Government and the ongoing work by the
World Health Organization, together with the Iraqi
Department of Health and civilian protection workers,
to make sure that people who may have been exposed to
chemical agents were identified and treated.

As the report of the Secretary-General noted, it is

women and children who are bearing the brunt because
of the ongoing fighting. The protection of civilians is of
paramount importance and we reiterate our appreciation
of the Government's commitment in prioritizing the
protection of civilians in the Mosul operations. We
hope that the relevant United Nations agencies and
others will do everything possible to deliver much
needed assistance to those displaced by the operation
in close cooperation with the Iraqi Government.

The return of civilian administration and the
resumption of basic services in the liberated areas will
be vital in restoring normalcy and ensuring stability. We
take note of the efforts being made towards inclusive
political dialogue and reconciliation in Iraq. We hope
these efforts will contribute to addressing sectarian and
political divisions and to fostering unity in the country.
In this regard, we appreciate UNAMI's support to
these endeavours.

Finally, the recent visit of the Secretary-General to
Iraq and his meeting with the country's leadership was
indeed important in conveying a message of solidarity,
as Iraq continues to fight terrorism and to address the
multifaceted challenges it faces. We support the call
that he made to all the Iraqi political stakeholders to
engage in a broad-based and representative national
dialogue aimed at achieving sustainable peace and
reconciliation. It was a most appropriate call he made
for the Iraqi crisis has continued for too long.

