Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the briefers.
I would like to begin by paying particular tribute to
Special Representative Ms. Ellen Laj for leading the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
through an extremely difficult period. As all three
briefers have made so painfully clear, South Sudan is
deteriorating before our very eyes. Ethnic tensions have
reached a breaking point. The humanitarian situation
now rivals the worst on the continent of Africa and the
political talks that could have brought peace to millions
now appear to be further from success than at any point
in the country's brief history. We just cannot stay silent
in the face of such tragedy. Here are the three things
that we need to do to help the people of South Sudan.

First and foremost, we need to recognize that this
is no ordinary civil war. Mr. Adama Dieng just said
genocide does not happen overnight. The warning signs
are there. That should play over and over our minds.
He is telling us to open our eyes. He is telling us to act
before it is too late. If we fail to do so, the consequences
will be unspeakable. Just think, if that horrific process,
if that tragedy were to become a reality, how could
we sit around this table and ask what could we have
done? Instead, today, we need to choose to take a
different path.

This brings me to my second point. On the eve of
South Sudan's independence, we unanimously adopted
resolution 1996 (2011), which authorized the creation of
UNMISS. Since that day, South Sudan has landed on
the Council's agenda 70 times. On how many of those
occasions has the Council spoken with one voice? Is
it not time for us to unite to give the people of South
Sudan hope? I know the United Kingdom is willing to
do so. I know that the United Kingdom can and must
play a greater, even more significant part in that effort
as a member of the troika and as a bilateral partner. But
this effort extends beyond any single Government. In
fact, beyond the confines of this Chamber. We need a
truly global effort - one that includes the members of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union, the United Nations, and especially one
that requires the political will, the political courage of
South Sudan's leaders. They must admit to the scale of
the problem and commit to being part of an inclusive
and peaceful political solution.

My third point is that we already know the steps
that need to be taken: an immediate end to the fighting;
an immediate end to obstructions on UNMISS, the
Regional Protection Force and humanitarians; an
immediate end to hate speech and incitement; and
a redoubling of collective political effort behind an
inclusive political conversation. The situation in South
Sudan described today is dark. It is grim. But ley us
make no mistake that, as Ms. Ellen Laj said, it can get
darker. For this reason, we need to listen to Mr. Adama
Dieng and use the tools that we have to prevent that
from happening. I agree with all of his proposals and
that includes his point that it is urgent for the Security
Council to impose an arms embargo. The United
Kingdom has consistently called for that and we
support the United States' proposal. We cannot stand
idly by while the people of South Sudan have weapons
used against them by their fellow citizens. There is no
reason, given these conditions, to allow the continued
flow of weapons to those who could eventually turn
them on civilians.

Let me tackle concerns about an arms embargo
head on. First, an arms embargo is no longer a matter of
political leverage - we have other tools. Cooperation
around a political process and stopping the flow of
arms are not mutually exclusive. Secondly, we know
that an arms embargo can be implemented because of
the limited infrastructure in South Sudan - only one
main tarmac road and only four main airports. Thirdly,
we know that, with an embargo, the operation of heavy
weaponry will be limited and the flow of ammunition
will be reduced. Therefore, we know that an arms
embargo will have an impact in the short, medium
and long term. We know all the answers to all of those
questions and we know that stopping these weapons
will be a step in the right direction in this matter oflife
and death.

No matter how dark the situation is in South Sudan,
it can get worse, but it can also get better, provided we
take action. So let us act collectively and with authority,
wisely using the tools at our disposal, to get where we
are all aiming, namely sustainable peace and freedom
from fear for the people of South Sudan.

