I would first like to thank France for convening this meeting on such a fundamental issue. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/525). This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which established a robust framework to enhance child protection in armed conflict. Brazil is proud to have supported the resolution as a member of the Council in 2005. The monitoring and reporting mechanism thereby created constitutes one of the pillars of the children and armed conflict agenda. Brazil is fully committed to the advancement of this agenda. We ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict and endorsed both the Vancouver Principles Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers and the Paris Commitments. We have also supported initiatives on the ground, such as the promotion of the practice of capoeira, an Afro-Brazilian martial art, as a tool to reintegrate former child soldiers in Haiti and in eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of Congo. During its most recent mandate as a member of the Council, Brazil supported the adoption of resolution 1998 (2011) - another landmark instrument for the children and armed conflict agenda - which focuses on attacks against hospitals and schools. The protection of educational facilities is instrumental to providing a sense of normality and stability to children. Education gives them hope for a brighter future, thus alleviating the suffering caused by war. In that spirit, Brazil endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration, which represents an important political commitment to ensuring children's education, even during hostilities. Last February, Brazil also hosted, together with Poland and the United States, a meeting of the Warsaw process working group on humanitarian issues and refugees, which brought together delegations from all regions to discuss challenges regarding child protection and education in the Middle East. The working group made a relevant contribution to ongoing regional and national efforts, including those coordinated with United Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations, to protect children and youth in armed conflicts as well as to ensure access to quality education during displacement. Brazil welcomes the signing of new action plans and commitments by the United Nations with listed parties to conflicts. The continued engagement with Governments and non-State actors is a powerful tool to change behaviour and protect children's rights. Despite progress in some areas, the reported 25,000 grave violations are a matter of great concern, as they reveal a broader trend of blatant disrespect for international law. Brazil reiterates its condemnation of the targeting and use of children in armed conflict and underscores the responsibility of all parties to shield them from the direct consequences of war, including by refraining from the use of force, as required by the Charter of the United Nations. Brazil shares the Secretary-General's concern at the growing number of children in detention for actual or suspected association with opposing parties and concurs with the report's assessment that children should be treated primarily as victims. While both armed conflicts and domestic law enforcement are examined in the annual report, they pose entirely different challenges and must be addressed through different policies. Armed conflicts and other threats to international peace and security are under the purview of the Council and follow specific rules, while issues of internal law enforcement fall outside its mandate. One should not lose sight of this distinction or of the appropriate forums in which to discuss each of them. In conclusion, the international community can count on Brazil to advance the children and armed conflict agenda in the Security Council and to promote peace, which "remains the most powerful means to reduce violations against children" (S/2020/525, para. 15).
