Mr. Choi (Republic of Korea): Angola has trodden
the rocky road of peacemaking for the past two years,
following the signing of the Lusaka Protocol in November
1994. Although we cannot be totally satisfied with the slow
pace of the peace process during this period, or with its
pattern of intermittent fits and starts, we believe that the
efforts made by the Angolan parties and the international
community have indeed been necessary and worthwhile.

Among recent developments, we welcome the fact
that today UNITA formally declared the completion of
the ever-pressing task of quartering all its troops and that
the Government has initiated the actual incorporation of
UNITA troops, beginning with the nine generals currently
residing in Luanda.

We would like to underline, however, that the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and other
commitments between the Angolan parties have yet to be
finalized. With the completion of the mission of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) two months away, as envisaged in Security Council
resolution 976 (1995), it is time for the Angolan parties
to build on past achievements and further accelerate
efforts to complete the final stages of the peace process.
We sincerely hope that the implementation of crucial
military tasks will mark the initiation of genuine
reconciliation through political negotiation between the
Angolan parties.

As the military commitments are being fulfilled, the
political aspects of the peace process will loom larger in
the coming months. The establishment of a Government
of National Unity and Reconciliation is the next crucial
step in the long- overdue peace process. Needless to say,
success can be guaranteed only when the Government and
UNITA mutually cooperate and compromise.

While the establishment of a Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation is not to be linked with
other political issues, we believe that all outstanding
political issues can be best and most expeditiously settled
through a tete-a-tete between the President of Angola and
the leader of UNITA. We urge both parties to show a
spirit of maximum cooperation and flexibility for the
realization of this meeting and the settlement of all
outstanding political issues. In this regard, we place
special emphasis on paragraphs 10 through 12 of the draft
resolution before the Council.
At the same time, we are not oblivious to the ever-
increasing need for socio-economic stability in Angola.
The pressing and costly tasks of demobilizing and
reintegrating the 10,000 ex-combatants, and relieving and
rehabilitating over a million displaced persons, will have
to be addressed through hard work by the Government,
with the help of the international community. Angola is
also facing many other challenges in the areas of State
 

governance, public accountability, and law and order. The
consolidation of peace in Angola cannot be forthcoming
without the Government and the international community
continuing to make their best efforts to tackle these issues.
We believe, therefore, that close scrutiny of the situation on
the ground will be necessary to help consolidate peace in
Angola with the adequately restructured presence and
assistance of the international community. We
wholeheartedly welcome, in this regard, the idea of sending
a Security Council mission to Angola at an appropriate time
to assess the situation and better decide on the pace of
withdrawal of UNAVEM. III and the modalities of a follow-
on United Nations presence.

In conclusion, we support the extension of the
mandate of UNAVEM. III until the end of February 1997
and its subsequent reduction, as suggested in the draft
resolution on the basis of the Secretary-General's
recommendation. Therefore, my delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before the Council.

