Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and the
countries aligning themselves with this statement.

Afghanistan has achieved considerable progress
over the past four years in partnership with the
international community. The political transition
process, as set out in the Bonn Agreement, has been
successfully completed with the inauguration of the
Afghan National Assembly on 19 December 2005.

It is now vital to deepen and consolidate the
progress achieved so far. With the major political State
institutions now in place in the centre, it is important
that those institutions extend their capacity to provide,
in an efficient manner, security and essential public
services to the population throughout the country.

Another milestone was the launching of the
Afghanistan Compact at the London Conference on
Afghanistan on 31 January and 1 February 2006. The
European Union welcomes the Afghanistan Compact
on the basis of partnership between the Afghan
Government and the international community, with a
central and impartial coordinating role for the United
Nations. The Compact is based on Afghan priorities
and thus ensures Afghan ownership. This is in line
with the European Union's longstanding support for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of an
Afghanistan that is accountable to its citizens, able to
assume its rightful place in the international
community and to contribute to regional stability.

The European Union fully supports all three
pillars of activity identified by the Compact: security;
governance, rule of law and human rights; and
sustainable economic and social development, as well
as the cross-cutting priority of counter-narcotics.

We remain committed to long-term support for
the efforts of the Afghan Government, and of the
people of Afghanistan in each of these areas, and we
will further enhance the effectiveness of our action.
The EU-Afghanistan Joint Declaration of 16 November
2005 is a clear expression of this intent. Our assistance
will be aimed mainly at fostering the establishment of a
democratic, accountable and sustainable Afghan
State - one capable of exercising its sovereignty and
protecting the rights of its citizens, while stressing
Afghan ownership in the process. We will build upon
our already extensive engagement in the political,
security, development and humanitarian fields, and we
will ensure that counter-narcotics is mainstreamed
throughout activities in each of these areas.

The challenges of the phase following the
successful completion of the Bonn process call for
deepening and consolidating the progress achieved so
far. Counter-narcotics will remain a cross-cutting
priority in our overall EU policy towards Afghanistan.
We will sustain and increase our efforts in support of
the priorities highlighted in the Government of
Afghanistan's national drug control strategy. More
specifically, we will support the development of strong
and effective counter-narcotics institutions, law
enforcement and criminal justice agencies, including
through the provision of mentors and trainers, and will
provide financial support for efforts by the Afghan
Government to strengthen and diversify sustainable
opportunities for leading rural livelihoods.

The human rights situation remains a cause for
concern, in particular with regard to women and
children. The EU will continue to give priority to this
issue. We welcome the efforts put into drafting an
interim national action plan for women in Afghanistan.
This document will be a vital instrument to promote
the participation of women and ensure their rightful
place in Afghan public life.

In the context of continued efforts to end the
culture of impunity and to promote reconciliation, the
EU regards transnational justice as a crucial
component. Equally important, we will continue to
support the strengthening of a viable Afghan civil
society as a way of consolidating democracy in
Afghanistan. Furthermore, the European Union will
pay special attention to governance and administrative
reform and anti-corruption strategies, including at the
provincial level, and to promoting human rights and
the rule of law.

We will increase financial support for reform of
the justice sector at both the central and provincial
levels. In that regard, we will directly support
provincial reconstruction team civilian activities, led
by EU member States, which will include activities
focused on the rule of law and good governance at the
provincial level.

The security situation also remains a cause for
concern and continues to undermine reconstruction
efforts outside the cities. We will increase support for
security sector reform, including by providing training
and increased financial support for the creation of an
effective and sustainable Afghan national police force,
and by making available a further contribution to
support the disarmament and reintegration of former
combatants.

The European Union welcomes the Doha
Declaration on Border Management in Afghanistan and
the Declaration on Closer Cooperation on border
police, both agreed in Doha on 28 February.

European Union member States continue to play
their substantial role in supplying military and civilian
resources to the NATO-led International Security
Assistance Force.

The European Union will continue to support
Afghanistan's sustainable economic and social
development and its efforts to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. We will provide assistance within
the framework of the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy and the Afghanistan Compact.
Programmes and projects will be coordinated with the
Afghan Government in order to ensure that they are
consistent with its priorities and that donor activities
are rationalized.

The EU will provide assistance directly through
the budget and will continue to encourage the Afghan
Government to reach greater financial self-
sustainability.

I would like to conclude by stressing that the
European Union looks forward to continued close
cooperation with the rest of the international
community, drawing on the Afghanistan Compact and
the EU-Afghanistan Joint Declaration as frameworks
for our cooperation. The European Union supports the
continued central role of the United Nations, including
in the monitoring and coordination of donor activities
by the international community.

In that context, the European Union welcomes the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
latest report on Afghanistan (S/2006/ 145) regarding the
future mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan. UNAMA will thus continue
the important role it has had in the past in the
implementation of the Bonn Agreement. However,
progress is dependent on long-term political
commitment on the part of all stakeholders, both in
Afghanistan and among members of the international
community.

The European Union will continue to closely
coordinate its actions and programmes with the United
Nations, its agencies and other relevant international
organizations.

