First, I would like to congratulate the Dominican Republic on its professional handling of this month's presidency of the Security Council and on finding creative solutions to the procedural and technological challenges. In these unprecedented times, when the world and the United Nations are fighting the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we must remind ourselves that the Palestinian people under occupation face an even bigger crisis. It is precisely in such challenging times that we must rally our support for, and solidarity with, them. As the world's attention is turned to preventing loss of life and limiting the spread of the pandemic, the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, has continued to deteriorate and the occupation is still advancing, in grave breach of international law, including humanitarian law and human rights law, and in violation of United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016), which call for an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and the fulfilment of the rights of the Palestinian people, including to self-determination and independence. With 437 confirmed cases, 15 of them in Gaza, and two deaths, as of 19 April, the State of Palestine has joined the rest of the world as a victim of the outbreak. The negative shock to the Palestinian economy will have profound implications for public welfare, employment, social cohesion and financial and institutional stability. Strong international donor support and targeted technical assistance will be crucial on the path to recovery. While technical coordination between the Israeli and the Palestinian authorities is supporting the response to the virus on the ground, such measures cannot be mistaken for well-intentioned steps towards a peaceful solution. In fact, as the international community focuses its attention on the fight against the pandemic, the occupying Power, Israel, has continued to entrench the occupation and to openly discuss its intention to annex the occupied Palestinian territory, with measures being taken while this debate is held and the illegal Israeli blockade on Gaza continues. Home demolitions, evictions, the confiscation of Palestinian property, the destruction of agricultural and livelihood structures, the expansion of settlement construction, human rights abuses and settler violence, as well as military incursions, have continued. The destruction of water, sanitation and hygiene facilities is putting thousands of Palestinians at an increased risk of contracting the virus and are jeopardizing their health and safety. That is in breach of Israel's legal obligation to protect the right to health and life of Palestinians under the Fourth Geneva Convention. Children, especially the 194 currently in administrative detention in Israeli jails, are being affected by the virus. The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People calls for the release of all Palestinian prisoners whose health is at increased risk of virus contagion in detention facilities. Similarly, as reported by Special Coordinator Mladenov on 30 March (see S/2020/263), the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016) continue to be violated. Declarations of regret and concern have made no difference. The international community must ensure that the occupying Power meets its obligations in all these matters under international law and international humanitarian law and that there is accountability for not doing so. During the virtual event organized by the Committee on 14 April, the Director of Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), Mr. Matthias Schmale, mentioned that in the Gaza Strip the main concerns were a dilapidated economy and an inadequate health infrastructure, aggravated by high population density, especially in refugee camps. As UNRWA's core funding for Gaza is expected to last until May or June, the Committee urges the international community to continue to provide the Agency with adequate and reliable funding for the continuity of its operations in all fields in order to ensure its vital assistance to the Palestine refugees. The Committee reiterates its call for the total lifting of the Gaza blockade and to refrain from imposing further restrictions, which would be devastating for the economy of the Gaza Strip. Statements reaffirming support for the two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders and opposing the Israeli annexation have poured in from almost all countries, the Middle East Quartet as well as representatives of the United States Congress. As welcome as they are, statements are not enough, and the time for action is long overdue. The expansion of Israel's control over the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, is eroding, literally, the possibility of achieving the two- State solution. The goal of seeing Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and security along the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian State, remains unchanged, still unattained and at great risk. In the midst of this health scourge, we must not forget that, while everyone is affected by COVID-19, the pandemic's most devastating consequences are for women and girls, from health and the economy to security and social protection. Palestinian women and girls are no exception. Yet women are not just victims in the crisis; they also play a major role in the response and must be supported in their efforts. The Secretary-General's recent call for a global ceasefire was heeded by many warring parties. The United Nations Middle East Envoys joined him in calling on parties to de-escalate tensions and urged greater humanitarian action to prevent the spread of the pandemic in the region. We also call on Israel, the occupying Power, to heed the long-standing call for a halt to illegal actions and practices, including all measures aimed at the annexation of territory, and, in accordance with its obligations under international law, to ensure the protection of the Palestinian civilian population under its control by providing humanitarian access and assistance so as to prevent the spread of COVID-19. We in the United Nations have the tools to rein in violence and injustice and to seek peace, justice and security for all. We are committed to leaving no one behind. Not unlike the fight against the pandemic, we are in this together. Each of us, individually and collectively, must do our part, for only by caring for our neighbours can we save ourselves.
