Mr. Calovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): Let me start by expressing my delegation's
great satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, the Permanent
Representative of Canada, a country with which the
Republic of Macedonia has traditionally enjoyed excellent
relations, presiding over the Security Council for the month
of February.

The Security Council will decide today whether the
United Nations will continue with its very important
contribution to peace and security in the region of my
country, the Republic of Macedonia, in the currently
troubled Balkans.

At this moment, it can be argued at length that the
contribution of the United Nations is more necessary than
when the Security Council decided to extend the mandate
of the United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP) last year.

It is common knowledge why it should do so. I will
avoid elaborating on that. The main reasons for the Council
to decide in favour of extension are clearly spelt out in the
letter of the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Macedonia,
Mr. Aleksandar Dimitrov, dated 29 January 1999, contained
in document S/1999/108, and in the Secretary-General's
report to the Council on the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force, contained in document S/1999/161 of
12 February 1999.

We are pleased with the Secretary-General's
recommendation contained in paragraph 34 of his report
that

"the Security Council may wish to consider
extending the presence of UNPREDEP, with its
existing mandate and composition, for a further
period of six months until 31 August 1999".
(5/1999/161, para. 34)
We are also pleased that the members of the Security
Council during the process of consultations have
supported the Secretary-General's recommendations.

I would like to use this opportunity to underline that
UNPREDEP is discharging its mandate successfully and
that the cooperation with Macedonia and other
international organizations is exemplary and good. I
would like to express our satisfaction with the work of
the present head of the mission, Mr. Valenzuela Marzo,
and with his predecessor, Mr. Henryk Sokalski. I would
also like to express the same satisfaction with the work of
the Force Commander, Brigadier-General Ove Stromberg,
and of course with all the military and civilian personal
under their command.

Indeed, the Security Council should be pleased with
the dedication that all the members of the mission have
shown in carrying out the task entrusted to them. I am
sure that this cooperation and the carrying out of this task
will continue successfully in the period to come.

Since I have the floor, I would like to say a few
words about the situation in our region. My comments
will contain nothing that is new to the members of the
Council, but they are important for its records and for
public opinion at large.

The situation continues to be very difficult,
dangerous and unpredictable, and it can be safely
considered a serious threat to the peace and security of
the Balkans. The possibility of a new bloody war in the
Balkans should be considered a real one. There remain
unacceptable options of Violence, of the use of force and
of achieving something by military means and not
through diplomatic and political means. I regret to say
that the forces of peace, particularly in Kosovo, are weak,
and it is of paramount importance that they be
strengthened. In that human and political effort the United
Nations and Member States of this Organization,
individually or collectively, should take part - I repeat,
should take part.

 

In sum, the United Nations should not abandon the
region, should not run from the troubles and should prevent
the worst from happening. Extension of the mandate of
UNPREDEP should be seen, therefore, as providing
important support to the peace forces in the region. It
should be seen as a must for our Organization. At this
moment, prevention of a new war in the Balkans is of
utmost urgency and a very serious obligation of the
Security Council under the Charter of the United Nations,
in particular under Article 24, where the Council is
requested, as I would like to underline, to act on behalf of
the Member States. And I can safely state that the Member
States fully support the extension of the mandate of the first
successful preventive peacekeeping mission of the United
Nations.

Let me add a few words more on this. As you know
very well, the veto right has been extensively discussed in
our Organization, particularly in recent years. The Member
States, with the exception of a few, are in favour of not
exercising this right that has been entrusted to the
permanent members of the Security Council. The main
reason, or argument, against the use of the veto has been
and is now that the Security Council under the United
Nations Charter acts on behalf of the Member States, not of
an individual Member State. In the case of UNPREDEP it
should be noted quite strongly that the extension of its
mandate is supported by all - I repeat, all - Member
States except one, and that because of bilateral
considerations, something that we all consider to be in full
contradiction of the Charter of our Organization.

I will end my statement by expressing the hope that
the Council will adopt a resolution in support of the
Secretary-General's recommendation, in favour of peace in
the region, in favour of continuing the important and
successful work of UNPREDEP. In Macedonia in such a
situation we say that it is never too late to take a positive
step.

