Mr. Lowcock: We have received a lot of questions
about resolution 2401 (2018), which the Security Council
adopted on Saturday, 22 February, and its demand for
a cessation of hostilities without delay for at least 30
consecutive days throughout Syria. I want to start
today by answering the questions we have received.
Is the United Nation ready to deliver to people who
need humanitarian assistance? Yes. We have convoys
ready to go to 10 besieged and hard-to-reach locations,
including a 45-truck convoy with aid for 90,000 people
to Douma and eastern Ghouta. Are you ready to support
medical evacuations from eastern Ghouta? Yes, we are
working very closely with the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC), the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
and other health partners on that. Has resolution 2401
(2018) been implemented? Is there a ceasefire in Syria?
No, and no. Have you got any inter-agency cross-line
convoys through to hard-to-reach or besieged areas?
No. Have you been given permission to access any of
those locations? No. Have you received the necessary
facilitation letters for convoys? No. Have there been
any medical evacuations? No. Have any civilians left
eastern Ghouta? No. Is there any actual improvement
in the humanitarian situation in eastern Ghouta since
the adoption of the resolution demanding, as it did,
unimpeded access? No. Can you deliver assistance in
eastern Ghouta during a humanitarian pause between
9 a.m. and 2 pm. local time? To quote the ICRC Middle
East Director, who spoke about that yesterday: "It is
impossible to bring a humanitarian convoy in five
hours." Agencies now have years of experience in that
area, and it can take a day simply to pass checkpoints,
even when the parties have agreed. The goods then
have to be offloaded.

If there has been no humanitarian access since the
adoption of resolution 2401 (2018) on Saturday, what
has happened in the past few days? More bombing,
fighting, death, destruction, maiming of women and
children, hunger and misery - in other words, more
of the same.

On 26 February, two days ago, airstrikes, barrel
bombs and artillery shelling were reported across
eastern Ghouta, including in Harasta, Shafuniyeh,
Otaya, Hosh Eldawahreh, Al-Ashari, Jobar, Beit Sawa,
Hazerma, Hannnura, Nashabiyeh, Sagba and Douma.
Reports indicate that at least 30 civilians, including
women and children, were killed. In Shafuniyeh, 14
people, including three women and four children, were
reportedly killed and many others injured by airstrikes.
Eighteen civilians, including drivers of ambulances,
women and children, were reportedly received at
health facilities in Shafuniyeh with difficulties
breathing, consistent with the use of chlorine. One
child reportedly died as a result. On the same day, two
workers from local non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) were reportedly killed as a result of shelling
on the besieged enclave. It was also reported that two
health-care facilities in Saqba were taken out of service
by airstrikes. In the past few days, shells have also
reportedly continued to fall on Damascus city from
eastern Ghouta.

Since 18 February, more than 580 people are now
reported to have been killed due to air and ground strikes
in eastern Ghouta, with many more than 1,000 people
injured. At the same time, hundreds of rockets fired
from eastern Ghouta into Damascus have reportedly
killed 15 people and injured more than 200.

I now want to update the Security Council on the
situation in other parts of the country.
In Idlib, fighting continues to kill and injure
civilians, destroy civilian infrastructure and result
in large population movements. Since December, an
estimated 385,000 people have been displaced, with
many civilians moving north. Half of Idlib's population
was already displaced. People are being forced to
move yet again, with each disruption increasing their
vulnerability. Civilians are concentrated in an ever-
smaller area. Many are forced to live in makeshift camps
or in the open air. Formal camps are overwhelmed,
operating at up to 400 per cent of their capacity. The
response is being stretched to its limits.

We are receiving reports of civilian deaths and
injuries and of restriction on the movement of many
civilians as a result of military operations in Afrin.
Those who risk moving continue to be stopped at exit
points by the local authorities in Afrin, preventing
them from accessing safer areas. We believe that, so
far, approximately 5,000 people have reached the
surrounding villages and Aleppo city. Tens of thousands
are believed to be displaced within Afrin. The Turkish
authorities have emphasized to us their willingness to
facilitate humanitarian access. We would like to see aid
convoys operated from Damascus. However, to date
that has not been agreed by the Syrian side.

In Raqqa city, conditions remain unsafe for the
return of internally displaced persons (IDPs). Among
those trying to return home, 637 people have been injured
and more than 125 killed by unexploded ordinance since
last October. Medical and other essential services are
absent and access for humanitarian workers to the city
remains precariously limited because the conditions are
so dangerous. As I have said before, demining activities
need to be accelerated as a matter of urgency.

Humanitarian access for the United Nations and
its implementing partners in Hasakah was limited for
much of January due to the increased restrictions placed
by the local authorities. United Nations convoys were
blocked from travelling to the northeast from elsewhere
within the country. The delivery of aid already in local
warehouses was also blocked. While an agreement
to resume humanitarian deliveries was reached on
30 January, that agreement will end in March. NGO
partners continue to deliver goods and services across
the north-east. However, sustainable access for the
United Nations is critical. Any protracted interruption
of humanitarian assistance and services in the IDP sites
may drive the displaced people back to areas where
they are not safe.

Earlier this month, the United Nations received
clearance for the first assessment visit to Deir ez-Zor
after it had been under the control of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) for three and a half years.
More than 100,000 people live in the town despite that
fact that it is estimated to be 80 per cent destroyed.
The infrastructure is almost completely destroyed,
particularly in the central and the eastern areas, where
ISIL was in control. In coordination with the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent, the United Nations has dispatched
78 trucks carrying food, health, nutrition, protection,
shelter, education, water and sanitation items since last
September, when ISIL was driven out.

Finally, we remain concerned about the tens of
thousands of people stranded in Rukban, in south-
eastern Syria. We continue to seek the necessary
agreements for convoys of life-saving assistance
to them.

As I said last week (see S/PV. 8186), there was a
severe reduction, of nearly 40 per cent, in cross-line
access to besieged and hard-to-reach areas in 2017
as compared to 2016. On average in 2017, over the
entire 12-month period, we reached 165,000 people a
month with cross-line convoys. That was completely
inadequate. So far this year, we have reached a total of
only 7,200 people through a single small convoy earlier
this month. In other words, we were reaching more than
50 times as many people in besieged and hard-to-reach
areas last year as to date this year. The main reason
for the reduction in the number of convoys has been
the consistent refusal by the Government of Syria to
provide the necessary approvals and facilitation letters
to support delivery.

As the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/l38)
details, while we continue to reach millions of people
in urgent need in areas controlled by the Government
of Syria and through the cross-border programmes
mandated in resolution 2393 (2017), assistance across
conflict lines to millions of people in hard-to-reach
and besieged areas has completely collapsed in recent
months. Unless that changes, we will soon see even
more people dying from starvation and disease than
from the bombing and shelling.

The United Nations remains focused on reaching
those most in need throughout the country, including
the 5.6 million people considered to be in acute need.
The needs-based approach means that the United
Nations will continue to seek to deliver aid and to
provide services to millions of people in a principled
manner regardless of where they are located. More than
half of those in need are in Government-controlled
areas. However, millions more people are not.

What the Syrian people need has been made
abundantly clear-protection, access to basic goods and
services, an end to sieges and respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The Security Council has unanimously supported all
such needs in adopting resolution 2401 (2018).

I started today by answering questions that we have
received regarding resolution 2401 (2018). I would like
to end with a question for the Security Council. When
will the resolution be implemented?

