Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
this, your first meeting as President of the Council, I
should like to welcome you, Sir, and to offer you our
full cooperation towards the success of your work. I
also extend special thanks to Ambassador Joy ngu
for her outstanding work and wisdom in leading the
Council last month.

I warmly thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, for
his exhaustive second briefing on the implementation
of the relevant provisions of resolution 1970 (2011)
and for the additional information with which he has
provided the Council today. His account of his work
and his meticulous and conscientious attention to detail
demonstrate that the Court is acting in great earnest.

Clearly, both the Office of the Prosecutor and the
Pre-Trial Chamber have acted speedily and effectively
during the first stage of the procedures arising from the

Council's referral of the case to the Court in resolution
1970 (2011). We note that three cases have been
opened charging murder and political persecution
committed, according to the Prosecution, in the course
of attacks on the civilian population in pursuit of State
policy. Those are therefore crimes against humanity for
which the individuals in question should be held
criminally responsible, and the international
community has shown a willingness to do so.

Investigations are continuing in other areas. In
particular, the Office of the Prosecutor is considering
the possibility of investigating accusations in
connection with gender-related crimes and war crimes,
which could give rise to new proceedings as a result of
the events that occurred in Libya. My delegation
believes that an essential part of this stage of the
process is the necessary cooperation with the
International Criminal Court of all actors involved,
especially the new authorities in Libya. The second
report of the Prosecutor contains important and
encouraging references to the positive attitude in this
regard on the part of both the States parties to the
Rome Statute and other international bodies such as
Interpol and United Nations commissions of inquiry.

We deem it of the utmost importance that those
Governments that are the recipients of specific requests
for cooperation with regard to goods and monies
obtained through illicit activities respond rapidly to
such requests. Such information could be vital to the
conclusion of open investigations and could have
serious ramifications in terms of the payment of
reparations to victims, as is provided for under the
Rome Statute.

We welcome the statements made by the new
Libyan authorities with regard to their willingness to
cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor and their
involvement in the important task of preserving
evidence. It is now up to States to take the relevant
measures to ensure that those accused who remain at
large are apprehended.

As we stated at the meeting held last May, when
the first report of the Prosecutor's Office with regard to
the situation in Libya was presented, the arrest of those
accused and their surrender to the ICC for trial is the
way to implement the decision taken by the Security
Council under Chapter VII of the Charter. Thus any
failure to implement those measures would negatively
affect the authority and credibility of the Council itself.

