Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting and for the concept note
(S/2015/846, annex) provided to guide our discussions.
We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for his
insightful briefing.

We commend the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations (HIPPO) for consulting widely with
Member States, regional organizations and the United
Nations committees in the course of its work. That, we
believe, has led to the broad acceptance ofits report (see S/2015/446). We note the broad themes under which the
Panel examined the challenges faced by United Nations
peace operations, namely, partnerships, politics,
prevention and people. Nigeria welcomes the Human
Rights Up Front action plan, proposed by the Secretary-
General to implement the Panel's recommendations,
which renew focus on prevention, mediation and

stronger regional and global partnerships. Those entail
new ways of planning and conducting United Nations
peace operations to make them faster, more responsive
and more accountable to the needs of countries and
people in conflict. In prioritizing areas of the HIPPO
report for implementation, it is pertinent to proceed
from identifying propositions to providing immediate
and enduring solutions to targeted challenges and
United Nations peace operations.

We underscore the vital needs to address evolving
challenges of peacekeeping in the context of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
In that connection, we emphasize the importance
of strengthening triangular cooperation among the
Secretariat, troop- and police- contributing countries
and the Security Council to foster common acceptance
and appreciation on the part of all stakeholders for
the effective implementation of the United Nations
peacekeeping initiatives.

We welcome HIPPO's recommendations aimed
at enhancing the cooperation relationship between
the United Nations and the African Union (AU).
Partnership is the cornerstone of Africa's efforts to
stabilize its conflict zones and to shoulder its share of
the global responsibility to maintain peace and security.
In that regard, it is important to highlight the funding
challenges faced by the AU, and the need for the United
Nations to assume primary responsibility for AU-led
operations initiated as bridging measures. That should
not be misunderstood as unwillingness on the part of
the AU to manage its own operations. Rather, it is an
acknowledgement that resolving armed conflicts in the
world of today often requires complex, nuanced and
high-technology responses that demand a particular
level of infrastructure that the AU might not be able
to immediately make available. The need for support
does not amount to dependency. Rather, it should be
viewed as a necessary element of the vital partnership
for maintaining international peace and security.

We welcome the Panel's proposal regarding
the use of United Nations assessed contributions to
support Security Council-authorized African Union
peace-support operations, including the causes
associated with deployed uniformed personnel to
complement funding for the African Union and all
African Member States. We also welcome the Secretary-
General's decision to prioritize the implementation
of the Panel's recommendation regarding developing
stronger and original global partnerships. That
would require improving institutional collaboration
between the United Nations and original bodies that
would go beyond context-specific to more predictable
mechanisms for cooperation. In that regard, we look
forward to the early finalization of the joint African
Union-United Nations framework for an enhanced
partnership in peace and security.

Nigeria supports the proposal for tailoring and
sequencing mandates for peacekeeping missions.
That will enable planners to take into consideration
realities on the ground when reformulating mandates
and assessing the resources needed to achieve the
required tasks. Sequencing also helps to ensure that the
dialogues among the Security Council, the Secretariat
and troop- and police- contributing countries are not
limited to the predeployment phases of missions, but
sustained as an integral and periodic component of the
mission's work.

The United Nations peace operations have, since
their inception, been a vital part of the global security
architecture. They are a source of inspiration and
hope for the victims of conflicts. Ensuring that peace
operations remain relevant now and in the future will
require the collective efforts of United Nations Member
States to surmount existing and emerging challenges.
As we consider the HIPPO report and that of the
Secretary- General (S/2015/682) and seek a way forward,
the Security Council is again charged primarily with
the maintenance of international peace and security
and must demonstrate leadership by expediting action
on recommendations directed to it.

I would like to conclude by offering our deepest
condolences to the families, friends and Governments
of peacekeepers who have lost their lives in the line of
duty. I also would like to express our commiseration
with the families of those who have been affected by the
recent terrorist attacks in France, Lebanon and Mali.

