Mr. Sevan: In paragraph 16 (f) of its resolution
1483 (2003) the Security Council requests the
Secretary-General

"to provide the Security Council, 30 days prior
to the termination of the Programme, with a
comprehensive strategy developed in close
coordination with the Authority and the Iraqi
interim administration that would lead to the
delivery of all relevant documentation and the
transfer of all operational responsibility of the
Programme to the Authority".

When I briefed the Security Council at its
informal consultations on 29 September 2003, I noted
that most of our exit strategies had been overtaken by
events over which we had no control. We had planned
to submit a written report pursuant to paragraph 16 (f)
of resolution 1483 (2003), but prevailing uncertainties
on the ground demanded flexibility and compelled us
to constantly review our options for the phasing down
and termination of the Programme. I therefore
suggested that we report progress at least once a week
to the Council, through its Committee established
pursuant to resolution 661 (1990), in lieu of a written
report. I thank the Council for its understanding and for
its agreement with our suggested course of action.

As members know, we have provided the
Committee with weekly updates, and we participate in
its formal and informal meetings. We have also kept
the Coalition Provisional Authority and the relevant
Iraqi authorities fully informed, and have been working
very closely with them to finalize the necessary
arrangements for the termination of the Programme.

We have also kept Member States and suppliers
informed through the Office of the Iraq Programme
web site of the relevant decisions and arrangements
with regard to, inter alia, the prioritization of contracts
and the authentication of humanitarian supplies
imported to Iraq under the Programme.

On behalf of all my colleagues involved in the
implementation of the Programme, I should like to
personally record our most sincere gratitude to all
members of the Council and its Committee, as well as
to the Chairman of the Committee, His Excellency
Ambassador Gunter Pleuger of Germany, and members
of his delegation for their continued understanding and
support and for their cooperation with the Office of the
Iraq Programme.

The United Nations will terminate the Programme
on 21 November 2003, as called for in resolution 1483
(2003), and will continue to facilitate a smooth
handover to the Coalition Provisional Authority, in
close coordination with the relevant Iraqi authorities.

In that connection, I should like to inform the
Council that in a letter dated 8 October 2003 addressed
to Mr. Tesfaye Maru, Deputy United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator in the three northern
governorates, Ambassador Steven Mann, Coalition
Provisional Authority Senior Adviser, Oil-for-Food
Transition Team, North, stated as follows.

"In accordance with Security Council
resolution 1483 (2003), and as reaffirmed
by the United States in the Security Council
meeting of 29 September, the Authority will
assume responsibility for the phaseout and
handover. There will be no further role for
United Nations agencies in directing these
programmes after 21 November. This, of
course, does not preclude any normal
country operations that may take place in
the future using non-oil-for-food funding."
In view of the common position taken by the
United Nations and the CPA, I see no alternative, as I
also stated in my briefing of 29 September 2003, to the
transfer of assets, ongoing operations and
responsibility for the administration of and remaining
activity under the programme to the Authority - the
Coalition Provisional Authority - "as is", together
with the relevant documentation.

My statement today will set out the actions
identified and taken to date in order to meet this goal.
It will also list the considerable range of activities that
remain to be undertaken by the United Nations, the
CPA and the relevant Iraqi authorities to complete the
transfer of all remaining responsibilities under the
programme to the CPA in a professional and
comprehensive manner and, above all, with full
transparency.

I ask members to bear in mind, however, that the
substance of my observations today has been compiled
under the most difficult circumstances, with the
unstinting support of my colleagues in the field
operating in substantially reduced numbers, mostly at
locations far removed from their normal working
environment and, at times, without having access to all
the necessary documentation.

Handing over a multi-billion-dollar programme of
such complexity and magnitude during the six-month
period, as mandated by resolution 1483 (2003), would
have been extremely difficult even under the best of
circumstances. Doing so under the current conditions
of insecurity and reduced on-site staffing capacity will
require a degree of realism, understanding and
pragmatism, as well as flexibility from all parties
involved. Despite these constraints, however, the
United Nations has remained fully committed to the
humanitarian welfare of the Iraqi people and its
approach to the transfer of responsibilities for the
programme reflects an unswerving determination to
safeguard the interests of the Iraqi people.

Most of our phase-down activities have been
undertaken in the three northern governorates of
Dahuk, Erbil and Sulaymaniyah, where the United
Nations was responsible for the implementation of the
programme on behalf of the former Government of
Iraq. In the north, the hand-over involves the transfer
of projects, assets, inventories and relevant
documentation, contracts signed by the United Nations
and its agencies and programmes with international and
national contractors, as well as an agreement with the
CPA on liabilities and calculations concerning ongoing
costs of projects after their handover to the CPA. As
members know, some $8.1 billion had been allocated to
the three northern governorates since the start of the
implementation of the programme in December 1996.

With regard to the 15 governorates in the Centre
and South of Iraq, prior to the war the role of the
United Nations was limited primarily to monitoring
and observing the distribution and utilization of
humanitarian supplies provided under the programme.
Hand-over arrangements for the Centre and South
involve a tripartite review by the United Nations, the
CPA and relevant Iraqi authorities of all remaining
contracts for humanitarian supplies and equipment
submitted under the programme. The review has
covered approved and fully-funded contracts, as well
as those approved but not funded. Adjustments have
also been made for alternative delivery and
authentication sites to enable the delivery of supplies
and equipment to Iraq.

It was envisaged from the outset that these
activities would take place inside Iraq. However, our
preparations and best-case scenarios were undermined
by chronic insecurity and, in particular, the tragic
terrorist attack of 19 August on the United Nations
headquarters in Baghdad, which necessitated a revision
of the transfer strategy. Since then, the number of
United Nations international staff and consultants has
been reduced from a total of 769 countrywide to a
small core group of international staff in Baghdad and
Erbil. An inter-agency mission is currently in Erbil for
a very short period to assist in the hand-over process in
the three northern governorates. Most of the
international staff have been relocated and. to the
extent possible, have continued to work in Amman,
Jordan, and in Larnaca, Cyprus, on programme hand-
over assignments. As I informed the Council on 29
September, we had estimated that we would require at
the minimum 115 international staff for an orderly
transfer of over $3.5 billion-worth of completed and
ongoing projects, including $1.5 billion-worth of
assets, in the three northern governorates.

Given the reduction in United Nations personnel
and the late deployment of a hand-over team by the
CPA, the intended joint physical review of all
programme assets by the United Nations, the CPA and
the local authorities has not been possible.
Accordingly, completed and ongoing projects and
activities will be transferred to the CPA through
dossiers prepared for each project and activity.

As of 27 October 2003, 3,154 approved and
funded contracts worth some $6.36 billion have been
classified to have relative utility. An additional 322
contracts were initially determined to have relative
utility but were later assessed as either fully delivered
or the suppliers were otherwise not interested in
completing deliveries at this point. These contracts will
not be amended by the United Nations prior to 21
November 2003, but will rather be transferred to CPA
for further processing, where applicable. The number
of approved and funded contracts which have not yet
been included in the initial review is estimated to be
1,621, with a total value of $1.5 billion, including 775
contracts with negligible balances of less than $30
million in total.

As of 27 October 2003, 273 approved but
unfunded contracts worth some $700 million have been
funded following determination of their relative utility
and urgent need. There remain 3,319 of approved but
unfunded contracts, with a total value of $6.5 billion.

Out of the total of 3,154 contracts that have been
prioritized, United Nations agencies and programmes
have negotiated amendments to 1,653, representing
52.4 per cent of the total number. The United Nations
agencies and programmes have repeatedly assured OIP
that the amendment of remaining prioritized contracts
will be completed by the deadline, now extended to 3
November 2003, unless additional lists of priority
contracts are submitted just before that date. OIP has
made arrangements to exceptionally process
amendments received late due to reasons beyond the
control of suppliers, but no later than 10 November
2003.

An urgent review will be undertaken by the
United Nations of the contracts that have not been
reviewed so far, in order to determine whether they
have relative utility and to prepare a final list of such
contracts by 21 November 2003, which we will submit
to the Council. However, action is unlikely to be taken
by United Nations agencies and programmes
concerning contracts whose relative utility is
determined after 28 October, owing to lack of time to
process them. Prioritized contracts which cannot be
amended by the United Nations agencies and
programmes before the termination of the programme
will be transferred to the CPA for appropriate action.

Furthermore, pursuant to paragraph 16 (b) of
resolution 1483 (2003), action on "contracts
determined to be of questionable utility and the
respective letters of credit" will be postponed

"until an internationally recognized,
representative government of Iraq is in a
position to make its own determination as to
whether such contracts shall be fulfilled".
(resolution 1483 (2003), para. 16 (b))

Based on the essential needs of the Iraqi people, as
identified by the United Nations in coordination with the
CPA and the relevant Iraqi authorities, and following my
recommendation, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 661 (1990) approved, on an exceptional basis,
13 projects for the procurement of items, with a total
value of $459 million, not covered by approved and
funded or unfunded contracts. As of 27 October 2003,
100 contracts worth $69 million were submitted and
approved under these projects in the health sector - $18
million; agriculture - $25.6 million; and education -
$15.3 million. In addition, $189 million were allocated
for the local procurement of wheat and barley.

As of October 2003, under resolutions 1472
(2003) and 1476 (2003), United Nations agencies and
programmes had arranged the delivery of goods worth
over $1 billion. Part of the goods are still at locations
outside Iraq and if they cannot be delivered to Iraq by
21 November 2003, arrangements will be made for
their transfer to the CPA outside Iraq.

Some of the goods are consigned to United
Nations agencies and programmes under resolutions
1472 (2003) and 1476 (2003), but not yet received by
them. If such goods cannot be received by 21
November 2003, arrangements will also be made for
their consignment to the relevant Iraqi authority. A list
will be prepared of the goods falling under those two
categories and handed to the CPA before 21 November
2003.

A total of $398 million-worth of goods were
established to be in transit to Iraq when the United
Nations independent inspection agents were withdrawn
from the country in mid-March 2003 due to security
conditions. A total value of $315 million for such
goods has been prioritized so far and arrangements
have been made for the suppliers of the remaining
goods to be compensated under paragraph 4 (g) of
resolution 1472 (2003).

The letters of credit for all contracts renegotiated
and amended by the United Nations agencies and
programmes will be retained by the United Nations
until the contracted goods have been delivered in full
and payments to the suppliers have been effected.

The collateral funds of the letters of credit related
to other approved and funded contracts that were not
prioritized, or could not be amended by United Nations
agencies due to their late prioritization, will be
transferred to the Coalition Provisional Authority for
direct payment to suppliers once those contracts have
been executed.

Currently, the United Nations independent
inspection agent, Cotecna, is stationed at inspection
sites outside Iraq, and authenticates the arrival of goods
consistent with arrangements agreed upon between the
United Nations, the Coalition Provisional Authority
and the relevant Iraqi authorities. However, due to the
fact that Cotecna personnel are not permitted to operate
at the port of Umm Qasr, the issuance of authenticated
confirmation for goods destined for Umm Qasr will
need to be halted, unless the Authority provides
appropriate indemnifications.

In addition, I should like to register considerable
concern that, although one month has passed since the
mechanism was agreed upon, the Coalition Provisional
Authority has not provided the Office of the Iraq
Programme with information regarding contact points
within the port or an update concerning any
arrangements made to confirm the arrival of goods.
Since 10 October 2003, Cotecna has inspected 25
consignments, including 111,917 metric tons of food
destined for Umm Qasr, under the revised
authentication procedures, with no confirmation of
receipt. If that matter is not urgently addressed, the
confidence of suppliers in the authentication process
may erode, which may adversely affect the delivery
pipeline.

Furthermore, in July 2003, the Coalition
Provisional Authority was provided with details of 21
contracts in connection with which suppliers claimed to
have provided services prior to the war, which could
not be authenticated due to the withdrawal of Cotecna.
Despite repeated reminders, the Authority has only
been able to produce a negative response in connection
with two of the contracts concerned. The number of
outstanding contracts with services to be authenticated
has recently increased to 25, with a combined value of
$4.9 million.

The Office of the Iraq Programme has adjusted its
databases to include information concerning the
delivery dates negotiated by United Nations agencies
and programmes in connection with contracts
prioritized pursuant to resolution 1483 (2003), as well
as delivery locations and up-to-date contact
information for suppliers.

The entire oil-for-food database will be
transferred to the Coalition Provisional Authority on 21
November 2003. The Authority needs to ensure that
appropriate arrangements are in place, effective 22
November 2003, for the effective management of the
billions of dollars' worth of supplies and equipment to
Iraq from the Programme's delivery pipeline and for
authenticating the arrival of those goods in order to
facilitate payment to suppliers - perhaps through
retention of Cotecna's services by the Authority for a
limited period after the termination of the Programme.
I have been given assurances by the Authority that a
final decision in that regard will soon be taken, thus
ensuring the continuation of authentication
arrangements beyond 21 November 2003.

With regard to the transfer of activities in the
three northern governorates, the main objectives that
have guided the United Nations, its agencies and
programmes in their handover preparations are as
follows.

The first objective is the timely transfer of the
Programme's activities, projects and assets to the
Coalition Provisional Authority and the uninterrupted
delivery of essential humanitarian supplies and services
beyond the Programme's termination, on 21 November
2003.

The second is the protection of the substantial
investments made in the three northern governorates
over the life of the Programme, investments worth
some $3.5 billion, including fixed and mobile assets
worth about $1.5 billion.

The third is the transfer of any residual
obligations, commitments or liabilities of the United
Nations that could arise as a result of its
implementation of the Programme.

Fourthly, there is a need to assess the adequacy of
local capacity to manage Programme assets and
maintain ongoing projects beyond 21 November 2003.

Fifthly, there is a need to ensure that the local
authorities, which, following the hand-over to the
Authority, will assume administrative responsibilities
for the projects, receive all the relevant documentation
needed to manage the assets and implementation of
those projects beyond 21 November 2003. That
includes detailed dossiers covering all projects and
assets, their location and financial status.

The last objective is to make adequate provision
for the payment of recurrent costs for up to 12 months.
That includes salaries for national staff providing
essential services and the cost of spare parts for critical
equipment, beyond the termination of the Programme,
on 21 November 2003. The Coalition Provisional
Authority and the relevant Iraqi authorities have
submitted budgets to cover recurrent expenditures.
United Nations agencies and programmes have
procured supplies to ensure the continuity of essential
services.

To achieve those broad objectives, each United
Nations agency and programme has devised individual
exit strategies, based on the levels of project
implementation and the possible future humanitarian
involvement of the organizations concerned under their
respective regular programme activities. Common to
each strategy are five distinct components: first, the
transfer of fully completed projects and activities,
including the transfer of ongoing warranties, deferred
payment and performance-bond obligations and any
residual United Nations liabilities, commitments and
other obligations; secondly, the transfer of ongoing
projects expected to be finalized before 21 November
2003; thirdly, the transfer of ongoing projects and
activities, including obligations and liabilities against
local and international contracts that will continue after
21 November 2003; fourthly, the transfer of warehouse
stocks, including goods in transit as at 21 November
2003; and, finally, the transfer of relevant databases of
the United Nations, its agencies and programmes.

To date, 151 projects and activities, worth $1.85
billion, have been completed. As indicated during my
briefing to the Council on 29 September 2003, those
will be transferred to the Authority through dossiers. A
further 117 projects and activities, valued at $597.51
million, are expected to be completed by 21 November
2003. The United Nations will hand over to the
Coalition Provisional Authority 159 projects, valued at
$1.1 billion, that will not be completed by 21
November.

With regard to agreements reached with the
Coalition Provisional Authority to ensure project
viability, the United Nations and the Authority have
agreed that the project dossiers should contain, at a
minimum, the following information: a United Nations
Office of the Humanitarian Coordinator in Iraq
(UNOHCI) project status checklist, including annexes,
sectoral overviews and exit strategies, to provide all
relevant information on completed projects, including
those that have been implemented during several
phases; narrative description of projects, which is all
the basic information that would be needed to
administer and manage the project and related files;
and a list of project assets, facilities, and their
respective locations. With regard to the listing and
status of all completed contracts, the dossiers would
highlight the status of retention fees due and any
warranties in the listing. Original copies or photocopies
of all contracts in the United Nations agencies' file
system will be added to the dossiers. That is intended
to provide guarantees to the Iraqi people that
contractors who may have executed projects poorly are
held liable. With regard to applicable acceptance and
transfer documents, those include assets loaned or on
transfer to the local authorities and final acceptance
certificates.

With regard to ongoing projects to be completed
after 21 November 2003, an agreement has been
reached with the Coalition Provisional Authority for
the funding of ongoing projects that will continue
beyond 21 November. The Authority has accepted our
recommendation, as also advocated by the local
authorities, to fund all viable ongoing projects,
estimated to total 159, at a total cost of $1.08 billion.
In a letter dated 23 October 2003 addressed to the
United Nations Deputy Humanitarian Coordinator in
the three northern governorates, the Authority's senior
adviser of the oil-for-food transition team in the north
reaffirmed that

"it is the Coalition's decision to continue

current projects in the Northern Governorates

after 21 November, provided that we reach a

satisfactory outcome on the transfer of
contracts involving third parties".

The expected that all but a few of the ongoing
projects - perhaps three or four that might not have
fulfilled expectations - would be continued.

To facilitate that process, the Coalition
Provisional Authority, the relevant Iraqi authorities and
the United Nations are considering the establishment of
a central authority to manage such projects. Details of
that proposed central authority are still being worked
out; they are primarily a matter between the Authority
and the local authorities.

With regard to assets held by the United Nations
on the last day of the Programme, on 21 November
2003, it has been agreed that on that day inventory
items will be categorized as follows: stocks inside Iraq;
stocks held outside Iraq; and goods in transit.

In September 2003, it became apparent that the
joint inventory of assets - to be carried out by the
United Nations, the Coalition Provisional Authority and
the local authorities - in the warehouses would not be
physically possible, owing to the prevailing security
situation and relocation of United Nations international
staff. Since then, the Coalition Provisional Authority has
informally agreed to accept items warehoused in the
three northern governorates on the basis of inventories
prepared by the United Nations, subject to sampling
checks by the Authority. A team of experts from the
Authority has been conducting the sampling of assets in
the warehouses, and its initial assessment indicates that
the inventory records provided by the United Nations
agencies are accurate. The team will complete its work
and submit a report thereon to the Authority Senior
Advisor by 31 October 2003.

An agreement has also been reached on the
disbursement of locally generated funds (LGF). The
Coalition Provisional Authority approved the
recommendation of the high-level tripartite working
group, made up of senior representatives of the United
Nations, the Authority and local authorities, to disburse
LGF emanating from agricultural projects in the three
northern governorates. In that context, I have approved
$7.7 million worth of agricultural projects, submitted
by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and endorsed by the Authority and the United
Nations Office of the Humanitarian Coordinator for
Iraq (UNOHCI), for funding under the LGF budget.
Any LGF-funded projects that continue beyond 21
November 2003 will be transferred to the Authority
under the same terms as other ongoing projects whose
completion extends beyond the termination date of the
Programme.

With respect to Authority responsibilities,
ongoing projects and activities will be transferred in a
manner similar to that for completed projects. The
basic difference between the two categories of projects
is the transfer of active international and local contracts
and deeds between international firms and the United
Nations agencies.

The Coalition Provisional Authority and the
United Nations are reviewing such active international
contracts in Amman, Jordan. Preliminary discussions in
Amman have been positive, and we, as well as the
Authority, remain confident that agreement will be
reached on the transfer of such active international
contracts and deeds to the Authority prior to the
termination of the Programme. Details on the status of
negotiations in Amman regarding active international
contracts will be provided to the 661 Committee later
this week.

In accordance with the relevant provisions of
resolution 1483 (2003), the United Nations can transfer
remaining responsibilities for the Programme only to
the Authority. The Coalition Provisional Authority, in
turn, will identify and subsequently hand over the
responsibilities to the appropriate Iraqi entities.
However, it is of paramount importance that the United
Nations not be held liable for any residual
commitments or obligations that may arise from such
contracts.

Similar negotiations will be carried out and
completed with regard to active local contracts.
Currently, the Coalition Provisional Authority, working
mainly with national United Nations staff and the team
composed of international staff that arrived recently, is
reviewing active local contracts in Iraq. The Authority
will determine which local Iraqi entities will eventually
take over such contracts. We are confident that
arrangements for the handover of such contracts will
also be completed before the termination of the
Programme.

In cases where active international and local
contractors demand terms and conditions that are not
acceptable to the United Nations or the Authority, or
where it would be cost-effective to re-bid such
contracts, the Authority may advise the United Nations
to terminate them. In that event, however, the
Authority should provide adequate legal commitments
to ensure that the United Nations will not be held
ultimately liable for any such decisions. Otherwise, the
United Nations will have no alternative but to retain
adequate funds to cover such liabilities.

With regard to goods held or warehoused outside
the country, largely in neighbouring States, special
arrangements will need to be made. This is of
particular importance for those United Nations
agencies that, for a variety of reasons - including lack
of security, lack of warehousing space in the three
northern governorates, and delays in contracting the
items - maintain significant stocks outside Iraq.
Currently, there is approximately $25 million worth of
goods either in transit or warehoused by the United
Nations agencies outside Iraq, with additional goods
being shipped by the suppliers. Given that after 21
November 2003 the United Nations will not have funds
available from the escrow account to continue
payments for the ongoing storage and ultimate
transportation, the Authority and the Iraqi authorities
will need to commit themselves to providing all
necessary support for delivery into Iraq. As requested
by the Authority, we are currently in the process of
compiling detailed information on goods in transit and
warehoused outside Iraq.

As indicated earlier, the United Nations is
committed to the timely preparation of dossiers on all
projects and activities to enable the Authority and the
relevant Iraqi authorities to manage Programme assets
once they are transferred. There are four types of
dossiers: those for completed projects; ongoing projects
scheduled to be completed prior to 21 November 2003;
projects whose completion dates extend beyond 21
November 2003; and, finally, dossiers for all assets in
warehouses, as well as relevant databases. There is also
a category of projects that will be terminated prior to 21
November 2003 and that still require an agreement on
termination procedures and takeover of liabilities and
commitments.

No agreement has as yet been reached with the
Authority with regard to the databases established
under the Programme that contain detailed information
on issues such as key socio-economic indicators,
mapping and various surveys, as well as matters which
may also relate to intellectual property. We remain
confident, however, that we will soon resolve our
differences in that regard.

In addition to the various categories referred to
earlier, special arrangements are being made with
regard to goods in transit. According to United Nations
agencies and programmes, more than $55 million
worth of outstanding goods are being shipped, while
currently, there are already about $25 million worth of
goods either in transit or warehoused outside Iraq.
Every effort is being made to minimize the quantity of
goods to be delivered or still in transit, as of 21
November 2003.

The Coalition Provisional Authority will assume
responsibility for the safety of ESC (13 per cent)
account assets stored in warehouses and goods in
transit within Iraq. Regarding goods in warehouses
outside the country, the Authority would, on transfer of
the relevant contracts and purchase orders, likewise
assume responsibility for their safety.

Those commodities that relate to ongoing projects
and activities will be assigned as part of the transfer of
operational responsibility to the Authority, and a
similar arrangement will need to be made with regard
to those items that are related to maintenance of stocks.

As you well know, Mr. President, from 1999
onwards, the range of operations covered under the
Programme grew exponentially to include at its
conclusion some 24 sectors, including, inter alia, food,
food handling, health, nutrition, electricity, agriculture
and irrigation, education, transport and
telecommunications, water and sanitation, housing,
settlement rehabilitation, mine action, special
allocation for especially vulnerable groups, oil industry
spare parts and equipment, as well as construction.

Since the start of the implementation of the
Programme in December 1996, approximately $65
billion worth of oil was exported. More than $46
billion of that amount was allocated to the Programme
after deductions for other accounts pursuant to relevant
resolutions.

I say this for the record, Mr. President, because
we are convened in a formal meeting for the first time.
Under the Programme, more than $30 billion worth of
goods have been delivered to Iraq as a whole, including
foodstuffs worth $12 billion; food handling worth $2.2
billion; agriculture worth $2.4 billion; medicines worth
$2.3 billion; water and sanitation worth $1.3 billion;
electricity sector goods worth $2.2 billion; housing
worth $1.7 billion; and, for the oil sector, goods worth
$1.9 billion. In addition, before the start of the war in
March 2003, the delivery pipeline contained goods
worth approximately $10 billion, fully funded. As of
27 October 2003, over $7.56 billion worth of goods in
the pipeline had been prioritized pursuant to
resolutions 1472 (2003), 1476 (2003) and 1483 (2003).

A number of outstanding matters still remain to
be resolved in consultations with the Authority and the
relevant Iraqi authorities, with whom we have
established the necessary working relations, in Iraq,
Amman and at the Headquarters level. We remain
confident, however, subject to security conditions, of
meeting the challenge of terminating the Programme
by 21 November 2003, pursuant to resolution 1483
(2003).

I wish to thank all parties for their understanding
and cooperation with us in fulfilling all of the tasks
entrusted to us by the Security Council.

In conclusion, I should like to reiterate what I
said in the Council's informal consultations held on 29
September. The terrorist attack against the United
Nations headquarters in Baghdad on 19 August 2003
was not only a heinous act of terror against United
Nations personnel serving in Iraq, but also an attack on
every single Member State of the United Nations.
These acts of terror against humanitarian organizations
have continued. The latest outrage, unequivocally
condemned by the Secretary-General, was the attack
yesterday on the headquarters of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). The Secretary-
General has rightly described this attack on the ICRC
as a crime against humanity.
On behalf of all my colleagues, I wish to express
our deepest sympathy and most sincere condolences to
the ICRC and to the families and loved ones of all
those who were killed or injured.

Finally, I also wish to appeal to all Member States
to close ranks, condemn in the strongest terms the
terrorist attacks and take all necessary measures to
provide for the safety and security of all humanitarian
personnel. I also appeal to all Member States that have
not yet done so to sign the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel.

