Mr. Idris (Eritrea): It is a great honour to address
the Security Council on behalf of the Eritrean people,
whose struggle to create a peaceful and cooperative
neighbourhood is a matter of historical record. Three
generations of Eritreans have paid the ultimate sacrifice
to establish a regional order based on international law
and economic complementarity, while being mindful of
the shared culture and history of the people.

In recent weeks, the Horn of Africa has witnessed
a development of historic proportions. Eritrea and
Ethiopia have taken a bold step to end their state of
war and open a new chapter of peace and friendship.
The war that prevailed for the past two decades has had
devastating consequences that have gone beyond the
two countries and peoples involved. It has obstructed
meaningful cooperation and undermined regional
conflict-prevention and -resolution mechanisms. The
agreement between Eritrea and Ethiopia puts an end to
that distorted regional order of enmity and competition,
and opens new horizons for sustainable peace and
economic integration. It will strengthen the subregional
conflict-prevention and -resolution mechanism.
Moreover, today Eritrea and Somalia signed the Joint
Declaration of Peace and Friendship during the historic
visit of His Excellency Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed
Farmajo to Eritrea. They have agreed to exchange
ambassadors, forge political, economic, social, cultural,
defence and security cooperation and join hands to
address obstacles to regional peace and security. The
positive repercussions of those developments for the
entire region cannot be overstated.

It has long been evident that the sanctions on the
people of Eritrea cannot be justified in the name of
maintaining international peace and security. They
have been kept despite the fact that the pretexts for
their imposition have been shown to be false for years.
In that regard, far from helping to promote peace and
amity in the region, the Council has undermined and
derailed regional cooperation for a decade. Within the
emerging regional context, we find it inexplicable that
the Council is discussing the sanctions on Eritrea today.
The most appropriate action for the Council would
have been lifting the sanctions, thereby indicating in
unequivocal terms its support to the recent positive
developments. Eritrea welcomes the calls by several
countries, including Ethiopia and Somalia, for lifting
the sanctions. We find it unacceptable that just a few
members of the Council continue to set conditions
and move the goalposts, with the intention of keeping
political pressure on the people of Eritrea for reasons
not related to the maintenance of international peace.
As in the past, it is clear that whatever Eritrea does in
fulfilling its commitment to the Council's resolutions,
and regardless of the changes that the region has been
witnessing, those members are unwilling to lift these
unjustified punitive measures.

The Security Council should not miss another
opportunity to contribute positively to regional peace
and security in the Horn of Africa and the Red Sea.
What is at stake is the Council's credibility in the eyes
of the citizens of the region. By lifting the sanctions
immediately and unconditionally, the Council can send
a positive message that it supports the desire of the
citizens of the region to live in peace and prosperity
together, and that the Council is ready to accompany
them on their arduous journey to remove the obstacles
to regional integration. The other option for the
Council is to maintain business as usual by imposing
preconditions, moving the goalposts and keeping these
politically motivated sanctions without justification.
The message to the citizens of the region will be that
the Council is unwilling to work together with the
regional developments and will continue to encourage
spoilers seeking to undermine the unfolding peace
and integration.

For its part, Eritrea will remain committed to
redoubling its efforts and joining hands with the
countries in the region to ensure peace and accelerate
socioeconomic progress in the Horn of Africa and the
Red Sea region.

