Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia): My delegation
associates itself with the statement made earlier by
Malaysia in its capacity as Chair of the Non-Aligned
Movement, at whose request this meeting was
convened.

The delegation of Indonesia is gratified that, once
again, the Security Council is meeting in an open
format to examine this contentious agenda item. It is a
sign that, despite differences of opinion within the
Council concerning the way forward, the doors to
consultation and debate are still open. Indeed,
negotiation is at the heart of the multilateral process, of
which we continue to be a staunch supporter and
advocate.

When my delegation addressed the Council three
weeks ago, we were of the same opinion as those
Member States that were convinced that, on this issue,
the diplomatic option had not been exhausted towards
meeting the objectives of resolution 1441 (2002).
Although events have moved forward since then, we
still firmly believe that the option is still on the table
and that the Council can resolve this matter in a
peaceful manner.

It is also important to be certain that we are
seriously undertaking the responsibilities of peace in
the spirit in which the Charter of the United Nations
intends it, and not just as a series of steps leading to
war. To that end, my delegation feels that the
inspections being conducted by the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) have yielded a good result and
therefore that they should be given a fair chance,
measured in terms of additional time as well as
personnel and resources.

We do not think that anyone denies the fact that
there has been some progress in the inspections process
so far, or questions whether UNMOVIC and the IAEA
are capable of the task before their inspectors. The
general concern is that the inspections have not turned
up evidence of violations of United Nations resolutions
by Iraq. Unfortunately, that assessment can hardly be
considered conclusive, since the inspectors are still
working.

In that connection, Indonesia will support a
strengthened inspection regime. We advocate a
strengthened regime that is cognizant of the importance
of its assignment and is able to execute that assignment
responsibly, fairly and quickly. In that context, it is
understood that, as of today, Iraq has provided its
cooperation to enable the inspectors to work
effectively. However, in view of the gravity and
urgency of the situation, it is critically important that
Iraq continue to actively and immediately cooperate
with them, as mandated by resolution 1441 (2002).

We continue to believe that there can be no
solution to the situation in the Middle East that ignores
the reality of the entire region. I state this with
particular reference to the situation in Palestine, which
continues to deteriorate daily, although that may
conveniently - but unwisely - be ignored. It is the
belief of my delegation that the solution to the core
issue of Palestine would, accordingly, contribute to the
comprehensive settlement of all aspects of the
problems in the Middle East and that we should never
concentrate so much on other issues in the region that
we overlook that fact.

Finally, we will call tirelessly on the Security
Council to fully adhere to the provisions of the
Charter- that is, to promote peace and security. In
that context, therefore, Council members must bear in
mind that peace is their obligation to the world. It is
important to take into account that every member of the
Council represents all Members of the United Nations.
War must be a final entry in the dictionary of their
deliberations: a decision to be made by the Council
only as a last, inescapable recourse.

