Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, I would first like to say how pleased my
delegation is to see you presiding over the work of the
Security Council in this month of June 2000. You may
rest assured that you will have the full cooperation of
the delegation of Mali.

I also take pleasure in paying tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Wang Yingfan, for his
effective and dedicated guidance of our work in the
past month.

My delegation thanks the French delegation for
convening this meeting today, which provides a useful
opportunity for members of the Security Council to
have a direct dialogue with the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda. I would like to thank Ms.
Carla Del Ponte for her full and instructive briefing,
and to join in the tribute paid to her and to all the staff
of the Tribunals for their professionalism and
commitment.

I would like to make the following comments.
First, Mali fully supports the work of the International
Criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and for
Rwanda. These jurisdictions were established by the
Security Council to express the will and determination
of the international community to bring to justice the
perpetrators of the most atrocious crimes that the world
has ever known. In so doing, the Security Council set
up a powerful mechanism to ensure that international
humanitarian law is applied and respected. Indeed,
through their work, the Tribunals are contributing to
the establishment of the rule of law and putting an end
to the cycle of violence and the culture of impunity.

Secondly, turning to the question of the
functioning of the Tribunals, I would like to emphasize
that my delegation considers that the Security Council
should fully shoulder its responsibilities by providing
all the required support. Similarly, it is important for
the Council to examine further measures that could
support the effectiveness of their activities, particularly
the issue of resources and procedures, as recalled in a
most timely manner by Ms. Carla Del Ponte in her
briefing.

Thirdly, it also seems that the cooperation of the
States is essential to the proper functioning of the
Tribunals, which, as we are aware, do not have any
coercive powers of their own. Notwithstanding that,
this cooperation is mandatory, according to Security
Council resolutions. As the Tribunals continue to carry
out their tasks, the sentences that they are imposing
indicate the urgent need for close cooperation, with
regard to both the bringing to trial and the confinement
of indictees. The provision by States to the Tribunals,
particularly the Rwanda Tribunal, of prison facilities
where the sentences can be served remains a cause of
concern.
I wish to point out that, faced with this situation
and responding favourably to the appeal made to
States, my Government signed in 1999 a cooperation
agreement with the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, under whose provisions convicted persons can
serve out their sentences in Mali. We invite other States
to do the same.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate our full
support for the Prosecutor's efforts and to thank her
once again for her professionalism and her
commitment.

