We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for their reports. As always, we wish at the outset to recognize and honour the men and women who work every day to meet the humanitarian needs of the Syrian people and to continue advance the political process. We know that achieving results in an environment of such mistrust is a very difficult task. But despite the profound differences between the Syrian parties, the sacred goal of fulfilling the aspirations of the people rests only upon them. There must be a starting point to the process of finding a solution to the multiple challenges that the population continues to endure after 10 years of conflict. We need to be able to find that point about which we can later say, "That was the point that changed everything" - the famous point of no return. I remember that in December 2018, in his last report to the Council (see S/PV.8434), the then Special Envoy spoke about that. Despite our optimism last month, it seems to the Dominican Republic that, when it comes to giving the Syrians a political process with concrete results, we have lowered the bar too much. This is very unfortunate. Where is our ambition? I will be very brief. Almost a year after the establishment of the Constitutional Committee, while it is true that it has been a platform on which the parties have established a dialogue, we also regret that it has exhibited such limited substantive progress. The impact of the pandemic has certainly played a role in delaying the meetings. But we believe that there is an underlying problem, and that is the apparent disengagement, lack of commitment and ambition on the part of the parties. It is the only explanation we see for the inability of the parties to agree on the agenda for their work. This cannot continue. We encourage the parties to maintain a spirit of engagement and commitment to the constitutional conversation and to put aside issues that may keep them away from that conversation. Regarding the humanitarian situation, we remain concerned about the millions of Syrians who suffer from food insecurity, including malnutrition. We are also extremely concerned and share the grief of the families of the hundreds of health workers who have died from the coronavirus. We commend the work of the World Health Organization, non-governmental organizations and all doctors, nurses and first responders who risk their lives without having the necessary protection against the virus. We advocate for greater support to the population, whose purchasing power is not enough to buy masks, gloves or other protective equipment. In Syria, these items are a luxury. We share the views of other colleagues about the delicate and fragile security situation in the north-west of the country. We condemn in the strongest and most forceful terms the attacks perpetrated against civilians and humanitarian workers. Those responsible must and will pay for their crimes. In conclusion, we reiterate our unwavering commitment to principled humanitarian action that is sustained and timely and based on the ever-growing needs of the population, and to a transparent, credible and inclusive political process that advances with firm strides and positive results until it meets the aspirations of the people, who, despite the circumstances, have not given up. The families of the missing have not given up. Syrian refugees have not given up. Syrian doctors have not given up. The children will not give up. Let us not give up on them.
