I thank the Force Commanders for their briefings and their service. I would like to offer my condolences to the families of the two peacekeepers from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) who died of the corona virus last week. The United States greatly appreciates the sacrifice of all United Nations peacekeeping personnel continuing to maintain peace and security amid the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and we commend all the Force Commanders for their leadership during this crisis. The pandemic has challenged United Nations peacekeeping missions in new and unforeseen ways, including through suspended troop rotations, restrictions on the movement of personnel and equipment, the need for quarantine and isolation facilities and access issues in countries such as South Sudan. Force Commanders have re-prioritized mandate implementation while dealing with movement restrictions on troops. But even in the face of these challenges, we fully expect accountability for the performance of both uniformed and civilian personnel. We continue to champion resolution 2436 (2018), which calls for clear, objective performance standards for all United Nations peacekeeping personnel, measures to address underperformance and incentives and recognition for outstanding performance. We look forward to its full implementation and are eager to learn more about the ways Force Commanders hold their troops accountable for performance. An accountability mechanism applicable to uniformed and civilian personnel, and in line with an integrated performance policy framework, will be crucial. As General dos Santos Cruz noted in his report, accountability contributes to the safety and security of peacekeepers. We support resolution 2518 (2020) and underline the importance of the safety and security of peacekeepers. The resolution highlights the strong correlation between the safety and security of peacekeepers and a culture of performance and accountability. With regard to MINUSMA, we appreciate the tireless efforts we have seen to prioritize troop performance and hold poor performers accountable. We also commend the Force Commander's drive to maximize his troop-contributing countries' (TCCs) capabilities through the development of the MINUSMA force adaptation plan. The success of this plan is dependent on getting the right TCCs for the job, and the recent force generation conference is a positive step in this direction. We continue to encourage Member States to pledge more highly specialized units, as well as the necessary enablers, such as helicopters, medical capabilities, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance assets. We believe it is important that troop-contributing countries clearly convey any caveats prior to deployment and to commit to full operational transparency. In the wake of attacks on peacekeepers, what actions is the MINUSMA Force Commander taking to ensure the safety and security of the peacekeepers? Turning to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), we welcome the Force Commander's work to increase the UNMISS force presence through the hub and spoke strategy, which has increased field-level engagement and presence in identified hotspots. We welcome UNMISS engagement in facilitating freedom of movement for civilians in areas of conflict, but we remain concerned about the impact of reduced patrolling. How has the confirmation of COVID-19 cases at some of the protection-of-civilian sites affected his operations, and how is he communicating the dangers of COVID-19 to internally displaced persons? Finally, with respect to the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), we appreciate the continued work of Deputy Force Commander Brigadier General Maureen O'Brien during this pandemic. We also express our full support for the Secretary-General's appointment of Major General Ishwar Hamal as Head of Mission and Force Commander, and we look forward to his arrival at the mission. The Council has voiced its unanimous support for the full return of operations on the Bravo side, as well as the need for the resumption of inspections in the Bravo area of limitation. What is UNDOF's plan for the resumption of inspections in the Bravo area of limitation?
