The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Viet Nam.

I thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2008/458). I also thank
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, for his detailed briefing.
I welcome the participation in today's Council meeting
of His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and of Mr. Skender Hyseni.

My delegation shares the view expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report that recent events in
Kosovo have created a profoundly new reality on the
ground and pose significant challenges to the ability of
UNMIK to exercise its administrative authority as
mandated by the Security Council in resolution 1244
(1999). We also note with concern the fact that the
Pristina authorities have instituted measures that seek
to effectively assume UNMIK's powers, in particular
with regard to the application of property and vehicular
traffic law. We are also concerned that the so-called
constitution makes no mention of any role or function
for the United Nations and does not contain any
reference to resolution 1244 (1999), which has so far
been the legal framework for the international civil
presence in Kosovo and will continue to be so until or
unless the Security Council decides otherwise.

Taking into account this radically changed reality
and the evolving circumstances in Kosovo, we
understand that there is a pressing need for a
consensual solution that preserves peace and security
in Kosovo, as tension continues to escalate between the
Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb communities, and,
more dangerously, as large quantities of illicit arms are
available in Kosovo during this sensitive and easily
potentially explosive period. We therefore call upon the
parties concerned to refrain from making any statement
or undertaking any action that would endanger peace,
provoke violence or jeopardize security in Serbia,
including Kosovo and the region. We also urge both
sides to resume dialogue and negotiations towards a
comprehensive and lasting solution to the issue of
Kosovo in the interests of peace, security and stability
in the Balkan region.

Concerning the future of UNMIK, we take
careful note of the Secretary-General's package of
proposals and share his views that, given a
substantially changed situation, UNMIK needs to be
adjusted to effectively perform its tasks as an interim
administration throughout Kosovo. We hold, however,
that any change or reconfiguration of the international
civil presence in Kosovo will require a new decision of
the Security Council, in conformity with resolution
1244 (1999), as well as the consent of all parties
concerned. We hope that the parties concerned will
continue to work together with UNMIK, as well as
with members of the Security Council and the
international community, towards the achievement of a
mutually accepted solution to the issue of Kosovo. In
that spirit, my delegation commends Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his efforts to engage the parties in
dialogue on the practical issues, as shown in his recent
introductory meetings in Belgrade with the Foreign
Minister of Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremie, and with Mr.
Goran Bogdanovic'.

We wish to take this opportunity to reaffirm Viet
Nam's support for the central role of the United
Nations in promoting the dialogue and reconciliation
process and in maintaining peace and security in
Kosovo and the Balkans.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Mr. Skender Hyseni has asked for the floor to
make a further comment. I give him the floor.

