Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): I wish to congratulate you
most warmly, Mr. President, at the outset, for assuming
the presidency of the Council for this month, in which
you have already displayed your diplomatic and
political acumen. May I also extend our gratitude to
your predecessor, Ambassador Wang Yingfan of China,
for his effective leadership last month.

Against the background of repeated broken
promises, failure to honour previous agreements and a
litany of assurances unfulfilled, the situation in the
Middle East is crying out for urgent help as it inches
towards a conflagration, with both the Palestinians and
the Israelis displaying mounting resolve to make the
sacrifices necessary in the effort to break each other's
will. All forms of contacts have ceased, and relations
between the Palestinians and Israel, the occupying
Power, are almost non-existent. If there is any contact
at all, it is through the barrel of the gun. What a
dreadful scenario, and what an alternative to the joy,
warm handshakes and the high hopes pinned on the
Oslo Declaration of Principles, of 1993, and on the so
many subsequent negotiations, however protracted and
less fruitful than they might have been.

What we are witnessing today is a war of
attrition, which may grow into a regional war unless
there is an immediate intervention by the international
community. The Security Council cannot continue to
stay on the sidelines. The continuous brutal acts of
aggression by Israel - entering and attacking
Palestinian-controlled areas in gross violation of
agreements reached; targeting and destroying police
headquarters, police stations, government facilities and
infrastructures; and occupying the very symbols of
Palestinian nationhood - all indicate to us the
determination of the occupying Power to paralyse
Palestinian institutions and their Authority in order to
create a security vacuum.

The insistence by Israel on a ceasefire from the
Palestinians while offering nothing in return -
tangible or intangible - makes a mockery of its desire
for security and peace. The overwhelming, brazen
show of power by Israel simply highlights the glaring
disparity of the forces. On one side, we have a nuclear
power with the latest cutting-edge technology in air
power, missiles, tanks, a superb navy and state-of-the-
art intelligence. On the other side, we have young
stone-throwers and men with basic weapons - with no
armour, no artillery, no navy or any air defences.

Obviously, this large-scale military campaign by
Israel is intended to coerce the Palestinians into
submission and into accepting impossible conditions,
or else face prolonged siege, expulsions or even the
crippling of the Palestinian Authority. Anything is
possible under the current climate. Such a policy is at
best counterproductive, and at worst simply misguided,
fuelling sentiments of distrust, hatred, despair and
anger

Relying on repressive measures alone -
brutality, collective punishment, assassinations,
demolitions and denial, and including unrealistic
demands - cannot bring enhanced security to Israel. It
has the right to security and to live in peace.
Unfortunately, Israel has trapped itself in a vicious
cycle of violence, leaving no room for diplomacy. This
is a grave political blunder that requires serious
rethinking.

The economic effects of the Israeli blockade, now
almost a year old, in the occupied West Bank and the
Gaza Strip are alarming, with rising unemployment and
falling incomes as people grapple with perhaps the
most severe movement restrictions imposed on the
Palestinian population and territory since 1967,
according to a United Nations study just released. The
restrictions on movement in and out of Palestinian
areas and between towns and villages are having dire
consequences on all economic activities and on the
livelihood of the people.

The self-sustaining claim that Israel is the only
democracy in the Middle East is fast becoming a myth.
For it is inconceivable that a nation that professes to
respect universal values and norms is the one that at the
same time pursues, as a matter of policy, cruel and
discriminatory practices against the Palestinians,
administering the notions of democracy and human
rights as they relate to Palestinians as an option and not
as an inalienable right as we know it. The lack,
therefore, of any legal or moral basis for the continued
colonization of the Palestinian people in this age and
era, coupled with the phenomenal growth in illegal
settlements, place Israel outside the self-proclaimed
democratic and ethical norms at the centre of its
foundation and continued existence. Israel cannot have
one set of democratic principles and human rights
standards for its own citizens and none at all extended
to the Palestinian population under its occupation. It is
a charade, to say the least.

We condemn all acts of violence and killings
directed against innocent civilian populations on both
sides. As we all know, our attention is directed to the
ever worsening situation through the day-to-day
reports. We tend to focus on the disturbing accounts of
the moment, often forgetting that this is yet one more
side effect of a lingering, pervasive and much larger
problem, namely, occupation - perhaps one of the
longest, if not the longest, foreign occupation of a
people in modern history.

Israel's 34-year-old occupation of Palestinian
territory has long been condemned by the international
community and by the Security Council as illegal and
as a serious obstruction to a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace. In total disregard of repeated
international demands, however, Israel has been
vigorously pursuing the policy of extensive illegal
settlements throughout the occupied territories. Those
territories are today punctuated by Jewish settlements.
The territory has been balkanized into about five dozen
"bantustans" completely encircled by Israel. They are
separated, with no territorial contiguity, no borders and
no airspace. And travel between one bantustan and
another is through Israeli checkpoints. The question is
whether Israel will ever contemplate dismantling and
relinquishing the illegal settlements to pave the way for
a lasting peace with the Palestinians?

As one would expect, the current Prime Minister
of Israel, in an interview last April, ruled out the
removal of Jewish settlements, claiming that they
provided "essential strategic depth to protect Israel's
existence". And, in another interview in the same
month, he said he was "willing to accept the
establishment of a Palestinian State on 42 per cent of
the West Bank".

So, in the context of that grim prospect, coupled
with the failure of the peace process and the siege
making life intolerable, the current widespread unrest
was not unexpected. Now an escalation of rage and
bitterness reigns. The more Israel employs the
excessive power of repression, destruction and
incursion, the more radical the Palestinian response
becomes. There is no immediate end in sight under this
scenario. And there is no alternative except mutually
assured destruction.

Against the backdrop of such an explosive
situation, the Council needs to be proactive and, in
accordance with its mandate under the Charter and with
relevant resolutions, to take steps necessary to de-
escalate the violence that has already claimed hundreds
of lives and has caused thousands of casualties and
senseless destruction. Among the immediate measures
that are deemed urgent are: to call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities, including provocation,
assassination and destruction, and for the lifting of the
siege; to demand that Israel relinquish Orient House
and the other Palestinian offices in and around
Jerusalem; to urge the urgent resumption of the peace
talks; to approve a monitoring mechanism to oversee
the implementation of the proposals set out in the
Mitchell Committee's report; and to demand that Israel
relieve the economic pressure inflicted upon the
Palestinian people, including releasing the hundreds of
millions of dollars in tax money owed to the
Palestinian Authority.

Finally, the Council is called upon to heed and to
exercise its Charter responsibility by ending the
occupation which is the root cause of the persistent
mayhem and suffering. It must also commit itself to
restoring dignity, respect and sovereignty to the
Palestinian people. Like all other peoples everywhere,
they have the right to live in peace and to have a secure
existence.

