Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I will be brief this morning. We have still not
seen any progress in the investigation into the situation
in Darfur, and the status ofthe accused has remained the
same. Nor will we comment on the internal situation in
the Sudan. The Security Council has other, appropriate
formats for those purposes, which, as we know, function
perfectly effectively without the participation of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC).

What are we seeing? During the reporting period
the Court continued its academic and practical
experiments on the States parties to its Statute. On
6 May, with regard to the appeal brought by Jordan,
the Court came to a conclusion about the existence
of customary standards of international law based on
which a Head of State has no immunity vis-a-vis a
competent international court. That is strange, since all
the previous experience of the hunt for Omer Al-Bashir
testified to the exact opposite, which was that all the
States that he had to visit in his capacity as President
of the Sudan recognized that immunity and refused to
arrest him.

Historical perspective is important in establishing
international custom. The representative of the United
Kingdom mentioned an important date, and as it
happens I too would like to point out that this month, a
few days from now, we will mark the 100th anniversary
of the signing of the Treaty of Versailles. Under article
227 of the Treaty, the Allied Powers arraigned the
German Kaiser, Wilhelm II of Hohenzollern, for "a
supreme offence against international morality and the
sanctity of treaties" and provided for the creation of a
special international tribunal. That never came about,
however. The monarchy of the Netherlands, a State that
today is extremely active in the area of international
justice, categorically refused to surrender the former
German Emperor.

The position of the Russian Federation on the
question of the immunity of senior State officials is
well known. The ICC's position that the subject of
immunity does not even arise in this case is pernicious
and dangerous. Existing international law provides
for State officials' immunity vis-a-vis foreign States'
criminal jurisdiction, without regard to the subject of
the jurisdiction of international criminal tribunals. In
that situation, in limiting the freedom of an official of
a foreign State, the State exercising that jurisdiction
unavoidably intrudes on the dimension of relations
between States, and in that context must act in strict
compliance with the norms of international law on
immunity from foreign criminal jurisdiction. We
therefore call on the States parties to the ICC to act
sensibly and to refrain from any steps that could create
friction between States.

