The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Chad, the Congo, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Italy and
Rwanda in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

It is so agreed.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 21 November 2003 from the
Charge' d'affaires of the Republic of the Congo to the
United Nations, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the CEEAC
Group at the United Nations, I have the honour to
request that the Security Council extend an
invitation to His Excellency Mr. Amadou Kebe,
Ambassador, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, to address the
Council under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure in the course of the Council's
consideration of the agenda item 'Central African

79:

Region .

That letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2003/ 1115.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Amadou Kebe.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Amadou Kebe to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to the Deputy Secretary-
General for Political Affairs of the Economic
Community of Central African States, Mr. Nelson
Cosme.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Nelson Cosme to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 5/2003/1077, which contains a letter dated
10 November 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
transmitting the interim report of the multidisciplinary
assessment mission to the Central African region.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

I now give the floor to Mr. Kalomoh,


