Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, Secretary-General
Afifi and Deputy General Counsel Crown for taking
the time to briefus today on this very important topic. I
also want to single out Egypt for thanks, and Mr. Selim
specifically, for calling this meeting.

I would also like to offer my sympathies on behalf
of the American people to you, Mr. President, and the
people of Egypt for the despicable attack that occurred
in Cairo on Sunday, which killed eight police officers.
That ambush underscores the continuing, deadly,
inhuman threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) (Da'esh) and, of course, by groups
that adopt similar tactics.

On a visit to Cameroon, Chad and Nigeria last
month, I met with some of the countless victims of
Boko Haram, which recently pledged allegiance to
Da'esh. One woman I spoke with had seen her husband
executed and had her three children ripped from her
grip and taken by Boko Haram. Now alone, displaced,
she does not know why she is still alive. As she says,
her life no longer has meaning. She just sits around all
day, every day, and pines for her children and wonders
if there is more that she can do to somehow bring
them back.

I met a 14-year-old girl who described having been
given a "choice" by the terrorists who had burned down
her home: be killed or become a Boko Haram bride.
She chose life, and after a year of sexual enslavement
by Boko Haram, she managed somehow to escape her
monstrous captor. But now in a refugee camp, she
blames herself for the stigma that she carries with her
from the time that she spent with Boko Haram. She feels
shame, while those who enslaved her appear incapable
of shame.

An 23-year-old boy told me that he was studying at
his madrasa when Boko Haram began shooting. He fled
alone into the bush and has not seen his parents since.
He does not know if they are alive.

Such horrors inject acute urgency into this meeting
as the Council seeks to strengthen its collective effort
to defeat ISIL, Al-Qaida and terrorist groups like them.
There could be no more urgent cause on Earth.

None of us are immune to the threat posed by
those groups. In Minneapolis on Monday, three young
American men went on trial charged with conspiring
to provide material support to ISIL and to commit
murder abroad. One of their mothers lamented what
had happened to her boy, saying,

"I told him to never even mention those names,
Al-Shabaab or ISIL, because the Koran says
nothing about the reasons to kill anyone in the ways
ISIL talks about."

Six other Americans pleaded guilty to similar charges
earlier this year. Some of them told the judge that they
had been inspired by ISIL recruitment videos and
social media.

As we consider the task of countering violent
ideologies, we all must recognize that the common
goal of countering terrorist ideologies should never
be used as an excuse to suppress political dissent.
Many countries recognize narrow, clearly delineated
exceptions to the right of the freedom of expression,
such as incitement to imminent violence, which is an
exception to that right in the United States. But there
is a clear and vast difference between responding to
those legally prescribed exceptions and broad-based
attempts to silence Government critics. Legal action
is a critical tool in the campaign against ISIL, but it
must not be wielded like a cudgel against those who
voice unpopular speech or criticize authorities. Such
behaviour does not prevent violent extremism, it fuels it.
I would offer three principles upon which to ground our
common strategy to counter the poisonous ideologies
and narratives propagated by groups like ISIL.
First, such a strategy should focus on exposing the
lies, distortions and falsehoods that underpin terrorist
narratives. The most influential and effective actors in
this effort will always be religious leaders, civil society
organizations, community groups and individual
citizens. Independent voices can spread the truth about
what life is really like under ISIL control. Religious
leaders can reject ISIL's perverse distortions of faith by
spreading Islam's message of peace, love and tolerance.

ISIL clearly fears this threat. Just this part weekend,
the group called for the murder of 11 imams and scholars
living in the United States and elsewhere who have
actively worked to rebut its narratives and discredit its
ideology. Governments can play a supporting role by
convening and amplifying independent voices, as the
United States has done in partnership with the United
Arab Emirates in the establishment of the Sawab
Centre, which has provided training to civil society
organizations and other groups.

Secondly, an effective strategy will facilitate the
free flow of information. Such openness expands public
access to the truth, and in this battle, the truth is clearly
on our side. We have nothing to be afraid of. The Internet
itself is not a threat, though it can host ISIL lies and
propaganda. It also makes possible the flow of counter-
narratives, the exchange of new ideas and the voices
of tolerance, which vastly outnumber the exceptions. A
free press might criticize its Government - certainly
the free press in my country does that - but that is
precisely what makes those voices credible and ensures
that they are seen as independent by the public. A
reputation for impartiality and reliability is what makes
their reporting on the atrocities and perversions of ISIL
and others so powerfully important.

By contrast, arresting journalists, sentencing
reporters to death and treating the media as an
enemy of the State - such actions are thoroughly
counterproductive. The media are an ally when it comes
to showing the truth about terrorists groups. Attacking
the media will not produce a more compliant citizenry;
instead, it will produce a more alienated, suspicious
and disenfranchised public, one more likely to chafe
under a Government's attempts at control - all to the
benefit of terrorist groups.

It is telling that one authority that recently sought
to curtail the flow of information to the people under
its control is ISIL itself. Last year, it banned private
Internet access in Raqqa in an attempt to prevent
disaffected fighters from reaching their families and to
stop locals from telling the outside world about life under
ISIL rule. It also banned satellite dishes and receivers,
railing against what it called "the news channels that
spread false lies and defamation". ISIL is right that
the Internet and free media threaten its adherents. It is
critically important that no State Member of the United
Nations follow its lead and adopt the same View.

That brings me to the third principle that should
undergird our approach. We have to better understand
the factors that draw some people or communities to
terrorist narratives, so that we can better spot them and
counter them. The motivation of those who become
radicalized is extremely varied. To give one example,
after extensive online conversations, one lonely
23-year-old Sunday-school teacher and babysitter in
Washington State was prepared to marry a stranger
and move to Syria. She was stopped only after her
grandparents intervened. Recalling the gifts and
attention that her new online contacts lavished upon
her, she told a reporter later, "I felt like I was betraying
God and Christianity, but I also felt excited because I
had made a lot of new friends".

An imam in central Mali recently told a researcher
from Human Rights Watch that an extremist group's
local appeal had nothing to do with religion but simply
that, in a region where the Government is unable to
provide security or basic social services, "the jihadists
provide a better alternative to the State". Identifying
those dynamics enables us to seek to address them, and
the strategy that we develop today to combat terrorist
narratives must be grounded in broader efforts to
counter and prevent violent extremism. Endorsing the
Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism (A/70/674) when it is raised next month will
represent an important step in that direction.

In conclusion, I mentioned earlier that ISIL
recently called for the murder of 11 imams and scholars
in response to their efforts to counter ISIL's messaging.
What are they doing that makes them so dangerous to
ISIL? They are notjust rejecting the terrorists' perverted
views. They are actively promoting alternative ideas
and advancing a more positive narrative. They are
doing so not only through the older tools that traditional
social-media platforms like Twitter, YouTube, Instagram
and Facebook offer, they are discussing religion over
SnapChat. Counter-messaging, social media and an

open Internet that enables young people to access such
content is how we defeat the narratives and ideologies
of ISIL in the modern era. That is the antidote - not
restrictions on the media, filters on the Internet or
attacks on political opponents. In the development of
our common framework and in our approaches based
on our individual systems of governance, it is essential
that we see political freedom as the enemy of terrorism
that it is.

