Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you for convening the
monthly briefing this morning to discuss the item on
the situation in the Middle East, and to thank
Mr. Michael Williams, Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing to the Council. We
wish him Godspeed in his endeavours.

The question of the Middle East remains one of
the oldest and most important issues with which the
Council has been dealing, on a constant and regular
basis. However, the poor progress made so far in the
peace process has been an inherent component of this
question. Violence, on the other hand, continues
unabated and unhappy news flows constantly from that
region.

Last month, Israel, the occupying Power,
continued its illegal and inhuman practice in the
occupied Gaza Strip and West Bank, killing many
civilians and defenceless children, in flagrant violation
of international law. That specifically constitutes a
clear and unambiguous violation of the relevant
provisions of the Geneva Conventions. The right of
Israel to defend its citizens does not warrant resorting
to such excessive, illegal and inhumane practices. In
fact, such practices could only undermine the chances
of continuing the peace process and could contribute to

increasing tensions in the Arab and Muslim worlds,
thus creating an environment conducive to the spread
of violence.

For several months now, the Israeli Government
has been violating the sanctity of Al-Aqsa Mosque in
East Jerusalem and allowing excavations and
demolition along the western wall of the compound.
Despite the flimsy justifications given by the Israeli
Government for undertaking such excavations, those
excavations are considered part of a pattern of actions
by Israel aimed at changing the legal status,
demographic composition and religious and historical
landmarks of the occupied city of Jerusalem. Those
measures and actions are illegal and void, as repeatedly
stressed by the Security Council and the General
Assembly and as clearly stated in resolution 465
(1980).

The latest disagreements between the brethren in
Palestine are unfortunate. We are confident that this
state of affairs will not continue. Having said that, we
stress that achieving Palestinian national accord is in
everybody's interest. On the other hand, it is
unacceptable that Israel exploits events in Gaza as a
pretext to impose an unjust siege and an economic
embargo on the Gaza Strip that adversely affect all its
innocent population. Gaza has become a big prison
where the civilian population is suffering from a
shortage of basic needs and significant restrictions on
movement. That environment causes further
deterioration in the already poor humanitarian
conditions of the civilian population. The Gaza Strip is
on the verge of economic collapse and has become
entirely dependent on international aid, as recently
noted by the United Nations Secretary-General.

In those tragic circumstances, the need to
accelerate efforts to reach a comprehensive and lasting
peaceful settlement of this crisis could not be felt more
deeply. The international community, particularly the
Quartet, should take action aiming first and foremost to
establish stability and Palestinian national unity among
the various factions. It should refrain from any action
that could lead to the exacerbation of differences
between brethren, in view of the negative impact that
internal differences have on peace and security in that
region.

In the light of the deadlock in the peace
process - despite some limited progress, such as the
recent meeting between the Palestinian President and

the Israeli Prime Minister - the involvement of
international actors is indispensable to move the peace
process forward. Therefore, we believe that the
intention expressed by the Quartet to meet next
September as part of its efforts to provide diplomatic
support for the talks is a positive and useful
development. In that regard, we hope that the
appointment of Mr. Blair as the Quartet's new envoy
will constitute a step towards the revitalization of the
group's role, and we wish him success in his work.

We also hope that the United States initiative to
hold a peace conference for the Middle East next fall
will yield concrete results and will not have a fate
similar to that of previous initiatives. To achieve
success in that endeavour, all parties need to strive for
peace in a genuine spirit. They also need to
acknowledge that violence cannot be a solution in the
Middle East. The solution must in fact be based on the
establishment of two States, in accordance with the
international terms of reference, relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Quartet road map.

With regard to the Lebanese issue, we share with
all parties the concern that the political situation in the
country has so far been marred by instability. One year
after the adoption of Security Council resolution 1701
(2006) the situation on the borders remains calm, but
Israel must cease its continuous violation of the
Lebanese airspace and cooperate in the implementation
of the resolution, as well as other Council resolutions
relevant to Lebanon, as a prerequisite for long-term
stability. All Lebanese need to unite in the face of
threats to the stability, security and national unity of
Lebanon. All Lebanese political forces need to return
to the table of dialogue and place national interest
above all other considerations.

