Mr. Vedrine (France) (spoke in French): I wish
first of all to say how sad I was to hear of the event that
occurred this morning. We do not yet know the nature
of that event, but I want to convey condolences to the
city of New York, which has again been traumatized,
and to the victims and their families.

The attacks of 11 September are a major
challenge to peace and democracy. The Security
Council reacted immediately by adopting resolution
1368 (2001). Pursuant to that resolution, and in
exercise of its right of self-defence, the United States
has undertaken an armed response against Osama bin
Laden and the Al Qaeda network and against the
Taliban system that supports them. France stands in
solidarity with that action.

Combating international terrorism means acting
simultaneously on many fronts. The mobilization must
be universal, and it is. Here, the United Nations has a
key role to play. It must, first, provide the international
community with strengthened legal instruments
enabling it to fight terrorism, including by depriving
terrorists of all financing and by ensuring that they can
nowhere find support or refuge. The Security Council
responded to that urgent need by unanimously adopting
resolution 1373 (2001).

In the same spirit, we must act to promote the
entry into force of the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, adopted in
1999. Finally, it is important to conclude the draft
comprehensive convention as soon as possible.

This mobilization also means increased
cooperation among States, something to which the
United Nations can make a major contribution. By
setting up a counter-terrorism Committee, Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) put in place a
mechanism for cooperation and encouragement which,
we hope, will help States, in line with their needs, to
respond to the requirements of the global coalition.

For this to be effective, regional organizations
and specialized bodies must be mobilized around the
same objectives. On 21 September, the European Union
adopted a very broad plan of action, including a
European arrest warrant and other legal, police and
aviation-security measures. The new recommendations
of the Financial Action Task Force on Money
Laundering (FATF), adopted at Washington, D.C., on
30 October, enable its members to apply to the sources
of financing of terrorism methods that they have been
successfully using to combat money laundering. These
also make provision for measures that can be taken by
States that are not members of the FATF.

It is essential also to ensure consistency between
the initiatives of these various bodies and what is being
done in the United Nations. In that connection, France
proposes the establishment of a forum on the financing
of terrorism, with a broader membership than that of
the FATF, which could, inter alia, be an efficient relay
point for requirements formulated by the United
Nations.

Acts of international terrorism clearly pose a
threat to international peace and security that the
Security Council must combat with the greatest
robustness. The draft declaration that the Council will
adopt today attests to the unanimous resolve of its
members, and through them, that of the entire
international community. We are determined to go
forward and to face up to all aspects of this complex,
long-term campaign.
