Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the briefings of Mr. Blix of UNMOVIC, and Mr.
Zlauvinen, representative of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), on their respective work
programmes established under resolution 1284 (1999).
Once again, my Government wishes to thank the heads
of both inspection teams for their efforts and to
commend the work of the teams they lead.

The inspections have been suspended. And
Saddam Hussain is responsible for that situation.
Through his ongoing policy of deceit, concealment and
delaying tactics, he has decided to openly opt for the
path of confrontation, contravening the interests of his
people and the demands of the Security Council. He
alone is ultimately responsible for the strong increase
in diplomatic, political and military tensions produced
in recent days, and he alone will be responsible for
facing the grave consequences to which resolution
1441 (2002) refers.

The work programme submitted to us for our
approval is part of the inspections paradigm established
in resolution 1284 (1999), adopted by the Council in
1999. However, we must be clear. Through the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1441 (2002), the
dynamic is no longer the same.

Spain has made arduous efforts at all levels to
contribute to a peaceful resolution of the Iraqi crisis.
To that end, it submitted, together with the United
States and Great Britain, a draft resolution designed to
rachet up the pressure on the Iraqi regime and which,
in fact, offered Saddam Hussain another opportunity to
adopt the strategic decision to cooperate fully,
immediately and unconditionally with the inspectors.

Spain understands, and it has demonstrated that
since it became a member of the Council, that a new
resolution, even if it were politically desirable, would
not be legally necessary.

Indeed, the legitimate recourse to the use of force
to disarm Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction is
based on the logical linking of resolutions 660 (1990),
678 (1990), 687 (1991) and 1441 (2002), adopted
pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter.

Resolution 660 (1990) considered the Iraqi
invasion of Kuwait a breach of the peace and
international security. Therefore, at that time, the
Security Council determined, for the first time, that
Iraq not only constituted a threat to peace and
international security, but also that it was in breach of
the peace and international security.

Iraq did not comply with that demand of the
Council, which requested, in its second resolution, that
Member States use all means necessary to make Iraq
comply with resolution 660 (1990). An international
coalition, under that mandate, intervened militarily and
restored international legality.

Resolution 687 (1991) declared a ceasefire,
subordinating it to compliance with a number of
conditions. The majority of them demanded the
disarmament of weapon of mass destruction. They also
referred to humanitarian matters, terrorism and the
payment of war reparations. With the exception of the
last issue, the remaining conditions were not met.

Iraq has provided cover to terrorists and has
recently boasted of training suicide teams. Saddam
Hussain's regime has not returned all those who
disappeared or were taken prisoner. It continues to fail
to provide information, in a clear, complete and
authentic manner, on the whereabouts of its weapons
and its programmes for weapons of mass destruction.
Let us recall that paragraph 9 of resolution 687 (1991)
demanded that Iraq present to the Secretary-General,
within a period of 15 days, a detailed report on the
locations and characteristics of all its weapons of mass
destruction. Twelve years later that information still
has not been provided in a comprehensive manner, as
demanded by the Council.

Resolution 687 (1991), therefore, left in abeyance
resolution 678 (1990), which authorized the use of
force. It left it in abeyance, but it did not abolish it. The
content of resolution 678 (1990) continues to be
perfectly valid, and that is recalled in resolution 1441
(2002), unanimously adopted by the Council four and a
half months ago.

Resolution 1441 (2002) recognizes that Iraq's
non-compliance with the Council's resolutions
constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
it recalls that these have not been restored in the
region - I am using the language of the resolution -
and it decides that Iraq has failed to comply and
continues to fail to comply most seriously with the
demands imposed by the international community.

In accordance with the provisions of the
Council's most recent resolution, I repeat, the Council
has not met just once, but rather many times, to
examine successive reports of the inspectors. Iraq has
still not complied with the will of the international
community, as has been demanded of it. Therefore,
peace and international security continue unassured.

Finally, my country would have sincerely
preferred for us to have met here under very different
circumstances, in order to adopt the UNMOVIC and
IAEA work programmes and to take note of their
implementation, on the basis of the genuine and full
cooperation of the Iraqi regime, and to set new
timetables for Iraqi disarmament. However,
unfortunately, that scenario has not materialized.

The commendable work of the inspectors, which
Spain values and supports, is part of a system that has
demonstrated its effectiveness in enormously diverse
countries and circumstances. However, the system of
inspections has always had an inescapable prerequisite:
the full, active and immediate cooperation of the party
being inspected. For 12 years, Saddam Hussain has not
wanted or provided such cooperation.

In conclusion, the humanitarian dimension
concerns us. We believe that measures must be taken to
alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people. We hope to
receive more information from the Secretary-General,
and we support the initiative of submitting a draft
resolution on humanitarian issues.

