Mr. Syed Hamid Albar (Malaysia): Mr. President,
may I begin by congratulating you on convening this formal
meeting of the Council on the subject of small arms, which
is of major concern to the international community. This
meeting is indeed most timely, given the enormity of the
problem and the conflict situations we are in today.

In many of the regional conflicts and civil wars since
the end of the cold war, small arms and light weapons have
played a significant role in their prolongation and
intensification. Far more people have fallen victim to the
use of small arms than any other weapons. What is clear is
that long after a conflict has formally ended the stockpiles
of small arms continue to pose a threat to public order. This
often hampers post-conflict nation-building efforts. The
rampant use of small arms has exacted a heavy toll on the
lives of innocent civilians caught in the conflict, particularly
children, women and the aged.

The accumulation of small arms - whether estimated
to be 100 million or 500 million - is indeed of grave
concern, and illustrates the gravity of the situation. The
proliferation of small arms in the hands of combatants more
often than not slows down efforts at peacemaking and
peace-building. Clearly, the illicit trade in small arms poses
a serious threat to international peace and security. It is
therefore incumbent upon the international community to
work towards greater control and management of this
highly complex problem.

What is urgently needed is a practical approach to
deal with it at the country, regional and global levels.
Malaysia believes that addressing the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons must be viewed from a
holistic perspective of arms control and disarmament,
post-conflict peace-building, conflict prevention and
socio-economic development. In the context of conflict
situations, the problem should be seen comprehensively
in the context of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants, a subject which the
Council addressed in July this year.

We believe the United Nations, particularly the
Council, can and should play a critical role in checking
the proliferation of small arms. The United Nations
should continue to be a central forum for creating better
public awareness and understanding of the direct and
indirect consequences of the use of small arms. It should
continue to serve as a clearing house for information, to
facilitate an exchange of national experiences and to learn
from them, as well as to arrive at arrangements and
agreements most suited to the specific situations faced by
Member States. In this regard, Malaysia welcomes the
decision of the Secretary-General to establish the United
Nations Coordinating Action on Small Arms (CASA). I
trust that this will have the strong support of the
international community and the Council.

Malaysia commends the Secretary-General's report
on small arms, which constitutes an important
contribution to our understanding of the problem. The
many recommendations contained therein are innovative
and far-reaching, and deserve serious consideration. We
find that a number of the recommendations can quite
easily be implemented, though others may require further
examination. We are grateful to the panel of experts who
have contributed ideas which have been incorporated in
the report of the Secretary-General.

There are a number of other initiatives being
undertaken by various parties to develop viable, practical
policy options. We are gratified to note that a number of
regional organizations have taken the initiative to control
the excessive accumulation and uncontrolled use of small
arms. The Organization of American States (OAS), for
example, has made a significant contribution to this
process with the adoption of the Inter-American
Convention against Illicit Manufacturing of and Illegal
Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunitions, Explosives and

 

Other Related Materials. These measures also include the
strengthening of border controls, marking of firearms and
sharing information on weapons producers, dealers,
importers and exporters. The support of the international
community is equally important to ensure the success of
another regional initiative taken by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) on the
moratorium on the sale of light weapons. Another welcome
development is the establishment of a European Union code
of conduct on arms exports. These commendable regional
approaches have paved the way towards greater
coordination and cooperation between Member States, and
should be emulated by other regions of the world,
particularly in areas of existing conflict.

In the Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN) region we have also begun to look seriously at
the issue of small arms, particularly in the context of the
ASEAN Regional Forum.

Beyond Governments and intergovernmental
arrangements, there is also an important role to be played
by non-governmental organizations and other actors in
international society. It is encouraging that there is
increasing involvement on their part, thereby mobilizing
additional resources in dealing with this issue. A number of
areas have been identified by non-governmental
organizations such as combating the illicit traffic in small
arms, tighter control of legal arms transfers and the urgent
need for reductions in small arms in war-torn societies -
for appropriate action to be taken by their Governments.
Such efforts by non-governmental actors are indeed
important.

Malaysia supports any initiative by the United Nations,
individual countries and non-governmental organizations in
dealing with this issue. The challenge before us is to define
the problem, which has many complexities - political,
legal, technical, economic and social - and formulate
appropriate and effective approaches and strategies on how
best to deal with it.

A pertinent point which ought to be made in any
discussion of the subject is that well over one 100 States
Members of the United Nations do not manufacture
weapons domestically and have to rely on imports to meet
their legitimate needs. It has become abundantly clear that
the flow of small arms, particularly to developing countries,
is driven not only by the forces of demand but also by
those of supply.

Malaysia fully supports the convening of an
international conference on illicit trafficking in small
arms. We believe that such a conference will afford the
opportunity for an in-depth analysis of all aspects of the
highly lucrative, illicit arms trade. To ensure a successful
outcome, there is of course the need to make adequate
preparations, including on the important issue of the scope
of the conference. The conference should be focused and
action-oriented, and should draw upon the experiences of
regional approaches to tackling the problem. Malaysia is
of the view that given that the problem of illicit arms
trade affects a large number of developing countries, it
would be appropriate for the conference to be chaired
only by one of those countries.

As much as we support current global efforts to
address the issue of small arms, we hope that it does not
in any way distract the global community from also
addressing the core issue of nuclear disarmament, which
is far from being resolved and remains the greatest threat
to life on the planet. Whether it does or not, I would
nevertheless underscore the importance of keeping an
equal focus on the nuclear disarmament issue even as we
grapple with the problem of small arms.

