The President (spoke in F rench): I shall now
make a few brief comments in my national capacity.
First, I warmly thank the Deputy President of
South Africa and facilitator of the peace process in
Burundi, Mr. Jacob Zuma, for his statement, which
contained some good news. Above all, my delegation is
very grateful to him for his tireless efforts to advance
the peace process in Burundi. The perseverance and
resolve with which he has undertaken his task must be
welcomed. We are, of course, also grateful to his
country, South Africa.

I also wish to thank the President of the
Economic and Social Council for his extremely useful
contribution to our debate, which shed light on the road
yet to be travelled before we reach our common
destination: a peaceful and stable Burundi.

My country welcomes the positive developments
in the peace process in Burundi, despite its many
frailties. Bulgaria, like other delegations, welcomes the
Global Ceasefire Agreement, signed in Dar es Salaam
on 16 November between the Government of Burundi
and the Conseil national pour la defense de la
democratic-Forces pour la defense de la democratic,
led by Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza. That was a major step
forward towards peace. We encourage the parties to
implement that agreement forthwith. Bulgaria also pays
heartfelt tribute to the countries of the regional
initiative, which helped to arrive at the Agreement. We
cannot exaggerate the importance of the positive role
played by the countries of the region.

Bulgaria also duly appreciates the valuable
contribution of the African Union through its
deployment of the African mission to Burundi, which
should be appropriately supported and assisted by the
international community and the Security Council.

It is essential that the ceasefire in Burundi extend
throughout the country. In that respect, like other
delegations we urgently call on Mr. Rwasa Agathon of
the Forces nationales de liberation to abandon the
military option and to join the peace process.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I would ask Deputy President Zuma and President
Rosenthal if they wish to offer any additional
observations in response to points raised by members
of the Council.

I call on Deputy President Zuma.

