Mr. Spoerri: I thank you, Madam President, for
giving the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) the opportunity to address the Security Council
today on a topic that is at the heart ofthe ICRC's mission
and mandate and at the centre of all aspects of our daily
work in armed conflicts around the world. My briefing
will focus exclusively on the topic of missing persons
from the 1991 Gulf War and the work of the so-called
tripartite mechanism, which is chaired by the ICRC.

Under international humanitarian law, parties to the
conflict must both prevent people from going missing
and clarify the fate of those who do. In armed conflicts
people go missing for a variety of reasons, and their
families are left waiting. The plight of missing persons
and the agony of their families often continue long after
conflicts end. The tripartite mechanism was born as a
result of the international armed conflict of the Gulf
War, which began with the invasion of Kuwait by Iraqi
troops on 2 August 1990. Shortly after the conflict,
Iraq, Kuwait and members of the coalition - Saudi
Arabia, France, the United Kingdom and the United
States - met in Riyadh, under the auspices ofthe ICRC,
and signed an agreement establishing the Tripartite
Commission on missing persons in April 1991.

The Tripartite Commission, which is composed of
members ofthe coalition, the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq as an observer and the ICRC as Chair
ofthe Commission, set up the Technical Subcommittee,
in December 1994, in order to expedite the search
process. Tripartite Commission meetings continue to
be held twice a year, while the Technical Subcommittee
meetings are held five times a year. It has been 27 years
since the end of the Gulf war, 27 years since the first
session of the Tripartite Commission and 24 years
since the setting up of the Technical Subcommittee.
To date, 46 Tripartite Commission sessions and 104
Technical Sub-committee sessions have been held with
one aim - to trace persons still unaccounted for as a
result of the conflict and to provide answers to their
families. Shortly after the withdrawal of Iraqi forces
from Kuwait, the parties to the conflict met and agreed
to repatriate prisoners of war (POWs) and civilian
internees captured or arrested during the Gulf War.

In accordance with its mandate and with resolution
686 (1991), the ICRC made arrangements for the general
repatriation of more than 70,000 Iraqis from Saudi
Arabia to Iraq. It was also arranged for the repatriation
of4,()00 Kuwaiti and allied forces POWs and over 1,300
civilian internees and detained civilians of Kuwaiti
nationality, or civilians of third countries, from Iraq
to Kuwait.

After the successful completion of that phase, the
focus shifted to determining the whereabouts and fate
of military and civilian persons still missing. The aim
was to resolve individual cases through an exchange
of information among the Tripartite Commission
members. However, it was only in 2003 that the search
for burial sites, in an attempt to locate, recover and
repatriate the remains of those still missing, began in
Iraq, and followed suit in Kuwait.

Since 2003, the remains of 373 persons have been
recovered: 275 persons in Iraq - in Amarah, Karbala,
Ramadi and Samawah - and 98 in Kuwait. Those
efforts were supported by additional information
that the United States and the United Kingdom made
available in 2010. Excavation missions also took place in
Al-Habbaniyah, Muhammad Sakran, Najaf, other sites
in Ramadi and, finally, Khamisiyah, in Nasiriyah, in
Iraq, but, unfortunately, no human remains were found.

A total of 1,080 cases of missing persons remain
open today within the framework of the mechanism,
including 371 reported missing by Kuwait and 700 cases
by Iraq. In addition to that, 336 other documented cases
of Iraqi missing persons, known as out-of-tripartite
cases, remain unresolved. It should be noted that those
cases do not constitute the entirety of missing persons
cases, but those documented by the mechanism.

Despite continued search efforts, it has been 14 years
since human remains belonging to a Kuwaiti missing
person have been recovered, and seven years since
remains of an Iraqi have been found. The tremendous
efforts, and the commitment of all the members, did
not yield tangible results. Hundreds of families are still
desperately awaiting answers.

The tripartite mechanism experienced several
challenges. The most notable being the elapse of time
since the cessation of the conflict. The passage of
time made finding and contacting, or re-contacting,
witnesses difficult. Changes in the topology of the
landscape affected the ability to recognize and locate
burial sites. The mechanism suffered from the loss of
archive material, as well as the lack of the centralization
of information, with data dispersed among the various
members. Additionally, the lack of availability of the
appropriate equipment and machinery proved to be a
major challenge for the mechanism.

In response to those major challenges, the ICRC
undertook an extensive analysis of all available
information, involved various experts and forensic
specialists, took stock of the situation in detail and
proposed recommendations for future work. In 2017,
the ICRC finalized a draft of those findings in its report
entitled "The Review Project", which outlines a set of
recommendations to move forward, streamlines the
search and recovery processes and emphasizes forensic
best practices.

Based on those new recommendations, field work
and excavation missions will continue on 27 August
2018 in Samawah, which is considered a promising
site. The important recommendations of the report,
including the correct utilization of satellite imagery, are
guiding the optimal implementation of those missions.
Despite the fact that no positive exhumation occurred
in recent years, there is a newly rejuvenated positive
energy and commitment to the revitalization of the
Tripartite Commission from all parties.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank all
Technical Subcommittee and Tripartite Commission
members, along with UNAMI, for taking upon
themselves the task of elucidating the fate of those
missing persons and for their cooperation and
commitment to the tripartite mechanism and its
humanitarian mission. The ICRC was and remains
committed to the mechanism and shall spare no effort
in the search and recovery of human remains in order
to provide answers to the families of missing persons,
ensuring their right to know the fate of their missing
loved ones.

