Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to extend to you, Sir, our
thanks and appreciation for your positive response to
the request of the Arab Group to convene this meeting
to discuss the deteriorating situation of our Palestinian
brothers in the occupied Palestinian territories. I wish
also to extend to you and to the Government of Ukraine
our special congratulations on your presidency of this
Council. We are confident that you will guide the work
of the Council in an able manner.
I wish also to register our appreciation for the
outstanding efforts of your predecessor, my brother
from Tunisia, in managing the affairs of the Council
last month in a manner that reflected his great and
renowned experience in the international arena.

Our participation today in the discussion of the
illegal Israeli practices against the Palestinian civilians
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, affirms the dangers and consequences of the
provocative behaviour of Ariel Sharon, the Prime
Minister of Israel, on 28 September, when he paid a
notorious provocative visit to Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
That visit laid a heavy political burden on Israel, but is
by no means heavier than the bitterness and pain of the
brotherly Palestinians. It was an arrogant act that
revealed hatred for all elements of the peace and
stability to which we in the Arab States aspire.

Kuwait strongly deplores Israeli practices against
Palestinian civilians and the methods of repression
deliberately employed by occupying soldiers against
defenceless innocent people fighting for their freedom
from the occupation authorities. Our concern is
increased by the fact that the Israeli Government is
using all forms of repression and violence against
Palestinian civilians, approximately 400 of whom have
been killed to date. Following these deliberate killings,
including of defenceless children, since 7 March Israel
has imposed a policy of blockade on the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem. This has
further aggravated the living conditions of Palestinian
people in every walk of life to a level that is
unacceptable to any human being.

All this undoubtedly represents a violation of
United Nations resolutions and the principles of
international law, particularly the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 and the obligations emanating
therefrom under the two Protocols Additional of 1977.
In this context, we call for a consideration of ways to
guarantee the full implementation of that Convention in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem.

The suffering of the Palestinian people in the
occupied territories requires the firm resolve of the
international community to give no credence to the
allegations of the Israeli Government that it is acting to
alleviate the consequences of the blockade on the
Palestinian people. The Security Council is fully
responsible for ensuring the security and safety of the
Palestinian civilians and for safeguarding their dignity
and right to live free from the repression of the
occupying Power. Thus, we extend our absolute
support for the Palestinian request that a United
Nations force be established to protect Palestinian
civilians in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem. We trust that the establishment of
such a force will reveal the truth and will curb the
brutal Israeli practices perpetrated daily against the
Palestinian civilians.

In Kuwait, we do not understand why the Israeli
Government is afraid of the establishment of a
protection force, especially since Israel claims that it is
not responsible for the violence occurring there. If it is
sincere, it is illogical that it should oppose the
establishment of such a force. We also believe that the
creation of a force to guarantee the protection of the
Palestinians would contribute to stability and restore
the situation as it was in the past. Moreover, the report
of the fact-finding mission established under a
resolution of the Commission on Human Rights
stresses the need to establish an international
mechanism to protect Palestinian civilians.

In Kuwait, we support all peaceful initiatives
designed to find a just solution to the Palestinian
question in accordance with resolutions of international
legitimacy, particularly Security Council resolution 242
(1967). We maintain our firm stance in solidarity with
the just requests and claims of the Palestinians for their
legitimate political rights and to establish their
independent State on their national soil, with Jerusalem
as its capital. We wish to emphasize that, if peace is to
be just and comprehensive, it should be based on
international resolutions, particularly Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as well as the
principle of land for peace. This should lead to Israel's
withdrawal from all the Arab territories it occupied in
1967, including the Syrian Golan, and to its complete
withdrawal from southern Lebanon.

