Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): It is my pleasure to convey to you once again,
Sir, our deep appreciation for all the efforts you have
made and the serious work you have undertaken over
the past few days.

Allow me to explain to you and to the members
of the Security Council the decision of the Syrian Arab
Republic with respect to resolution 1483 (2003),
adopted by the Security Council this morning. We
would have voted in favour of the resolution had we
been granted the additional time for deliberation before
the voting that we requested on more than one
occasion. I shall now read out our explanation of vote:

"For many years, Syria has called for the
sanctions imposed on the Iraqi people to be lifted
and for the mitigation of the consequences of the
unjust embargo, including malnutrition and the
lack of medicines. On the basis of the interest of
the Government and people of Syria to improve
the conditions of our brothers, the Iraqi people,
we believed that we were compelled to vote in
favour of the resolution despite our conviction
that it fails to rise to the expectations and
aspirations of the Iraqi people for their country to
be a sovereign and united land and nation,
enjoying their natural resources and playing an
effective role in both the Arab and the
international arenas.

"Syria's vote in favour of the resolution can
in no way be interpreted as a change in its
position of rejecting the war against Iraq as
illegitimate. We cannot imagine how the United
Nations could legitimize foreign occupation.
Along with other States members of the Security
Council, Syria attempted to effect fundamental
amendments to the draft resolution that were
designed to give the United Nations a central role
in Iraq and to ensure that the Iraqi people would
enjoy the wealth of its country and the speediest
possible end to the occupation of its land.
"Syria's vote in favour of the resolution is
in conformity with its ongoing desire for unity
within the Security Council, which we believe to
be the fundamental framework for the
maintenance of international legitimacy."

I wish the position of Syria that I have just read and its implications for the resolution we adopted this
out to be reflected in the official records of the Security morning.
Council. At a later stage, I shall convey to the

. . . . . The meetin rose at 5.30 .m.
Secretariat an official letter containing this statement. g p

