Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
First, I would like to thank the Chairmen of the three
Committees for their reports. Terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems pose a major threat to international
peace and security - an issue for which the Council
has a special responsibility. Open meetings such as this
one, which enable all Members of the United Nations
to remain informed about all of the Council's activities
in combating terrorism, are particularly useful.
Furthermore, they make it possible for us to ensure that
there is smooth interaction and coordination in the
work of the three Committees established by the
Council.

We fully support the statement to be made later

by the presidency of the European Union. However, I

would also like to refer to some specific aspects of the
work of the Committees.

With regard to resolution 1540 (2004), that
Committee has spent a great deal of time elaborating a
draft programme of work. I should like once again to
stress the importance that my country attaches to
ensuring that the programme of work and its
implementation deal with all aspects of resolution 1540
(2004), neglecting none. The question of the delivery
vehicles for weapons of mass destruction - which has
been the poor relation in the work done over the past
two years - must not be excluded on an artificial
basis. We cannot adopt an approach that restricts the
scope of the resolution. The fact that a treaty bans any
particular type of weapon does not mean that such
weapons or their delivery vehicles no longer exist.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is a unique instrument in
terms of non-proliferation precisely because it deals
comprehensively and coherently with the three types of
weapons of mass destruction, their delivery vehicles
and related materiel. It is respectful of treaties and of
those who have or have not signed them, but it is
directed at all States. Where there is no treaty - that is
to say, in the case of delivery systems and non-State
actors - it does not lay down the law but asks States
to fully shoulder their responsibilities. The Security
Council has formulated these requests of all States
precisely so as to render them operational.

When we decided, by resolution 1673 (2006),
which extended the mandate of the Committee, that the
Committee should, within a period of two years, report
back to the Council on the completion of the
implementation by States of the resolution, we
assigned an ambitious goal to the Committee. It is now
up to the Committee to acquire the tools that it needs in
order to carry out this work in depth. The Committee
must, if it is to do the job that we have entrusted to it in
terms of assistance, effectively match offers and
requests for technical assistance. This will require the
updating of its matrix, which was never intended to be
carved in stone but was designed to be an evolving
tool. The contracts of several members of the group of
experts have expired or soon will expire, so it will be a
brand new group that will be helping the Committee to
implement its new programme of work.

France encourages the Committee to continue its
activities with a view to increasing awareness of the
resolution on the part of States and of international
organizations with competence in this area, such as the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the International
Civil Aviation Organization and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. This work is not
just useful in terms of inviting States that have not yet
done so to submit or supplement their national reports,
but also in mobilizing support for the Committee's
work among regional and specialized organizations
acting pursuant to their respective mandates. This
cooperative and interactive approach has helped States
to take on board the objectives of non-proliferation
formulated by the Security Council. By taking such an
approach the Committee will do useful work under its
second mandate.

The Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions Committee,
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), has,
since the adoption of resolution 1617 (2005), carried
out important work in improving the sanctions regime
in terms of making it more effective and more
transparent.

France welcomes the adoption of resolution 1699
(2006), which endorses the Committee's cooperation
with Interpol and extends it to other sanctions
Committees established by the Council. This
innovative cooperation has already enabled the
Committee to acquire supplementary information
relating to individuals and entities on the list and
especially to mobilize Interpol's network in order to
implement sanctions. We believe this cooperation
should be further intensified and, in particular, the
number of the notices accessible on the Interpol
network should be increased.

A review of the guidelines of the 1267 Committee
is under way. It now needs to be speedily completed,
particularly with regard to procedures for listing and
de-listing, as well as to those relating to humanitarian
exemptions, with a view to making those procedures
both more transparent and more operational. Increased
transparency would enhance justice and make it
possible to improve the credibility of the Committee's
work, particularly regarding Member States, which
would facilitate cooperation by Member States with the
Committee. It would also meet a need for
effectiveness. We have proposed that a focal point be
created to this end within the Secretariat to receive and
transmit to the Committee de-listing requests from

individuals on the list. I hope that guidelines will be
speedily adopted on this basis by the 1267 Committee.

Over the past three months, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the its Executive
Directorate have done important work analysing initial
reports received from States pursuant to resolution
1624 (2005).

The Counter-Terrorism Committee is mandated to
include in its dialogue with States their efforts to
implement resolution 1624 (2005) and to help build
States' capacities in this area. I thank the Chair of the
CTC for the report (S/2006/737) submitted to the
Council on 15 September. It clearly is a point of
departure; the Committee now needs to continue, at
regular intervals, to assess the status of the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005).

France attaches great importance to that
resolution, which, for the first time, called upon States
to act on the crucial problem of terrorist propaganda.
Like resolution 1373 (2001), that resolution calls on
States to adopt the necessary criminal laws to prohibit
incitement to commit terrorist acts and to deny safe
haven on their territory to those guilty of such conduct.
That is fundamental, and it is on that aspect that the
Committee should focus its work, using all of the tools
at its disposal for engaging in dialogue with States.

Resolution 1624 (2005) also calls upon States to
develop a broader political approach to the problem,
strengthening dialogue and mutual understanding. We
think that this balance is important, because while
counter-terrorism inevitably involves police, judicial
and intelligence work, it cannot be successful in the
long term unless it deals properly with factors that lead
to the radicalization and recruitment of terrorists.

France, furthermore, continues to advocate that
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate continue their efforts in following up field
visits and strengthening their cooperation with relevant
international and regional organizations in order to
improve the implementation by States of the Security
Council's requests.

In conclusion, I wish to recall the importance my
country attaches to mobilizing all United Nations
organs and agencies in combating terrorism. Here,
France welcomed the General Assembly's adoption of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(General Assembly resolution 60/288). That document,

which was largely inspired by the Secretary-General,
for the first time creates consistency in the work done
by all United Nations bodies in the area of counter-
terrorism. This will enhance the effectiveness of United
Nations action and help mobilize all States against this
scourge.

