Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his briefing. I have also listened carefully to
the statements made by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine and the representative of Israel.

The situation in the Middle East remains complex
and fragile. The peace process is still at an impasse,
which is very worrisome and disconcerting. The
Israeli-Palestinian issue remains at the centre of the
Middle East process and therefore requires the ongoing
attention and assistance of the international
community. China has always advocated the settling of
disputes between Israel and Palestine on the basis of
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the principle
of Land for Peace, the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Middle East Road Map and other agreements with a
view to ultimately establishing an independent State of
Palestine living in peace side by side with Israel.

China welcomes and supports every effort to
overcome the impasse in the talks and in restarting
negotiations. We welcome the recent efforts made by
both Israel and Palestine to resume the peace talks at
an early date, which we hope will soon yield positive
results.

China hopes that the Quartet will continue to
contribute to the peace talks between Israel and
Palestine. China believes that the Security Council
should play a greater role in the resolution of the
question of the Middle East.

Israel's settlement activities represent the main
obstacle to the resumption of peace talks. China has
consistently opposed Israel's construction of Jewish
settlements on occupied Palestinian territories. We urge
Israel to cease immediately its settlement activities and
to cooperate with international efforts towards peace,
so as to create conditions conducive to the resumption
of peace talks.

At present, the security and humanitarian
situation in the occupied territories, including the Gaza
Strip, remains grave. The relevant United Nations
resolutions must be implemented. We hope that Israel
will lift completely its blockade against the Gaza Strip,
so that the people of Gaza can resume their normal
lives in conditions of dignity, with space for
development. The international community must
provide greater assistance and support to the
Palestinian people.

The talks on the Syria-Israel track and on the
Lebanon-Israel track represent an important and
integral part of the Middle East peace process. A
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question
is indissociable from progress on those two tracks.
China fully supports the just aspirations of Syria and
Lebanon to safeguard their national sovereignty and
territorial integrity and to recover their occupied
territories.

China supports the Arab States' strategic choice
to seek a comprehensive and lasting peace in the
region. China is in favour of the Security Council's
playing a greater role in advancing the Middle East
peace process. China is ready to continue to play a
constructive role in seeking the early realization of a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.

It is China's consistent View that the crisis in
Syria can be settled only through a Syrian-led political
process on the basis of respect for the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria
and for the choices and will of the Syrian people. We
call upon all factions in Syria and on the international
community to cooperate with and support the efforts of
the Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Annan, to fully implement
the six-point plan.

