Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): It is a great pleasure for me to congratulate
you, Sir, on behalf of the Arab Group, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month; I wish you every success in your work.
I would also like to thank your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, for his wise management of the activities of
the Council last month.

I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Kalomoh for his briefing.
The regular monthly Secretariat briefings to the
Security Council on developments in the Palestinian
and Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, the Syrian Golan and the Shab'a farms,
reveal the enormity of the legal and humanitarian
violations that Israel, the occupying Power, continues
to commit in those territories. Although we were
optimistic about the peace negotiations, which we have
always supported, and the approach of the road map,
which is consistent with the Arab peace initiative
adopted at the Beirut summit, we have been repeatedly
shocked by Israel's violations of its legal and political
obligations under the relevant international
conventions and agreements.

Israel's military withdrawal from some
Palestinian territories in the Gaza Strip last September,
which was implemented unilaterally and without
coordination with the Palestinian side, was
accompanied by a series of dangerous unilateral
measures. These include the expansion of illegitimate
settlements in the West Bank, in and around East
Jerusalem and in the Syrian Golan; repeated closures
and sieges of those territories, including the closure of
checkpoints; the annexation of additional Palestinian
land and natural resources; and extrajudicial killings
and executions. Those actions have damaged most of
the economic and social institutions in the West Bank
and the Golan, preventing international humanitarian
assistance workers from gaining access to the affected
areas and freezing all customs and tax revenues
belonging to the Palestinian Authority as a punishment
of the Palestinian people for their democratic choice of
the new Government. Those are some of the measures
taken by Israel against the Palestinian people -
measures that have created a state of paralysis in most
of the Palestinian community's facilities and increased
levels of unemployment, poverty and disease among
the Palestinian people.

The Arab Group strongly condemns the unilateral
Israeli measures, which were not approved by the
Palestinian side and with regard to which there is no
regional or international consensus. Such illegal
measures are being taken in advance of negotiations on
a final settlement, and will not contribute to the peace
process or to future peaceful coexistence in the region.
We therefore call for such unilateral measures by Israel
to not be recognized by Member States or international
organizations.

We also demand that the Security Council and
major members of the Quartet shoulder their
responsibilities and take effective measures consistent
with the resolutions adopted by Arab leaders at their
most recent summit, held in Khartoum.

First, they should condemn all unilateral
measures taken by Israel in the occupied Palestinian
and Arab territories and demand that Israel
immediately cease such measures, including the
expansion of settlements, the building of the separation
wall, the Judaization of Jerusalem, the attempt to annex
Al-Aghwar - the Jordan Valley - and the division of
the Palestinian territories into three isolated cantons in
order to prevent the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State. We also call on them to condemn
Israel's attempt to make a unilateral declaration of its
final borders at the expense of Palestinian sovereignty,
which we consider to be a blatant violation to the
principles of the road map, international law and the
resolutions of international legitimacy, including the
relevant resolutions of the tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly and the July 2004
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.

Secondly, they should demand that Israel end its
policy of starving the Palestinian people, release all
funds belonging to the Palestinian National Authority,
pursuant to its legal obligations under the Paris
economic Protocol of 1994, and allow international
humanitarian and relief assistance personnel to gain

access to the affected Palestinian territories in a timely
manner.

Thirdly, they should provide the Palestinian
people with the necessary protection from repeated
Israeli attacks. Israel, the occupying Power, must also
refrain from infringing upon the Palestinian authorities,
invading their property and attacking unarmed
civilians. All prisoners of the Areeha prison in Jericho
who had been detained by the Palestinian authorities
must be returned, pursuant to the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, which is
applicable to the entirety of the occupied territories.

Fourthly, we call upon the international
community to continue to provide financial grants and
economic assistance to the Palestinian people,
regardless of their democratic choice.

Fifthly, we reiterate the just demands of Syria
regarding the restoration of the occupied Golan, and
reject Israeli measures aimed at changing its legal
status.

Sixthly, we demand that Israel stop its repeated
air, land and sea violations of Lebanese sovereignty,
resume its withdrawal from Shab'a farms and Kafr
Shuba hills and hand over all landmine maps pertaining
to southern Lebanon, in compliance with Israel's
obligations as outlined in relevant international
resolutions and in order to restore peace and stability in
Lebanon.

In closing, we would emphasize that any further
delay or procrastination by the Security Council in
taking the necessary effective action to address these
illegal measures will only send the wrong message to
the Israeli Government and will encourage it to commit
further violations. Accordingly, more than ever, we
urge the Security Council, as the United Nations organ
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, to shoulder its responsibilities in this
regard and to apply no double standards, in order to
avoid dragging the region into further violence and
bloody conflict. This would ensure a suitable political
environment that would enable the new Palestinian and
Israeli Governments to resume their peace negotiations
along to their natural track, and would provide an
opportunity to establish a just, lasting, comprehensive
and peaceful settlement of the Palestinian question, in
accordance with the resolutions of international
legitimacy, the principles of the road map, the Arab
peace initiative and the vision of the establishment of
two States, Palestine and Israel, living side by side in
peace and within a framework of mutual respect.

