The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now continue its consideration of the item
on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the open
debate held at its 4274th meeting on 5 February
2001 on "Peace-building: towards a
comprehensive approach'. The Council recalls
also the statements of its President in relation to
activities of the United Nations in preventive
diplomacy, peacemaking, peacekeeping and post-
conflict peace-building. The Security Council
welcomes the convening by the Secretary-General
of the Fourth High-level United Nations-Regional
Organizations Meeting and notes with interest its
results, in particular the 'Framework for
cooperation in peace-building' as conveyed by
the Secretary-General to the President of the
Security Council in his letter of 12 February 2001
(8/2001/138).

"The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Council emphasizes the
need for full respect for the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
provisions of international law, in particular those
related to prevention of armed conflicts and
settlement of disputes by peaceful means.

"The Security Council reaffirms that the
quest for peace requires a comprehensive,
concerted and determined approach that addresses

the root causes of conflicts, including their
economic and social dimensions.
"The Security Council recognizes that
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building
are often closely interrelated. The Council
stresses that this interrelationship requires a
comprehensive approach in order to preserve the
results achieved and prevent the recurrence of
conflicts. To this effect, the Council reiterates the
value of including, as appropriate, peace-building
elements in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations.

"The Security Council recognizes that
peace-building is aimed at preventing the
outbreak, the recurrence or continuation of armed
conflict and therefore encompasses a wide range
of political, developmental, humanitarian and
human rights programmes and mechanisms. This
requires short and long-term actions tailored to
address the particular needs of societies sliding
into conflict or emerging from it. These actions
should focus on fostering sustainable institutions
and processes in areas such as sustainable
development, the eradication of poverty and
inequalities, transparent and accountable
governance, the promotion of democracy, respect
for human rights and the rule of law and the
promotion of a culture of peace and non-violence.

"The Security Council further reaffirms that
a comprehensive and integrated strategy in peace-
building must involve all the relevant actors in
this field, taking into account the unique
circumstances of each conflict situation. The
Council emphasizes that a well-planned and
coordinated peace-building strategy can play a
significant role in conflict prevention. In this
connection, the Council underlines that
international efforts in peace-building must
complement and not supplant the essential role of
the country concerned.

"The Security Council notes that the
experiences of the United Nations and regional
organizations and other actors in peace-building
point to the need for enhancing peace-building
activities by formulating a strategy based on the
interdependence between sustainable peace,
security and development in all its dimensions.

"The Security Council stresses that, to be
successful, such a peace-building strategy should
meet, inter alia, the following basic criteria:
relevance, coherence and consistency of
programmes and actions; the consent and
cooperation of the authorities of the State
concerned where they exist; continuity in and
conclusion of the process; cooperation and
coordination among organizations and other
actors involved; and cost-effectiveness of the
overall peace-building operation.

"The Security Council strongly encourages
the United Nations system and regional and
subregional organizations, donor countries and
the international financial institutions to consider
undertaking initiatives such as: utilization of the
mechanism of consolidated appeals; the joint
holding of pledging conferences to mobilize
expeditiously international political support and
the essential resource requirements; ensuring
prompt financing of quick start-up peace-building
projects; and strengthening mechanisms that
promote development and self-reliance by
improving capacity-building activities.

"The Security Council also underlines that
successful peace-building is predicated on an
effective and an unambiguous division of labour,
based on the comparative advantage of different
implementing bodies, between all the
international partners, including the United
Nations system, the international financial
institutions, regional and subregional
organizations, non-governmental organizations
and the wider international community. In this
regard, the Council strongly encourages all those
actors to enhance their cooperation in areas such
as the early identification of situations where
peace-building is required; the definition of
objectives and priority areas of peace-building;
the development of an integrated operational
response through mutual consultation; joint
monitoring of peace-building activities; and
establishing repertories of best practices and
lessons learned in the area of peace-building.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of mainstreaming a gender
perspective into peace agreements and peace-
building strategies and of involving women in all
peace-building measures.

"The Security Council further encourages

the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations to establish consultative processes
to ensure that peace settlements and agreements
mediated by these organizations include
commitments by the parties to the conflict to
concerted action in different areas of peace-
building, and stresses the need to identify such
areas at early stages of the negotiation of peace
agreements.

"The Security Council recognizes that the
repatriation and resettlement of refugees and
internally displaced persons as well as the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants should not be seen in isolation but
must be carried out in the context of a broader
search for peace, stability and development, with
special emphasis on the revival of economic
activities and reparation of the social fabric.

"The Security Council considers it essential
to provide speedy operational solutions to the
exceptional and urgent needs of countries
emerging from or on the verge of conflict,
through innovative and flexible means, including
quick impact programmes which translate into
concrete and visible improvements in the daily
lives of their local populations.

"To enhance further the effectiveness of the
United Nations in addressing conflicts at all
stages, from prevention to settlement to post-
conflict peace-building, the Security Council
reiterates its willingness to consider ways to
improve its cooperation with other United
Nations bodies and organs directly concerned by
peace-building, in particular the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council,
which have a primary role in this field.

"The Security Council recalls the essential
role of the Secretary-General in peace-building,
in particular in the establishment of strategies in
this field and their implementation, and
recognizes the need to strengthen the
coordination and analysis capacity of the
Secretariat in order to allow the Secretary-
General to fulfil his responsibilities in this area.

"The Security Council recognizes the need
for the early involvement on the ground of peace-
building actors and an orderly assumption of their

responsibilities. To this effect and in order to
avoid any gap between peacekeeping and peace-
building, the Council expresses its determination,
where appropriate, to consult at various stages of
any peacekeeping operation that includes peace-
building elements, and in particular when the
operation is being established, with the State
concerned and with relevant actors who are
primarily responsible for coordinating and
implementing aspects of peace-building
activities, such as the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the United Nations
funds and programmes, the international financial
institutions, regional organizations and major
donor countries.

"The Security Council recognizes that
troop-contributing countries may be involved in
peace-building activities and that, within the
existing system of consultations with these
countries, relevant peace-building activities
should be discussed.

"The Security Council encourages close
cooperation between the authorities of the State
concerned and the international community in
elaborating programmes of peace-building
activities where the commitment by the parties
could be formalized in written communications.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of the presence of special
representatives of the Secretary-General or other
suitable United Nations coordination
arrangements, such as the resident coordinator
system, in coordinating the elaboration and
implementation of peace-building programmes by
international organizations and donor countries in
close cooperation with local authorities, taking
into account ongoing activities. The Council
stresses that any United Nations peace-building
presence should have the necessary personnel and
financial resources to discharge its mandate.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of its being kept regularly informed
of the progress achieved as well as of difficulties
encountered in peace-building in countries where
a peacekeeping operation had been mandated by
the Security Council.

"The Security Council reiterates that efforts
to ensure lasting solutions to conflicts and to
maintain the momentum for peace in any given
country or region require an increased solidarity,
sustained political will and timely and adequate
resources on the part of the international
community.

"The Security Council recalls the decision
by the Secretary-General to instruct the Executive
Committee on Peace and Security to formulate a
plan on the strengthening of the United Nations
capacity to develop peace-building strategies and
to implement programmes in support of them, and
looks forward to the submission by him of
recommendations to the Security Council and the
General Assembly on the basis of this plan.

"The Security Council will remain seized of
the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ZOOl/S.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12 noon.
