Mr. Miliband (United Kingdom): There could
not be a greater contrast between the daily regime of
delicate diplomacy at the United Nations and the day-
to-day reality of death and destruction in Gaza, but the
two are linked. The United Kingdom believes that the
crisis - and I use that word advisedly - in Gaza is an
indictment of the collective failure of all of us, over a
long period, to bring about the two-State solution,
which offers the only hope for security and justice for
Israelis and Palestinians alike.

The two speeches that we have just heard, from
President Abbas and Ambassador Shalev, define the
challenge for this Council. Both were moving, deeply
felt and passionate. I believe that, in this debate, we
cannot simply restate our national positions; we have a
wider responsibility to support all efforts to achieve an
immediate ceasefire and to chart a course back to the
common vision set out just three weeks ago in Security
Council resolution 1850 (2008).
As we meet, lives are at stake and new initiatives
are under way, notably from President Mubarak and
President Sarkozy, to engineer new action for a
ceasefire that engages Israel and responds to its
security concerns. The United Kingdom supports those
initiatives. We in the Council now need to use our
discussions over the next 24 hours to be clear in our
principles and practical in our conclusions to reinforce
those efforts.

The truce of June to December 2008 was, in
truth, less than that. Rockets were fired into Israel,
Palestinians died in Israeli military action and the
people of Gaza suffered greater and greater
deprivation. However, the immediate trigger for Israeli
military action was the end of the truce. Hamas
rejected its extension and fired almost 300 rockets
between 19 December and 27 December 2008. Those
rockets are not just a danger and a provocation -
though they are that. They demonstrate a choice by
Hamas, not just to target the people of Israel, but also
to target the fragile negotiations for peace, sponsored
over the past year by the United States.

However, the immediate consequence of Israeli
military action over the past 10 days is also clear: 600
dead, many of them civilians and children - the horror
of war piled upon months of deprivation. The
confirmation just a few hours ago that 30 civilians
were killed today in a United Nations school in Gaza is
a devastating reminder of the urgency of our
responsibilities.

Earlier today, the Quartet envoy called the
situation in Gaza "hell". The shortages of food, fuel
and medicine are, according to our reports, acute. The
scale of the suffering is immense. The need for
humanitarian supplies is urgent. In this context, it is
right to salute the leadership not just of the Secretary-
General, but also of the brave United Nations workers
trying to relieve suffering in Gaza.

The United Kingdom stands four square behind
the Security Council statement of 28 December calling
for an immediate halt to all violence. I reiterate today
the call of my Prime Minister for an immediate
ceasefire. But we are enjoined to come to the United
Nations not just to make declarations, but to seek
common ground and to find common purpose, so we
must focus on the substance and permanence of a
ceasefire, as well as on its timing.
Israel is right to say that the flow of illegal arms
into Gaza is a threat to its citizens and needs to be
curbed. We say that we need to support countries in the
region in developing the tools to tackle the trafficking
of weapons from land and sea. This will be a complex
and difficult task, but it is essential.

Meanwhile, the Palestinian Authority is right to
say that it concluded an agreement in 2005 on the
opening of crossings for people, goods and aid into
Gaza. We say that we need to open those crossings and
re-establish the authority of the Palestinian Authority
over them. This will help the people of Gaza. It will
also undercut the smuggling trade.

The permanence of a ceasefire depends on
something else. President Abbas is a powerful and
consistent advocate for the interests of all Palestinians,
whether they live in Gaza or the West Bank. The unity
of Palestine is essential to any decent vision of the
future. It is also a precondition for a democratic
politics of consent in which there is one legitimate
authority and in which every Palestinian has a voice in
the only process that counts: the peace process.

The test for us over the next 24 hours is simple:
will we help to bring an end to the current conflict and
pave the way back to the vision the Council set out
three weeks ago? Our starting point must be the goals
of an immediate ceasefire, an end to arms trafficking
and an opening of the crossings. But we also have a
responsibility to keep alive the vision of a peaceful
Middle East in which Palestinians have the dignity of
statehood and Israelis have recognition and security
from their neighbours. That is the responsibility of the
Council, that is our task today and those are
responsibilities and tasks that the United Kingdom
wants to help resolve.

