Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's public debate to discuss the matter of Somalia.
I would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Mahiga, for his
briefing. I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kenya and the Permanent Representative of
Somalia for their presence and for their statements.

In recent times, the international community has
continued to work towards a solution in Somalia. The
Somali Transitional Federal Government (TFG) has
resolutely fought against attacks launched by armed
opposition forces. Efforts to equip and train the Somali
security forces are proceeding apace. The African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has been
strengthened. In addition, international cooperation to
combat piracy off the coast of Somalia has continued
to progress. However, the security situation in Somalia
has yet to show any visible sign of improvement. The
humanitarian crisis has intensified and piracy has
continued unabated. The question of Somalia remains a
serious challenge to peace and security in the Horn of
Africa and to the world at large.

Resolving internal political differences and
establishing an effective central Government are the
important pre-conditions for the international
community's ability to play an effective role. As noted
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/447), the
TFG is undergoing a very tense period. This situation
must be quickly corrected. China supports the Djibouti

10-5364]
peace agreement. We hope that the TFG will duly
resolve its internal problems and work to strengthen its
role as a pole of attraction to the various political
forces in Somalia. We sincerely hope that the various
political factions in Somalia will place the interests of
their country and their people above all other
considerations and join the political reconciliation and
negotiation processes.

We call on all relevant parties, including the
countries of the region, to respect Somalia's
sovereignty and territorial integrity and to support the
TFG in order to facilitate early, substantive progress in
the political reconciliation in Somalia.

We condemn the attacks launched against the
TFG, the Somali people and AMISOM. We welcome
the contributions of the Somali security forces and
AMISOM. to improving the security situation in
Somalia. At present, the Somali security forces and
AMISOM. are facing serious funding gaps. China
therefore calls on the international community to
actively provide that assistance. China supports the
deployment of United Nations peacekeeping operations
in Somalia when the conditions are ripe.

The recent Istanbul Conference on Somalia
demonstrated the greater understanding of the
international community of the severity of the Somali
issue. The African Union's contributions and tireless
efforts to find a solution to the problem are indeed
commendable. We call on the United Nations to further
mobilize resources through various channels and to
provide further practical assistance to AMISOM. It is
our hope that countries will honour their commitments
to assisting Somalia in a timely manner.

Two decades of war and strife in Somalia have
seriously undermined the cause of peace in Africa. As
an urgent matter, the international community must
take early, effective action to gradually resolve the
question of Somalia. In that respect, the Security
Council should demonstrate a stronger sense of
responsibility and purpose.

The African Union has designated 2010 the Year
of Peace and Security in Africa. African countries are
working tirelessly to resolve all the hot spot issues in
Africa, and they maintain the fervent hope that the
international community, especially the United
Nations, will play a major role in finding a solution for
Somalia. Here, I reiterate that in the interests of peace
in Africa, China is ready to make its own contribution

10-5364]
to finding a solution in Somalia. China is also ready to
cooperate actively with the United Nations and all of
the parties concerned on this matter.

