Archbishop Auza: I would like to thank Lithuania
for organizing this important debate and to express my
delegation's appreciation for Lithuania's presidency
this month.

At the outset, the Holy See offers prayers for the
journalists who have lost their lives in the faithful
exercise of their profession, and expresses solidarity
and sympathies to their families. Let us acknowledge
their tremendous contribution to our world.
Society has a right to objective information, and
it is through the observance of this exigency that the
media are at the service of the common good. The
role of journalists in providing information is among
the principal instruments of democratic participation.
In promoting access to and providing information,
dedicatedjournalistsinconflictsettingsprovidealifeline
to those trapped behind combat lines or caught up in the
crossfire. They also offer policymakers - including
the Security Council - the information necessary to
make informed and responsible decisions on how to end
conflicts and assist those affected by them.

My delegation deplores the fact that hundreds of
journalists were killed over the past decade. While
danger is sadly a constant feature of life in conflict
situations, there is no excuse for parties in conflict not
to respect and protect journalists. Parties in conflict
are obviously not always reliable sources of objective
information. The exigencies of, and the need to justify,
military operations often trump the right to objectivity
in information. Here lies the fundamental importance
of journalists dedicated to truth and to the promotion of
the common good. Here lies, as well, the grave danger
that a party or parties in conflict would specifically
target journalists faithful to their duty of objective
reporting.

Today's debate has highlighted a number of tools
already at the disposal of the international community.
The Geneva Conventions and their Additional
Protocols grant protection for journalists and civilians
in conflict settings. However, military protection
policies andjudicial accountability mechanisms remain
insufficient, and in many places are non-existent. It is
in fact unacceptable that only fewer than than 5 per
cent of the cases of murders ofjournalists end in the
prosecution of the perpetrators.

The protection of journalists in conflict situation
gains more urgency in the context of the new challenges
that today's conflict situations present. My delegation
believes it is relevant to re-examine the current rights
and protections of journalists in conflict situations,
to see if they are still adequate, or whether more
specific protection measures for journalists are
needed - in as much that they are a special category
of civilians - particularly in the context of conflicts
perpetrated by non-State actors.

While it is the duty of Governments to ensure that
the measures already in place to protect journalists are
fully applied, more often than not, in conflict situations
State institutions break down or are impeded. Indeed,
conflicts are frequently symptoms of deeper problems,
including the weakness of State institutions themselves.
To that end, the international community can play an
important role in providing technical and financial
assistance for needy countries to improve policies
both to protect journalists and to address violations of
already existing rules for their rights and protection.

Media organizations also have responsibilities
in ensuring the safety of their journalists. Journalists
themselves should exercise tact, especially in situations
in which the duty to objective reporting seems to
collide with respect for the cultural values and religious
beliefs of peoples involved in the conflict. While lack
of objective information is a disservice to the truth,
could put lives at risk and misguide policymakers and
the public in general, lack of respect for cultural values
and religious beliefs could only exacerbate the conflict.

My delegation salutes those who put their lives on
the line so that the cries of those trapped in conflict
situations can be heard and the voices of those longing
for peace can find an echo. May the appreciation we
have for journalists' valuable work translate itself into
greater efforts to protect them better in armed conflicts.
Above all, let us all work together to banish wars and
conflicts, so that no one may ever have to risk life and
limb.

