Mrs. Adeng (South Sudan): I thank you once
again, Mr. President, for allowing us to address the
Council under your presidency for the month of April.
On behalf of the Government of the Republic of South
Sudan, I would like to thank the Council for holding
this briefing on the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA).

We would like to recognize the presence of
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, and Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa.

The Government of South Sudan appreciate the
diligent efforts of UNISFA, and the Governments of
our two countries have been progressive in efforts to
achieve an everlasting peace between the two countries.
We are optimistic that the process started by the sisterly
countries to resolve the issue of Abyei will continue,
making it possible to create an environment conducive
to the resolution of the final status of Abyei, which, as
stated in the comprehensive Peace Agreement, should
be done through a referendum of the people of Abyei.

In the case of troop deployment, consultation with
and the consent of the parties before and during the
deployment of troops is paramount, in line with the
principles underlying peacekeeping operations.

We would like to assure the Council that the
Government of South Sudan remains committed to the
full implementation of the September 2018 revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, as it is to the agreement
signed between the Sudan and South Sudan.

We would like to acknowledge and express
our appreciation to Major General Gebre Adhana
Woldezgu, the outgoing Acting Head of Mission and
Force Commander, for his determined efforts to
maintain peace and stability in the Abyei Area.

To conclude, once again we would like to assure
the Council that the Government of the Republic of
South Sudan and the Government of the Republic of
the Sudan are committed to the implementation of the
mandate. We are therefore requesting the continued
support of the Council.

