Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their briefings. The United States joined the United Kingdom and France in calling for today's meeting because we are appalled at the Al-Assad regime's escalation of violence in north-west Syria. The Trump Administration condemns in the strongest possible terms the Al-Assad regime, Iran, Hizbullah and Russia's barbaric and unjustified military offensive. To be quite clear, what we are witnessing is deliberate lethal violence against thousands of innocent children, women and men. It is violence that seeks only to terrorize and subdue, and it sends a chilling message: the Al-Assad regime and its allies are rejecting the Security Council's efforts to restore stability in Syria through a United Nations- facilitated political process. In response to that message, we come here today with a message of our own because here, in this Chamber, if the Security Council is to retain even a shred of credibility, we simply cannot ignore the resolutions we adopt. In 2015, the Council not only adopted resolution 2254 (2015) but did so unanimously. Today all elements of that resolution, including the Constitutional Committee, are in the crosshairs. Therefore, our message today is the following: the situation in north-west Syria demands an immediate, comprehensive and verifiable ceasefire. If there is one thing we know, however, it is that the Astana format cannot be trusted to deliver such a ceasefire. We know that because it is Russian warplanes that have routinely terminated Russian-brokered ceasefires and because it is Russian bombs that have destroyed Syrian hospitals and driven Syrian children from their homes. The sheer scale of destruction, both endorsed and facilitated by Russia, shows that neither it, nor Iran nor the Al-Assad regime can be trusted to deliver a ceasefire, let alone a political solution. With no faith whatsoever in the Astana format, we therefore call on the Special Envoy to turn his attention to securing an immediate, comprehensive and verifiable ceasefire in north-west Syria as a means of preserving the progress of the Constitutional Committee's vital work. It is essential for all parties to move forward on the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). The first step is to lend our full support to the United Nations immediate efforts to establish a nationwide ceasefire and ensure that vital United Nations cross-border humanitarian assistance, authorized by resolution 2504 (2020), can continue to reach the millions of civilians trapped by the Al-Assad regime's assault. The United States believes that the United Nations should use its neutrality and impartiality to secure a ceasefire in north-west Syria. In launching that assault, the Al-Assad regime has not only exacerbated a dire humanitarian situation in the region but also risks a wider escalation of the conflict. That only puts more Syrian lives in danger and threatens the hope for a political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015). For months the United Nations warned Council members of an impending humanitarian catastrophe in north-west Syria if violence continued unabated. That catastrophe has now arrived. Up to 700,000 people have been displaced by Syrian and Russian attacks in north-west Syria since September 2018. More than 500 civilians have been killed since the beginning of April. Barring drastic change, it will get worse. While the regime appears to be fully inoculated against any sense of shame or guilt for the misery it has caused, it should be under no illusions that cruelty and violence will go unanswered. For one, Turkey, as our ally in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, has the full support of the United States to respond in self-defence to the Al-Assad regime's unjustified attacks on Turkish observation posts that resulted in the deaths of Turkish personnel. For our part, the United States will continue to withhold reconstruction funding in regime areas of Syria. I am here to say that the Trump Administration will spare no effort in our campaign to isolate the Al-Assad regime both economically and diplomatically for as long as it continues to reject the political process outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). I want to conclude by speaking directly to the Syrian people. There can be no doubt that these are dark days, but they are not alone and they are not forgotten. As long as Donald Trump is President and I am the United States Ambassador to the United Nations, they will have the untiring and unflinching support of the United States of America.
