The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
speak in my capacity as representative of Spain.

At the outset, I should like to thank the Prime
Minister, Mr. Seydou Diarra, for his statement. I shall
make a few brief comments.

We welcome the progress that has been made in
the peace process, and we encourage the country's
authorities to work resolutely - as they are doing -
to address the challenges facing the consolidation of
the peace. In that regard, during the recent Security
Council mission to West Africa, we reaffirmed the
importance of implementing the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement as the only way to move forward on the
path of peace and reconciliation. Today, once again, we
urge all the political forces to implement that
Agreement and Accra II.

We believe, furthermore, that one of the principal
challenges in the current stage is the extension of State
authority throughout the country. During our first
meeting with the President of the Republic, he
indicated to us that he intended to begin sending public
officials to the western part of the country in order to
restore public services, now that security conditions
permit it. We should like to know what progress has
been made in that regard, and also how the
Government of cote d'Ivoire contemplates extending
State authority to the northern part of the country.

We also believe it is important that, in the short
term, the appointments of Government posts that are
still pending be completed, as well as all high posts of
the administration of the Government of Transition and
National Reconciliation.

Finally, there are two other issues that my
delegation considers relevant: the prompt
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programme and, secondly, the
parliamentary processing of the amnesty law, since that
is an essential element for the return to democratic
normalcy, always keeping in view the holding of
presidential elections in 2005.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to Prime Minister Diarra to make
any further comments or to respond to any of the
questions addressed to him by Council members.

