Mr. Tachie-Menson (Ghana): First of all, let me
join members in thanking the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Holmes, for his
comprehensive briefing.

The question of the treatment of civilians in
conflict situations is as old as civilization itself.
However, in recent times, the proliferation of brutal
conflicts in various parts of the world has focussed the
attention of the international community on this
problem.

It is clear that the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians lies with States and
Governments. That fact was recognized in General
Assembly resolution 46/182 of 1991. The 2005 World
Summit Outcome Document also affirmed that
principle in its paragraphs 138 and 139, which
emphasize the responsibility of the United Nations to
use appropriate diplomatic and other peaceful means to

protect populations at risk, and, failing that, to take
collective action under Chapters VI and VII of the
Charter to protect civilian populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. That was also stressed by resolution 1674
(2006).

It is therefore undeniable that the international
community has the legal and institutional tools to deal
with this issue. The challenge for us now is how to
translate the mechanisms at our disposal into effective
practical systems for the protection of civilians. The
problem of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
will have to be considered within the context of the
following factors: first, prevention of conflicts;
secondly, observance and implementation of the rules

of international humanitarian law; thirdly,
peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance; and,
fourthly, post-conflict peacebuilding and
reconciliation.

With respect to the first point, it is only logical
that, in order to stop the abuse of civilians, we should
go to the root of the problem, removing, through
conflict prevention, the conditions that breed conflicts
in the first place.

In that regard, we are guided by the Secretary-
General's report of April 1998 on "The causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa", which identified
the promotion of human security and human
development as the basis of conflict prevention.

That raises issues related to governance,
economic management and the rule of law. As stressed
by resolution 1674 (2006), there is a need for a
coordinated, comprehensive approach on the promotion
of economic growth, poverty eradication and
sustainable development in vulnerable areas and
regions by the United Nations and its agencies. This
also calls for cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs).

An important aspect of conflict prevention which
is often overlooked is an early-warning system. This
can operate at two levels: first, to warn of tensions in
the community that can trigger conflict; and, secondly,
to alert the international community to situations that
might lead to an escalation of violence against civilians
and result in a humanitarian crisis.

The Peace and Security Council established under

the African Union Constitutive Act, which is a

collective security and early-warning arrangement, is

an example of this. The Economic Community of West

African States (ECOWAS) early-warning system is
also a step in the right direction.

On the question of the observance and
implementation of the rules of international
humanitarian law, the responsibility lies with the
relevant States and combatants. The international
community as a whole and regional and subregional
organizations, in concert with NGOs, have a role to
play in sensitizing the various factions to the need for
observance of these rules and in exerting sustained
pressure to ensure compliance.

When States and combatants prove unwilling or
unable to act, the international community has a moral
and legal duty to intervene to avert a humanitarian
catastrophe.

Peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance are
two important tools currently used by the international
community to keep conflicts in check and reduce the
scale of human suffering. These two tools, while
distinct, are mutually supportive and complementary.
To enable peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance to
work effectively, it is necessary for peacekeeping
missions to be reconfigured through the adoption of
robust mandates to ensure not only the physical
protection of civilians but also the facilitation of
humanitarian assistance. Since the practical and moral
underpinnings of peacekeeping operations are
imperilled if the local population cannot be protected,
the protection of civilians should be part of the core
mandate of peacekeeping operations. That requires
additional resources. However, this is the most cost-
effective way to prevent a humanitarian disaster, which
would absorb even more resources.

On the fourth point, concerning post-conflict
peacebuilding and reconciliation, it is important that
the international community make available the
necessary resources, which would facilitate not only
economic reconstruction but also the building of
political and judicial institutions that will ensure the
rule of law and enable the individual to live in peace
and security. In that regard, the importance of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration is very
clear. Reconciliation and the bringing to justice of
those guilty of the most serious crimes should also
form part of the nation-building and healing process.

In that context, we are happy to note that the
International Criminal Court (ICC), which has become
fully operational, can play an effective deterrent role in
the promotion of the international legal framework for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The
referral of the Darfur situation by the Security Council
to the ICC is an important test case in this regard.

Finally, we call on the international community to
muster the necessary political will to put in practice the
measures necessary for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, as I have outlined.

