The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Brazil.

It is a great honour to preside over this historic
meeting. The last time Brazil held the Council's
presidency, almost six years ago, the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) had just been signed. Since
then, the parties to the CPA and the Sudanese people
have come a long way on the path towards the
democratic transformation of the Sudan.

Brazil warmly congratulates all Sudanese for the
peaceful and transparent conduct of the referendum.
We also commend Sudanese leaders for displaying
statesmanship and for their determination to pursue
dialogue and mutual understanding. We applaud the
CPA parties for having accepted the results of the
referendum and for committing to their
implementation.

Brazil also commends the excellent work of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan, under the
leadership of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Haile Menkerios. We also reiterate our
appreciation for the contribution of the Panels led by
Presidents Mkapa and Mbeki.

However momentous this achievement is, the
holding of the Southern Sudan referendum is but
another step towards peace, stability and development
in the Sudan. We encourage the parties to the CPA to
continue to address the remaining issues and post-
referendum arrangements in the same atmosphere of
cooperation that prevailed during the holding of the
referendum.

It is important that the popular consultations in
Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan states be completed
and that a solution is found concerning the status of
Abyei.

The United Nations must continue to provide
assistance, as requested, to ensure a smooth transition
in the post-referendum period. Options for the future
presence of the United Nations in the Sudan must take
into account the interdependence between security and
development, which so clearly manifests itself in the
Sudanese conflicts. Institution-building and strong
support for development will be necessary in Southern
Sudan. The Peacebuilding Commission could play an
important role in that regard.

The time has also come for the long-awaited
peace in Darfur. The Doha peace process must come to
a conclusion soon. Conditions must be reached for the
launching of the Darfurian political process. We are

encouraged by the announced intention of the
Liberation and Justice Movement and the Justice and
Equality Movement to participate in the Doha peace
negotiations. Brazil deplores, nevertheless, the recent
upsurge in hostilities and the continuation of attacks on
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and on humanitarian agencies.

Bilaterally, Brazil looks forward to strengthening
its ties to both North and South Sudan. Our bilateral
trade has been increasing in recent years. New
partnerships are being forged in the areas of agriculture
and biofuels. Cooperation initiatives are yielding
results. With peace and stability in the Sudan, those
initiatives will certainly thrive and be followed by
many others.

We hope this momentous occasion marks the
beginning of a future for all Sudanese that fully
realizes their aspirations for stability, peace and
development.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

As agreed by Council members, I shall now
suspend the meeting, with the intention of resuming
shortly.

The meeting was suspended at 12.45 pm. and
resumed at 2.00 pm.

The President: I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
7 February announcement by the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission of the final results of
the referendum on self-determination for the
people of Southern Sudan, which showed that
98.83 per cent of voters chose independence. The
Council calls on the international community to
lend its full support to all Sudanese people as
they build a peaceful and prosperous future.

"The Council congratulates the parties to
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and
the people of the Sudan for a peaceful and
successful referendum, and commends the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan for its contribution
to the process.

"The Security Council warmly welcomes
the statements of President Omer Al-Bashir and
Vice-President Salva Kiir on 7 February, in which
they accepted the final results of the referendum.
The Council calls on all Member States to respect
the outcome of the referendum, and looks
forward to welcoming an independent South
Sudan as a new member of the international
community after 9 July.

"The Security Council welcomes the work
of the Secretary-General's Panel, led by former
President Benjamin Mkapa. The Council praises
the CPA parties for their commitment to the CPA,
as illustrated by their support for a timely and
credible referendum process. The Council
underlines that full and timely implementation of
the CPA is essential to peace and stability in the
Sudan and the region and to future cooperation
between Northern and Southern Sudan and the
international community.

"The Security Council further
acknowledges that the process mandated by the
CPA represents an exceptional case and does not,
by itself, set a precedent.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the work of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel and its Chair, President
Thabo Mbeki, and notes the commitments made
by the CPA parties in the 27 January presidency
meeting and encourages them to continue to
strive for a timely agreement on the
implementation of outstanding CPA issues. The
Council urges the parties to reach quickly an
agreement on Abyei and other critical issues,
including border demarcation, security
arrangements, citizenship, debts, assets, currency,
wealth-sharing and natural resource management.
The Council welcomes the start of the popular
consultation process in Blue Nile state and
stresses the importance of inclusive, timely and
credible popular consultations processes in Blue
Nile and Southern Kordofan states, in accordance
with the CPA.

"The Security Council deeply regrets the
loss of life in violence in Upper Nile state from
3 to 5 February. The Security Council underlines
the need for the CPA parties to prevent further
clashes and promote calm, including by providing
immediate and ongoing reassurance to people of
all nationalities in the Sudan, including
Southerners in the North and Northerners in the
South, that their rights, safety and property will
continue to be respected. The Council urges the
CPA parties to respect their obligations.

"The Security Council reiterates its deep
concern over the increase in violence and
insecurity in Darfur, including ceasefire
violations, attacks by rebel groups and aerial
bombardment by the Sudanese Armed Forces,
which recently displaced approximately 43,000
civilians, and the kidnapping on 13 January of
three members of the United Nations
Humanitarian Air Service. The Security Council
recalls the importance that it attaches to an end to
impunity and to justice for crimes committed in
Darfur. The Security Council reaffirms its support
for The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), and urges all
parties to ensure full and unhindered access for
UNAMID throughout the mission area and to
allow humanitarian workers to provide assistance
to all populations in need.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the African Union-United Nations-led peace
process for Darfur, hosted by the State of Qatar,
the work of Joint Chief Mediator Djibril Bassole,
and the principles guiding the negotiations. The
Council welcomes the presence of the Justice and
Equality Movement and the Liberation and
Justice Movement in Doha, and strongly urges all
other rebel movements to join the peace process
without further delay or preconditions, and all
parties to engage with a view to concluding
urgently a comprehensive agreement.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to report to the Council by the
end of February on issues related to the Darfur-
based political process, including an assessment
of the enabling environment.

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance of increased participation of women
in the Sudanese peace processes.

"The Security Council will continue to
follow developments in the Sudan, including in
Darfur, closely."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2011/3.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 2.05 pm.

