Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, we too welcome your felicitous
initiative in convening this meeting on a very important
issue that is of concern to the international community: the
question of refugees and others in conflict situations. We
pay tribute to Mrs. Sadako Ogata and to her staff for their
tireless efforts to alleviate the suffering of that category of
persons and make their conditions of life less difficult. It is
for that reason that Mrs. Ogata can count on the
unconditional support of the Government of Gabon.

I shall be brief. In the framework of the ad hoc
working group established by the Security Council
following consideration of the Secretary-General' s report on
the causes of conflict in Africa, we have already adopted a
number of resolutions and presidential statements. We are
currently working on others, in particular a draft
resolution on the protection of refugees in camps and
which - as you yourself, Mr. President, have planned -
we will adopt on 18 November. That draft covers the
elements mentioned by Mrs. Ogata and will contribute to
ensuring security in the refugee camps.
Last year, when Mrs. Ogata met with the African
Group, she told us about the consultations she had had
with African leaders aimed at organizing an international
meeting similar to the ones held on the question of
refugees in 1991 in Central America and, I think, in 1996
in the Commonwealth of Independent States. What is the
current status of that project? We would also like to know
what kind of difficulties she is encountering in organizing
such a meeting, because we believe that in the context of
Africa this is definitely a complex problem, but especially
because at present most of the refugee flows in Africa are
due to internal conflicts. While there are some intra-State
conflicts, the majority are internal conflicts.

Perhaps - and here I refer to a proposal that has
been endorsed by the Council in the case of the Great
Lakes, for example - international efforts should be
deployed to hold a conference to examine questions that
have implications for these refugee flows. We said as
much on 29 September when, in this very Chamber, we
considered that matter. We believe that conflict resolution
is at the centre of the problem of refugees in conflict
situations, and are thus in full agreement with the analysis
that Mrs. Ogata has just shared with us.

This is what we have consistently told the Council
so that we might be able to alleviate the suffering of such
persons, particularly in Africa and in the Great Lakes
region. It is truly disconcerting to think of persons,
abandoned to their own fate in the vast virgin forests
covering that area, falling prey to wild beasts. It is a truly
a horrible situation, and it is for this reason that we
continue to insist that pressure be brought to bear on the
conflicting parties by those who have the means to do so
to prevent innocent people, particularly women and
children, from suffering. Many children cannot even go to
school to obtain an education. It is no secret that people
who have not been schooled in new agricultural
cultivation techniques to grow food will be hard-pressed
to do that work.

We will limit our comments to this issue.

 

