Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and your
delegation, for organizing today's debate. We also wish
to thank Mr. Pascoe for the information he provided to
the Council today.

Since our last debate on this item, several
political initiatives by regional and international
actors - in particular the United States, Saudi Arabia,
the League of Arab States and the Secretary-General -
have kept the Middle East peace process alive. Last
month's Arab Summit was a productive one. We
support the renewed commitment of the region to the
Arab Peace Initiative, whose basic principle - land for
peace - could prove to be an important factor in
establishing lasting peace between Israel and its
neighbours. We urge the Palestinian Authority to
officially endorse the Initiative. Such acceptance would
facilitate the diplomatic work of those engaged in the
peace process by sending a clear signal to the
international community that the entire Palestinian
people is committed to a solution based on two States
living side by side in peace and security.

The efforts made by United States Secretary of
State Condoleezza Rice with President Abbas and
Prime Minister Olmert have also been important. As a
result of those efforts, President Abbas and Prime
Minister Olmert have decided to meet every two
weeks. Although those meetings have not yet produced
practical results, the alternative of not meeting would
constitute yet another impediment to reaching a fair
solution to the Palestinian issue and the problems of
the entire region.

We are concerned that those discussions could
result only in gestures that could in the end be empty, if
the parties do not take advantage of them to discuss the
most central issues that are impeding a peace
agreement. Those issues pertain to the borders of a
Palestinian State, refugees and jurisdiction over
Jerusalem. In particular, the parties must move towards
a definition of a political horizon that will give the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples something to hope for in
the future. That would make it easier for all Palestinian
factions to commit themselves to the peace process.

Events on the ground continue to prevent the
establishment of an atmosphere conducive to fostering
trust among the parties and to a final peace agreement.
Continued attacks from Gaza by Palestinian militants
threaten Israeli civilians on an almost daily basis. The
kidnappings of Corporal Gilad Shalit and BBC
correspondent Alan Johnston - along with the absence
of proof that Mr. Johnston is still alive - have created
a climate of insecurity in Palestinian territory and
demonstrate that some Palestinian factions have very
little desire for peace. We urge that the two kidnapping
victims be freed without delay or preconditions.

Unilateral actions by the Israeli Government
deprive Palestinians of normal lives and hinder the
peace process. In some cases, those actions amount to
violations of human rights and international law.
Repeated deadly incursions into Palestinian territory,
such as the one that occurred this past weekend, lead to
the deaths of innocent Palestinian civilians. We
reiterate our request to Israel that it halt its military
incursions into Palestinian territory. We also call upon
the Palestinian Authority, and in particular the Hamas
Government, to urge factions to be prudent and
respectful of the ceasefire with Israel. We welcome
initial reports that that has already occurred, but we
wish to reiterate that the political commitment of the
Palestinian Authority to the peace process will not be
credible if the Palestinian Authority cannot prevent
acts of violence carried out by their armed factions.

We are still concerned about the precarious
conditions in which Palestinians are living in some
parts of the occupied territory. Restrictions on
movement of persons and the building of illegal
settlements in the territories are serious violations of
human rights and of international law, and they
exacerbate the frustration of the Palestinian people
over the occupation. On top of all that is a peace
process that is not taking off. All that erodes the trust
of the Palestinians in Israel and their expectations that
a solution to their statehood will be found through a
political process.
We urge the Israeli Government to relax the
restrictive measures they have imposed on the
Palestinian people in the occupied territory, including
East Jerusalem. We also urge the Israeli Government to
end restrictions on movement, in particular to stop the
construction of the illegal separation wall - that
should be dismantled - in order to give some kind of
normality to the lives of Palestinians.

With regard to Lebanon, we are concerned about
the ongoing political stalemate, despite some hopeful
signs of dialogue among the parties. We urge the
parties to continue with those efforts. We repeat that
peace in Lebanon must go through a political process
for national unity and that that in turn will require the
establishment of the special international tribunal.

We deplore actions on the ground and in the air
that Violate Security Council resolutions and block the
road to peace.

Finally, we wish to join the chorus of
congratulations and thanks to Mr. Alvaro de Soto for
his great work.

