Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I wish to welcome you, Mr. President,
to New York and to thank you for having convened
this meeting. I wish also to thank Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and Mrs. Florentina
Adenike Ukonga, Executive Secretary of the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, for their valuable briefings.

I should like also to congratulate the representative
of the People's Republic of China and his friendly
country on the occasion of the Chinese New Year.

In our debate today I want to focus on three issues:
first, efforts made at the international level; secondly,
the ramifications of transnational organized crime; and,
thirdly, the importance of international cooperation.

Concerning the first issue, tireless efforts have
been made at the international level to protect and
preserve the seas. This has included the conclusion of
various conventions and the holding of various regional
and international conferences such as the ministerial
meeting on the Western Indian Ocean in Mauritius
in April 2018, which led to the Mauritius Declaration
on Maritime Security, and the agreement on the
coordination of maritime operations in the Western
Indian Ocean. Such regional measures build and
promote the international legal framework necessary
to guarantee safe shipping, with positive effects on
peace, security and cooperation as well as on friendly
relations among all nations, as well as on the economic
and social advancement of peoples.

The report of the Secretary-General on oceans
and the law of the sea (A/73/368) indicates that 80 per
cent of world trade takes place by sea, which is the
main means of international trade and a fundamental
driver in the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

Secondly, on the repercussions of transnational
organized crime at sea, such a crime constitutes a serious
threat to international peace and security. Terrorist
groups such as those in the Gulf of Aden, on the coast of
Somalia and in the Gulf of Guinea are involved in many
illegal activities, including drug trafficking; weapons-
smuggling; migrant-smuggling; trafficking in human
beings; piracy and armed robbery; and terrorist activity
against vessels at sea and kidnapping for ransom.

The achievement of such illegitimate purposes
causes tremendous damage and loss of human life
and can also undermine international trade, energy
provision and the world economy in general. By way of
example, illegal migration at sea today represents one of
the greatest challenges to the international community,
since it has security and humanitarian dimensions.
Statistics provided by the International Organization
for Migration indicate that 1,514 people died at sea in
the first seven months of 2018 alone. In 2017, 3,140
people lost their lives trying to get to Europe.

In some States, political vacuums and political
troubles, as well as economic recession, an increased
unemployment rate and poverty, create a fertile breeding
ground for increased transnational organized crime and
the proliferation of terrorist organizations that commit
crimes such as the ones I listed earlier. This also
exacerbates the complexity and duration of conflicts.
All of this requires that we redouble our international
efforts to combat piracy in all of its manifestations in
order to maintain energy provision, international trade
and shipping.

Article 100 of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea stipulates that:

"All States shall cooperate to the fullest possible
extent in the repression of piracy on the high seas
or in any other place outside the jurisdiction of
any State."

In that regard, we underscore the commitment
to implement the measures set out in resolution 2442
(2018), on piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast
of Somalia. That should go hand in hand with national
efforts of Member States.

We pay tribute to the Contact Group on Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia and to international cooperation
undertaken in the framework of the Group of Friends of
the Gulf of Guinea, which is affiliated with the Group
of Seven; the Economic Community of West African
States; and the Economic Community of Central
African States in the fight against organized crime.

Thirdly and finally, international cooperation among
States and international and regional organizations has
become important. It can be undertaken by building
State capacity and cooperation among maritime
sectors, as well as by implementing and acceding
to international conventions and instruments, while
enacting legislation to effectively prevent organized
crime. In that regard, I note the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and its protocols, and the Arab Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime. We appreciate the
efforts made by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime in undertaking a range of capacity-building
activities, including the establishment of maritime
departments and appropriate legislative frameworks
within its Global Maritime Crime Programme.

We reiterate that transnational organized crime still
represents a threat to international peace and security.
It is closely connected to terrorism, which requires us
to coordinate better, in particular with those countries
that suffer from this phenomenon, and to continue
providing technical assistance to build the capacities of
all affected countries.

