Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania welcomes and appreciates the
opportunity to address the Security Council under rule 37
of its provisional rules of procedure.

When the United Republic of Tanzania addressed the
Security Council on the situation in Africa in April 1998,
we made an appeal to the Council to follow what in large
measure appeared to be positive developments from the
continent with a message to reassure Africa that hope was
not lost: a message to reaffirm that the United Nations will
work not only with African countries but also with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) in addressing the
twin goals of peace and security on the one hand, and
development on the other. Regrettably, the events that have
since unfolded have not permitted the United Nations to
bolster its focus in that regard.

As a result, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the hope and expectations ushered in by a new Government
in Kinshasa remain unfulfilled, largely due to a host of
intervening events. The outbreak of war in that country is
therefore a setback to the initial optimism of the people
not only of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of
the Great Lakes, but of Africa as well. It must be
underscored that these developments have also had grave
humanitarian consequences.

The immediate impact on the United Republic of
Tanzania of the outbreak of hostilities in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is the sustained flow of refugees
into our country. To us, this is a constant reminder of the
human tragedy facing not only the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, but our region, as well as the international
community. Once again, this conflict has proved that, as
always, it is the innocent civilians, and especially the
most vulnerable among them - women and children -
who bear the brunt of the attendant hostilities. The people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have suffered
so much over recent years. We owe them a contribution
which would allow the cessation of hostilities and permit
a solution to be found through dialogue, in full respect of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The Council is fully aware of the regional mediation
process begun by the Organization of African Unity and
that of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC), which has established a contact group, under the
chairmanship of President Chiluba of the Republic of
Zambia, that includes my President, Benjamin William
Mkapa. Several meetings have been held in Lusaka and
elsewhere in the search for a peaceful solution to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

While the Lusaka process faces some difficulties, it
is seeking to implement a draft ceasefire agreement while
also taking into account the security concerns of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as those of all
its neighbours. All those involved in the conflict have
been called upon to realize the futility of seeking durable
peace through the barrel of the gun. Lasting peace can be
attained only through a political settlement.

The African ceasefire initiative is meant to provide
a basis for a political solution to the conflict. It sets out
a framework to end the crisis diplomatically. A ceasefire
is therefore critical to the process. However, achieving a
cessation of hostilities often involves negotiations and
compromise. To avoid reigniting a conflict and to build
lasting peace will require a considerable degree of

 

reconciliation among the parties to the conflict. It is this
process which all of us must encourage and support.

My country firmly believes in the peaceful settlement
of disputes. This, however, is possible only with the
necessary political will and trust among the parties. The
challenge for us today is to encourage dialogue among the
parties. Indeed, we are most grateful for the support the
Secretary-General and the Council have been rendering in
this regard. It is particularly important that the Council
extend its solid support to the peace initiative of the
subregion. We see the African initiative as presenting a
practical framework for dialogue, peace and reconciliation.
It can work if the undivided support of the international
community continues and can be assured.

Lastly, it is also our belief that it is not too late for the
parties to pull back and save the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and its people from further suffering. Peace is a
prerequisite for the realization and enjoyment of the
opportunities and potential abundant in our region and
continent. Peace and stability are necessary for development
and growth. We must all strive to release the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region from the hostilities
currently being experienced. This will permit not only the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but our region as well,
to focus on the developmental challenges we all face,
which, to say the least, are daunting. We owe this to the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, of the
subregion and of Africa, as well as to the international
community.

