Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish at the outset to express our appreciation for
the holding of this meeting and to thank Mr. David
Shearer and Mr. Andrew Gilmour as well as Ms. Lydia
Minagano for their important briefings.

Peru regrets that the transitional Government has
not yet been formed, in keeping with the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
South Sudan, owing to delays by the parties in
the implementation of critical tasks during the
pre-transition period. However, we trust that the six-
month extension agreed upon on 2 May in Addis Ababa
will enable the parties to complete their outstanding
tasks and strengthen the major progress made thus far.

In this connection, we welcome the fact that the
entry into force of the Revitalized Agreement has led to
an appreciable drop in the level of political violence in
the country. Nevertheless, it is our view that this isjust a
starting point that should encourage further progress in
the peace process. We call on the parties to honour their
commitments and to prepare for the transition period
by giving priority to core outstanding issues such as
force cantonment, selection, training, unification and
deployment, and to the issue of determining the number
and borders of states.

We are particularly concerned at the prevalence of
sexual and gender-based violence in South Sudan. There
continue to be reports of incidents of such crimes, most
of them attributed to Government forces. It is our hope
that the action plan launched by the Government to
tackle this issue will be translated into concrete action
and that the next time we hear a report, there will have
been zero victims.

We also deplore the fact that the humanitarian
situation remains critical despite the fact that the
conflict has eased. Food insecurity and the fragile
economic situation in South Sudan continue to have a
serious impact on civilians. Furthermore, we noted with
interest the spontaneous return of 142,000 refugees,
which shows that the people yearn for peace and to return
to their homes. We must create conditions conducive
to safe returns and provide the people with the basic
services necessary for them to live dignified lives.

Here we welcome the response of the Central
Emergency Response Fund, which provided $11 million
to deal specifically with almost 270,000 persons in
various regions of South Sudan.

We are alarmed that there has been a consistent
increase in intercommunal violence in the past
few months, leading to 531 casualties, 192 per cent
more than the previous year. We trust that a genuine
commitment by the parties through the implementation
of the agreement within the agreed timelines will
make it possible to achieve peace and reconciliation
throughout the country. We believe that we are close to
that objective, but we must not lose the momentum of the
peace process. We commend the three churches on their
efforts to reconcile the leaders in South Sudan and also
welcome the efforts of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development to help the parties to implement the
key tasks needed to move to the transition stage. We
welcome the joint visit of the United Nations, the
African Union and IGAD to Juba on 10 May. The visit
sent a powerful message to the parties and served as an
effective endorsement of the peace process.

I conclude by highlighting the efforts undertaken
by IGAD, the African Union and the United Nations,
as well as the valuable work of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. We reiterate the importance
of maintaining unity in the Council in order to provide
the political support and follow-up required to continue
advancing the South Sudanese peace process and in
working in close coordination with the African Union
and IGAD.

