Mrs. Cordova Soria (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation welcomes the progress we have seen in
the electoral process in Afghanistan. We are also hopeful
about the fact that 8.9 million Afghans, including more
than 3 million women, will be able to exercise their
democratic right to vote in the upcoming parliamentary
and district council elections on 20 October.

We highlight the resolve of Afghan women and
men to participate in their electoral process with a
participative and inclusive spirit, while expressing
their desire to bolster the conditions necessary in order
to ensure credible elections in the framework of their
own fully sovereign, democratic practices without any
external intervention, and with the full participation
of women and minority groups, including all ethnic,
religious and linguistic groups, both as voters and
as candidates.

We also express our full support and recognition for
the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), which, in close coordination
with the Government of Afghanistan, has been
supporting the organization of the elections through
technical assistance and other forms of collaboration.
We hope that the electoral process will be carried out
in a secure and stable environment. The participation
of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces,
which have shown leadership in the maintenance of
security in Afghanistan, is critical in that regard.

In that order of priorities, we take note of the fact
that violence diminished during the Eid al-Fitr ceasefire
period. We regret that during the week of that holiday,
UNAMA nonetheless recorded 285 incidents and that,
in the weeks following the ceasefire, armed clashes
with the Taliban increased once again.

We hope that the effects of the conflict will not
exacerbate the situation of civil society, which in the
first semester of2018 suffered 1,692 deaths. The attacks
on civilian infrastructure, schools, hospitals and media
and communications offices highlight the violence to
which Afghan society is subject. Bolivia calls on all
parties to fulfil their obligations under international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
in order to prevent attacks on the civilian population
and civilian infrastructure.

On the other hand, serious restrictions on obtaining
redress in cases of sexual and gender-based violence,
along with the high prevailing degree of impunity,
highlight the need to ensure the promotion and
protection of human rights. We believe that the Afghan
authorities should take all the measures needed to assist
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission
to play its fundamental role as an effective and
independent institution.

Finally, and as we have noted previously, we
condemn in the strongest terms the terrorist attacks
that took place on 5 September in Kabul, which were
claimed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
and on 11 September in Nangarhar, both of which
resulted in the death of at least 61 people and an as-yet
undetermined number of wounded. Bolivia reiterates
that any act of terrorism is criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of its motivation, andwherever, whenever
and by whomever it is committed. The international
community as a whole must join forces to cooperate
with Afghanistan in combating this evil within the
framework of respect for its sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity.

