Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the associated countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey, and as the European Free Trade
Association countries members of the European
Economic Area Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway
align themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes this opportunity
to commend the results achieved by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. In the
footsteps of his predecessor Sergio Vieira de Mello, to
whose memory we would like once again to pay
tribute, Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma has been
leading efforts to ensure a better future for the people
of Timor-Leste through his dedication and skill in
guiding the civilian, military and police components of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET).
The European Union supports the efforts of the
Timorese Government to consolidate the fragile
political institutions in Timor-Leste. Since May 2002,
when Timor-Leste celebrated its independence, the
Government has made significant progress in
promoting the country's social and economic
development. The European Union commends and
encourages the efforts to ensure and uphold democratic
institutions and the rule of law while building the new
nation.

We welcome the continued development of
strengthened relations between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia. The European Union looks forward to the
early finalization of the border delimitation agreement
following the meeting of the bilateral Joint Ministerial
Commission held in Dili at the beginning of last
September. We hope that cooperation will continue in
the same friendly spirit on a number of other important
issues, ranging from the resettlement of refugees still
remaining in West Timor, border crossings and market
regulation, to the conclusion of other cooperation
agreements between the two countries. The European
Union strongly believes that, by ensuring the
accountability of all perpetrators of serious human
rights violations, trust in the judiciary and the
judiciary's contribution to reconciliation will be greatly
enhanced.

The United Nations continues to play an
important role in the nation-building of Timor-Leste.
We are pleased to note that UNMISET operations are
generally progressing according to the scheduled time
frames for scaling down the Mission. After a review
last April, the strategy already set out continues to be
implemented through the progressive transfer of
responsibilities to local authorities.

The international community must continue to
monitor the situation and developments on the ground,
particularly in the areas of civil administration, justice
and policing, as well as in human-rights-protection
training. Cooperation and consultation with the World
Bank, the United Nations Development Programme
and other United Nations agencies can provide support
for the lasting and sustainable development of
Timorese infrastructure and institutions.

After the Security Council has taken stock of
what has been achieved, reflection should take place in
the Council on the country's needs after the withdrawal
of the United Nations Mission in May 2004, and on the
support the United Nations and the international

community could provide to Timor-Leste next year, in
order to consolidate the success story that the country
already represents. The European Union looks forward
to the Secretary-General's report to be issued in early
2004 and to his further suggestions on these matters.

Many European Union member States have
participated in United Nations missions in Timor-
Leste. The European Union has made considerable
efforts to support the new nation through financial
assistance, humanitarian aid, rehabilitation and
development cooperation. The European Union, as well
as its member States, will continue to support the
consolidation of Timorese democratic institutions.

