Ms. Wroneeka (Poland): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for her
detailed account of the current situation in Syria.

Since March 2011, Syria has been in the throes of
a conflict that has forced more than half of all Syrians
to leave their homes. Millions of Syrians are either
displaced or have been forced to seek refuge outside the
country. The crisis has resulted in more than 12 million
people needing assistance.

The current situation in Syria remains unacceptable.
Poland is deeply concerned about the possible surge
of violence across Syria, in particulier in the north,
resulting in a high number of casualties among civilians
and threatening the vital lifeline provided by the import
and distribution of basic supplies and services across
the country.

Air strikes have been destroying civilian
infrastructure, including camps for the internally
displaced, markets, schools and, most importantly,
health-care facilities. Children, pregnant and lactating
women, persons with disabilities, the elderly and other
groups or individuals with specific needs or diminished
coping mechanisms are particularly at risk. The
protection of civilians and the provision of unhindered
access to humanitarian assistance are not a choice but a
legal obligation on all sides of the conflict. Those who
do not comply should be held accountable. Multilateral
cooperation in this respect is urgently needed.

As we hear almost daily about the suffering of
the civilian population in Idlib province, we want to
underline that civilians should be subject to protection
in line with international law. Unfortunately, this
basic condition is still not being met. Enhanced efforts
aimed at the promotion of and respect for international
humanitarian law are of the utmost importance.
Ensuring that the de-escalation zone in Idlib, agreed
by Russia and Turkey, is fully respected is crucial to
preventing a full-scale humanitarian catastrophe. All
parties to the conflict should spare no effort in ensuring
the full implementation of the agreement. For that
reason, Poland supports the draft resolution presented
by the humanitarian penholders on Syria.

Let me conclude by stressing that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian crisis. A lasting
settlement can be achieved only through a political
agreement, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and
the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) . A
political settlement is urgently needed, as it remains
the only way to achieve sustainable peace under these
extremely dire circumstances.

