Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank the presidency for
convening this debate and for preparing the concept
note (S/2017/305, annex) before us. I would also like
to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing.
Today I will address the wider Middle East region,
focusing on some of the challenges defining the present
day Middle East.

The Middle East peace process is one of the central
issues shaping international relations in the region.
The conflict between the Israeli and Palestinian sides
feeds into wider regional dynamics and the opportunity
cost has been immense. Peace there would unlock new
political, economic, security and cultural opportunities,
to the benefit of the region and beyond.

To achieve peace, underlying issues of conflict,
including settlement activities and violence, must
be addressed. Japan's position has been clear and
consistent. Settlement activities are in violation of
international law, and the recent announcement by the
Israeli Government that it will build a new settlement
is deeply concerning. Japan is also concerned by the
continuing violence. Various instruments, such as
the Quartet report and most recently, resolution 2334
(2016), provide steps towards credible negotiations,
which is the only way to achieve lasting peace. Japan
calls upon both parties to take concrete steps to that
end, and continues to support a two-State solution to
accommodate the aspirations of both sides.

The spread of terrorism and violent extremism is an
issue that plagues the region. In Syria, Iraq, Yemen and
Libya, the deterioration of governance, coupled with
conflict and political turmoil, has benefited terrorist
groups, further escalating tensions and exacerbating
conflict. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is also not
free from the risk of radicalization. The effects of
regional turmoil have spread far beyond its source, as
we have seen in the massive movements of refugees and
migrants and the expansion of terror threats into Africa
and Asia.

We have seen some progress in our fight against
terrorism. Japan believes that unless further efforts are
made to strengthen governance, it will be difficult to
consolidate the gains made and to counter the social,
economic and political conditions that feed violent
extremism. To strengthen governance, progress in
the political process is necessary. As the Secretary-
General noted in his first statement to the Security
Council (see S/PV.7857), we need a surge in diplomacy.
We definitely need it in Syria and Yemen. Libya also
requires further international support to make headway
on the political track.

The United Nations, including the Security Council,
has an important role to play. While each country's
political process should be different, Japan believes
that creating tolerant and stable societies embodying
coexistence and inclusivity is a common goal for the
region. Such societies are resilient to violent extremism,
spillover conflicts and relapse into conflict. That goal
should complement the political process.

In this regard, Japan stresses the need to focus
on three issues: humanitarian assistance, including
host community support, social stability and
governance, and investment in human capital. To
give an example, Japan has contributed to the United
Nations Development Programme Funding Facility for
Immediate Stabilization in Iraq, to support the early
return ofinternally displaced persons to their homes and
to enhance social resilience. Through measures such as
the restoration of key infrastructure and generation of
income and employment opportunities, we support the
Government of Iraq in stabilizing the newly liberated
areas to ensure that they do not slide back into turmoil.

Turning to Yemen, Japan aims to boost the
resilience of urban and rural communities, in
partnership with international organizations, through
micro-businesses and entrepreneurship projects that
enhance the economic empowerment of women and
youth. Our efforts to create inclusive societies extend
to addressing the needs of the vulnerable in conflict
situations. Japan has introduced maternal and child
health handbooks to Palestinian refugee communities.
The handbooks help mothers and children keep track of
their health conditions so that they can receive timely
and appropriate medical treatment. Most recently, we
have launched a smartphone appl of the handbook
in Jordan, thereby making it more convenient and
accessible. We aim to further expand the coverage of
the app in the coming years.

In closing, Japan reiterates the need for a shared
region-wide effort to achieve enduring peace. Efforts to
create tolerant and stable societies should complement
the political process. Japan attaches importance to
post-conflict reconstruction efforts that build and
consolidate peace under a credible political process,
and will continue to actively engage in such efforts. We
must also bear in mind that peace can have a positive
ripple effect. Japan remains convinced that a successful
Middle East peace process will unlock the potential for
region-wide stability and prosperity.

