Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
I wish first of all, Sir, to congratulate you heartily on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. We
know you as a talented diplomat with long and rich
experience brilliantly reflected in many ways, including
in your prominent role at the Copenhagen World Summit
for Social Development. This all augurs well for the
success of the Council's work. We wish also warmly to
congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Legwaila of
Botswana, on his remarkable work as President of the
Council last month.

I take this opportunity to convey to the Government
and the people of the United States the deep sympathy of
the Tunisian Government in connection with the recent
aeroplane accident in Croatia, which took the life of the
United States Secretary of Commerce.

My delegation is pleased that the Security Council
is meeting officially to debate the situation in
Afghanistan. This demonstrates its interest in that question
and in the need to restore peace to Afghanistan. As we all
know, the situation in Afghanistan is tragic and has given
rise to widespread concern.

The Afghan State and its people have been sorely
tried for years by the ravages and destruction of a
fratricidal war, which has taken the lives of defenceless
civilians, displaced the inhabitants and forced them into
exile and has paralysed the political life of the country,
ruined its economy, jeopardized its sovereignty and posed
a constant threat to its independence, unity and territorial
integrity - quite apart from the risks the situation poses
for stability and peace in the region.

Unfortunately, there is not a glimmer of
encouragement on the horizon. To the contrary, the
fighting continues, and indeed is intensifying. In recent
months, Kabul, besieged from all quarters, has been under
continuous indiscriminate bombardment that has inflicted
considerable losses on the population, who lack the basic
necessities of life.

It is regrettable that no heed has yet been paid to the
frequent United Nations and Security Council appeals to
put an end to the hostilities and peacefully settle the
disputes between the Afghan factions.

Over the past two years, the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan, headed by Ambassador Mestiri,
has spared no effort in its attempts to convince the leaders
of the warring factions to accept unconditionally an
immediate cease-fire and begin a dialogue leading to
negotiations aimed at a peaceful, lasting settlement in
Afghanistan. The refusal of the factions to lay down their
weapons, and their determination to pursue the military

 

solution they believe possible have thwarted the mediation
efforts of the United Nations Mission. Foreign interference
and the supply by other States of weapons, ammunition and
money to the factions have further complicated the Afghan
problem.

Quite apart from our great concern at the deterioration
of the situation, it is clearly urgent to take action to end the
vicious cycle of violence in that stricken country and to
launch a process of dialogue among Afghans, making it
possible to reach a settlement of the political crisis, to
restore peace and stability and to rebuild Afghanistan's
political, economic and social institutions.

General Assembly resolution 50/88 B, adopted by
consensus on 19 December 1995, once again spelled out the
stages that could lead to a negotiated settlement of the
Afghan crisis: the urgent establishment of a fully
representative and broad-based authoritative council with
authority, inter alia, to negotiate and oversee an immediate
and durable cease-fire; to create and control a national
security force to provide for security throughout the country
and oversee the collection and safeguarding of all heavy
weapons in the country, and to stop the flow of arms and
of equipment related to arms production to the parties; and
to form an acceptable transitional government which could,
inter alia, control the national security force until
conditions for free and fair elections are established
throughout the country.

That resolution also set out other conditions that would
promote a negotiated settlement, and called upon all States

"(a) To respect Afghanistan's sovereignty and
territorial integrity, strictly to refrain from interfering
in the internal affairs of Afghanistan and to respect the
right of the Afghan people to determine their own
destiny;
"(b) To take all steps necessary to promote peace
in Afghanistan, to stop the flow of arms and of
equipment related to arms production to all parties and
to put an end to this destructive conflict". (General Assembly resolution 50/88 B, para. 9)

In this connection, I would also recall General
Assembly resolution 50/70 J, on measures to curb the illicit
transfer and use of conventional arms, which invites
Member States

"To take appropriate and effective enforcement
measures to seek to ensure that illicit transfers of arms
are immediately discontinued". (General Assembly resolution 50/70 J, para. 1 (a))

We reaffirm our total support for the purposes of
General Assembly resolution 50/88 B, and stress the
importance and the necessity of their prompt
implementation.

A lasting settlement of the Afghan crisis can be
possible only with negotiations on the transfer or sharing
of power. In this context, the Security Council should
urge the warring parties in Afghanistan to renounce
violence and the use of force, to agree to an immediate
cease-fire and to consent to settle their differences by
peaceful means: dialogue and negotiation, which are the
only way to guarantee a viable, lasting solution that will
spare the afflicted Afghan people and enable Afghanistan
to recover peace within the framework of a freely gained
national consensus.

If this dialogue among Afghans is to be irreversible
and credible and if it is to make possible the
implementation of clearly defined stages of a settlement
as set out in the relevant United Nations resolutions, it
should be subject to no preconditions by any party,
faction or individual involved.

Clearly, if the United Nations Special Mission is to
complete its mandate to establish peace and national
reconciliation in Afghanistan the warring parties must
cooperate with it fully and unconditionally. Otherwise, the
parties would be frustrating the wish of the United
Nations and the international community to help them and
to provide the Afghan people with the assistance it so
sorely needs.

The Security Council should reaffirm its full support
for the United Nations Special Mission and for
Ambassador Mahmoud Mestiri. The United Nations
Special Mission should be afforded all necessary means
to continue its efforts to bring to the negotiating table the
main warring parties and factions - the Kabul
Government, the Taliban movement and General Dostum,
leader of the Uzbek militia - in the hope that other
Afghan parties and individuals will join the talks as soon
as possible.

While supporting the unflagging efforts of the
United Nations Special Mission, we urge it to explore
other ways and means, possibly including, as a last resort,
the convening of an international conference on
Afghanistan.

 

I would like to pay tribute to the sustained efforts of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference and its
Secretary General, Mr. Hamid Algabid, to bring harmony
and peace back to this country.

The renunciation of force by the Afghan parties, their
firm and serious commitment to a negotiated solution to the
crisis, and their full and wholehearted cooperation with the
United Nations Special Mission, are as necessary for the
achievement of a lasting settlement as the cooperation of
neighbouring and other countries.

We emphasize the importance of a sustained dialogue
between the Government of Afghanistan and those of
neighbouring countries as another essential factor for peace
in Afghanistan. This would promote mutually beneficial
cooperation and thereby contribute to strengthening the
foundations of peace and stability in the region.

In the meantime, the international community must
continue generously to provide humanitarian and economic
aid to Afghanistan, and to strengthen it, especially in order
to sustain and consolidate the peace efforts.

This is the main thrust of the action that we believe is
needed in order to bring peace to Afghanistan. The road to
peace has been charted. It is now up to the Afghan parties
to set about the task resolutely, with the necessary
goodwill; to the neighbouring and other States to give their
full support; and to the Security Council - the body which
bears the main responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security - to act urgently, within the scope of
its authority, and to launch, through Ambassador Mestiri's
mission, the process of national reconciliation in this
country and give hope back to a people in distress.

