Mrs. Gatto (Italy): I wish to thank your country,
Sir, for having convened this very important open
debate.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and would like
to add a few remarks in its national capacity.

I know it is late, but please allow me, first of all, to
say a few words to express Italy's heartfelt condolences
to Pakistan following the horrible terrorist attack that
struck the country in recent hours.

Italy strongly encourages cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, in
keeping with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. Regional organizations can, at times, be better
positioned to respond to certain problems, emergencies
and crises. We must therefore use such comparative
advantages and support regional organizations that can
assume leadership, as necessary andjointly agreed, so as
to ensure coherence in the response of the international
community and avoid the duplication of efforts.

We therefore welcome and support the efforts of
the African Union to strengthen its capacities in the
prevention of conflicts and in peacekeeping, and its
active role in defining and implementing African
solutions to African problems. We encourage the
strengthening of the African Union-United Nations
partnership, including through the joint planning of
peacekeeping operations, so as to facilitate a smooth
transition to United Nations peace missions. To that end,
we look forward to a harmonization of the standards for
troop- and police-contributing countries.

Over the years, Italy has strongly
supported - politically and financially - the
endeavours of the African Union. We have done so both
bilaterally and within the framework of the European
Union and with full respect for the principles of national
and African ownership. Through the Italian African
Peace Facility, we have allocated approximately
€30 million for a number of initiatives developed by
the African Union. In the security sector, we have
contributed to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), to the development of the African Standby
Force, to bilateral initiatives defined jointly with the
African Union and to efforts to support the Somali
security forces in developing their capacities.

Furthermore, since last February, Italy has held the
command of, and provided the main contingent to, the
European Union Training Mission Somalia and for the
Somali security forces fighting alongside AMISOM,
thus contributing to our shared goal ofquelling terrorism
in the country and the region. Italy has also contributed
engineers to the EU Operation in the Central African
Republic in support of the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic, and
subsequently the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic.

Politically, Italy has always upheld the role of the
African Union and its structures. We have contributed
to the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel
and to the Panel of the Wise, and we are glad to be in
the process of granting new contributions.

We have also encouraged and promoted cooperation
between the African Union and African subregional
organizations. In the Horn of Africa, for instance,
the synergies between the action of the African
Union and that of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, also strongly supported by Italy,
are of the utmost importance for the effort to further
consolidate the stabilization processes in the region,
such as in South Sudan and Somalia.

In the concept note prepared for today's discussion
(S/2014/879, annex), some specific questions are
posed on how we can overcome the challenges that the
African Union-United Nations partnership still faces.
We trust that the peace operations review recently
launched by the Secretary-General will offer an answer
to those questions. More generally, we hope that the
review will provide some innovative and much-needed

food for thought. The reality on the ground has clearly
shown the need to update the United Nations peace and
security architecture. A holistic approach is necessary
in order to take into account all of the various phases of
conflicts. The nature ofthe attacks against civilians and
Blue Helmets in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Central African Republic, South Sudan, Darfur and
Mali also demands more robust mandates as well as
more modern equipment and appropriate training. In
consideration of the added value of unmanned aerial
vehicles, we urge the High-level Independent Panel to
Review Peacekeeping Operations to further explore the
use of modern technologies in peace operations, while
keeping in mind the concerns retained by part of the
membership about the matter.

Italy is ready to further engage in initiatives such
as the Centre of Excellence for Stability Police Units
in Vicenza, which is led by our Carabinieri. It provides
effective training and skills, mostly to African police
officers. We also intend to heighten collaboration
between the Italian Army's Military Academy and the
United Nations System Staff College, both in Turin.

During the Italian presidency of the European
Council, working together with Germany and in close
collaboration with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, we hosted a series of seminars, here and in
Europe, on European Union-United Nations cooperation
in crisis management. They were important occasions
to discuss ways to strengthen cooperation by talking
about lessons learned and the way forward. We hope
that the results of that exercise will contribute to the
work of the Panel.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Italy's
determination to continue its efforts in strengthening
relationships among the United Nations, the African
Union and other regional organizations and especially,
the European Union.

