Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I am pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over
this important meeting. Your brotherly country
launched this wise and timely initiative, and we are
extremely thankful to you for it. We also thank the
Secretary-General for introducing his valuable report
(S/2009/304), and the Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the representatives of
the United Nations Development Programme and the
World Bank for their important contributions.

Over the past two decades, the United Nations
has done a great deal to prevent and resolve conflicts
and to maintain and build peace. While the
Organization has several achievements in this area to
its credit, efforts to ensure stability and economic
recovery, in particular in the aftermath of a ceasefire or
the signing of peace agreements, continue to face great
challenges. In-depth study is required to overcome the
difficulties and shortcomings and to determine the
most expeditious way to end a conflict, restore trust
among the various sectors of an affected society, and
implement programmes to promote economic recovery
and sustainable development.

In his report, the Secretary-General defines the
most important and urgent objectives for peacebuilding
in the immediate aftermath of conflict. These include
providing basic security, delivering peace dividends,
shoring up and building confidence in the political
process, and strengthening core national capacity to
lead peacebuilding efforts. I do not believe that anyone
can have any objection to those goals, but the great
challenge is how to respond effectively to those
priority goals.

In his report, the Secretary-General proposes a
plan for rapid response within the United Nations and
other actors in order to meet the following challenges:
first, to ensure rapid deployment of more effective and
more solidly structured United Nations teams;
secondly, to set priorities and ensure that resources are
available to implement them; thirdly, to provide United
Nations support for national ownership and developing
national capacity from the beginning; fourthly, to
strengthen and rationalize United Nations capacity to
identify staff, expertise and resources that can be
deployed immediately in the post-conflict
peacebuilding environment; and fifthly, to work with
donors to ensure that financing mechanisms function
more speedily and flexibly and are more risk-tolerant
and better aligned.

We thank the Secretary-General and other United
Nations departments for putting forward these
elements. However, we feel that it is clear that each of
those elements faces a number of challenges, which
will demand greater effectiveness, despite the
enormous efforts of the Secretariat and Member States
in recent years. I would like to focus on the two most
important challenges, which I believe are critical to
building and consolidating peace. These two challenges
are capacity-building and financing.

We all know that, in the aftermath of a conflict,
the institutions of a State have been dismantled. The
country lacks capacity and expertise on the ground.
The financial system is completely ineffective. The
sources of financing are not guaranteed. These
conditions make national Governments incapable of
carrying out their mission.

There is no doubt, then, that the first priority of
peacebuilding is to form a stable political system. This
requires building and developing essential capacities of
the State so that it can restore its legitimacy and
provide basic services to its citizens. This will promote
economic recovery and strengthen the labour market.
That is why we support the view that building such
capacity must be a prime element of any peacebuilding
effort from the very onset. We believe that such
capacity should be based primarily on available local
expertise, and after that on expertise provided by
countries that share the same culture, as well as by
regional and subregional organizations, whenever
possible.

Major international organizations should take full
advantage of local capacities in the given country. We
should avoid the excessive use of international staff so
that employment opportunities in the country in
question are not undermined. Two sectors where it is
important to strengthen capacity in post-conflict
peacebuilding are security and finance.

The first is linked to stability, security and
justice, which are key to restoring citizens' trust in
their Government and convincing them that peace has
its dividends. The second sector is clearly linked to
State revenue and to its management. If there is no
effective financial or tax system, the State will not be
able to meet its obligations or provide basic services to
its citizens, and runs the risk of social instability and
relapse into conflict.

Reconstruction efforts face a number of obstacles
resulting from limited financing channelled through
weak and often inadequate mechanisms. It is therefore
necessary to find a way to make financing flexible,
predictable and rapid, as well as sufficient and timely.
We hope that the Partnership Framework Agreement
between the United Nations and the World Bank will
provide for effective management of multi-donor
funding and facilitate the use of that funding.

We also hope that the Peacebuilding Commission
will play a greater role in finding innovative ways to
secure funding for peacebuilding and to encourage
donors to provide speedier, more flexible and more
risk-tolerant funding. We believe the Peacebuilding
Fund can make a greater contribution to bridging the
gaps between pledged funding and available funding.

We welcome the workplan proposed by the
Secretary-General with regard to the United Nations
response in the early post-conflict phase. We reaffirm
the importance of the role to be played by the
Secretary-General's representatives on the ground in
bringing together all influential actors in the aftermath
of a conflict, so that strategies and plans of action can
be adopted based on a national approach and tasks
prioritized and delimited. Financing must also be
provided from the outset.

