Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank the Representative of the Secretary-
General in Guinea-Bissau, Mr. David Stephen, for
introducing presenting the report on the political
situation in that country (S/2003/621). Mexico regrets
the fact that since 5 March 2003, the date of the most
recent Security Council consultations on Guinea-
Bissau, the situation in that country and the political,
economic and human rights aspects of the situation
have deteriorated. With respect to paragraph 4 of the
Secretary-General's report, my delegation expresses its
concern at the alleged harassment of the Government's
political opponents by security officials.

Mexico reiterates its position that parliamentary
elections must be carried out only when all the
necessary conditions exist so that they can be inclusive,
fair and transparent and can be supervised by both
national and international electoral observers. In that
context, Mexico supports the Secretary-General's
decision to dispatch another electoral mission to
Guinea-Bissau to review the situation in that country.

Mexico believes that, in order to consolidate the
peace, the United Nations Peace-building Support
Office in Guinea-Bissau should strengthen its
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes for former combatants and should
intensify its demining efforts.

We cannot overlook the fact that Guinea-Bissau
itself must undertake measures to foster political
stability, good governance, respect for human rights
and sound financial and economic management. The
promotion of the rule of law, the swiftest possible
promulgation of the constitution, and the election of
the President and the Vice-President of the Supreme
Court would help to restore confidence in the country
and in its institutions, which would help to create the
right conditions for the Bretton Woods institutions and
the international community to respond positively by
providing emergency financial support and technical
assistance to Guinea-Bissau.

Mexico will spare no effort to ensure that the
upcoming Security Council mission to Guinea-Bissau
will help to find a peaceful and negotiated solution to
the current crisis. Mexico believes that the Council
mission is an invaluable opportunity to strengthen the
political process in Guinea-Bissau and to define
opportunities to promote economic and social
development for its people.

In conclusion, my delegation appeals to the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and to the Organization of Portuguese-
speaking African States to renew their efforts to
mediate among Guinea-Bissau's various political
forces with a view to finding a peaceful and
constructive settlement to the current political and
socio-economic crisis. Mexico also urges that the Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau, the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa and ECOWAS work together in a coordinated
way, to the greatest extent possible and in accordance
with their mandates, in the quest for national harmony
and to promote the sustainable development of Guinea-
Bissau.

