Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We join others in
thanking the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his comprehensive
briefing today. We very much appreciate and support
his untiring diplomatic endeavours to relaunch a
credible political process with a view to resolving the
Syrian crisis. We know that his has not been an easy
job, and we understand his decision to move on. But
we continue to support him in his efforts in the coming
days, which are going to be very critical.

Last month, the Council expressed its concern
about a possible humanitarian catastrophe in Idlib (see S/PV.8345). This potential humanitarian tragedy has
been averted due to the agreement reached between
the Presidents of Turkey and Russia to establish
a demilitarized zone in Idlib. In this regard, we
recognize that measures are being taken to implement
the agreement.

At the same time, as can be expected in such complex
situations, we also understand that there are challenges
to fully operationalizing the agreement within the set
deadlines. What is important is to continue to work
together to sustain the implementation of this important
agreement. In this regard, we appreciate and support
the continued efforts of Turkey and Russia. All those
members that have influence should also support the
full implementation of the agreement. In addition,
enhancing international coordination to combat
terrorism also remains important.

As the Special Envoy said, the stabilization of
the situation in Idlib should be taken as a window of
opportunity for reinvigorating the political process,
without which there cannot be a sustainable way to
address the Syrian crisis. In this regard, since the
outcome of the Syrian National Dialogue Congress
held in Sochi, we understand the Special Envoy has
been conducting a series of extensive consultations
with Syrian actors and concerned Member States on
the formation of the constitutional committee, which is
indeed necessary as the process has to be truly inclusive.

While appreciating the Special Envoy's continued
engagement with all stakeholders, we also believe that
all actors should fully support his efforts to finalize
the establishment process of the committee, which we
believe should be credible and Syrian-owned. As is well-
known, the constitutional committee is only one element
in the Syrian political process, important though it may
be. Indeed, the formation of the committee should be
a stepping stone for relaunching the Geneva political
process in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).

It is therefore time for all Syrian parties to
constructively engage with the Special Envoy to
establish the committee as soon as possible. In this
regard, we welcome the invitation extended by the
Syrian Government to the Special Envoy. As he
mentioned, we hope his visit to Syria will be productive
and meaningful, leading to concrete outcomes that will
move the process forward. We look forward to hearing
from him next month. In addition, the Special Envoy's
continued consultations with the Astana guarantors and
the small-group countries could contribute to speeding
up the process of the formation of the committee. The
Council should also demonstrate its unity and continue
extending its full support for the tireless efforts of the

Special Envoy.
In conclusion, we all agree that there is no military
solution to the Syrian crisis. Therefore, finding a
comprehensive political solution remains urgent and
critical, not only for the sake of the people of Syria,
whose legitimate aspirations and concerns should be
addressed, but also for regional and international peace
and security. The international community, particularly
the Security Council, should work together in support
of the facilitation role of the Special Envoy for whom
we reiterate our appreciation and support.

