Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): On
behalf of France, allow me to begin by conveying the
solidarity of my country and all French citizens with
our American friends and the United States, as a
whole, as we remember the tragedy that took place on
11 September 2001. I also hope that the spirit of unity
that prevailed on 9/11, which I myself felt very deeply
as I was in the United States at the time, could provide
genuine inspiration for our work.

I thank the American presidency of the Council and
Russia for convening today's meeting as an extension of
the meetings held late last week. My statement will be
relatively brief. I will focus on two priority issues that
France believes are complementary and inextricably
linked: first, preventing a military offensive in Idlib,
which would open one of the bloodiest chapters of the
Syrian tragedy and lead to dire consequences; and,
secondly, creating genuine momentum for a political
settlement to the conflict. We all know that the path is
an extremely difficult one, but we also believe that a
solution is possible.

Despite calls from the international community,
the number of which is unprecedented in recent history,
the Tehran meeting did not lead to a firm commitment
on the part of Russia and Iran to preserving the
de-escalation that they themselves had guaranteed. In
the wake of the Tehran summit, millions of Syrians in
Idlib remain uncertain that their lives will be spared.
On the contrary, in the wake of the Tehran summit the
Russian air force resumed its aerial bombardment in
support of the regime.

Let us be clear: our common priority continues to
be combating terrorism, and it could, and should, bring
us together. As Council members are aware, France
is fully playing its part in that regard. But that fight
cannot justify indiscriminate attacks against civilians
or serious violations of international humanitarian
law. Such attacks constitute a humanitarian tragedy as
well as a strategic absurdity, in that they fuel the very
terrorism they purport to combat. Hence, Syria has
become the pre-eminent breeding ground for terrorism.
Among the 3 million people who are being held hostage
in Idlib - a number greater than the population of
Paris - many of them took to the streets peacefully
last week to say how unfairly they are being targeted,
to express their rejection of terrorism and to recall
their legitimate aspirations for the rule of law in Syria.
Those massive demonstrations, whose images we have
seen, show the faces behind the numbers.

We know - and it was extensively detailed last
Friday (see S/PV.8345) - how a major offensive in
Idlib would have disastrous consequences for the
country and the region, in humanitarian, security and
political terms.

On the humanitarian front, several tens of
thousands of people have begun to reach northern Idlib
to flee the bombing. They are only the first in what
could be a new and unprecedented migration crisis, of
which Turkey, which already hosts nearly 15 per cent of
the Syrian population who fled the regime's massacres
since 2011, will be the first to be impacted. We must do
everything possible to ensure safe, full and unhindered
humanitarian access to the entire population in need. In
that regard, I commend the heroic role being played by
the White Helmets in going to the aid of civilians under
bombardment, at the risk of their own lives and in the
midst of the ruins and rubble.

France also reiterates that it will not tolerate any
new use of chemical weapons. Along with our close
partners, we stand ready to respond in the event of
a chemical attack. Our most senior officials have
unambiguously spoken on that point.

Maintaining the ceasefire and protecting civilians,
including humanitarian personnel, must be the first
priority for actors on the ground. That is why Russia
must become involved. I welcome the involvement
of the United Nations in deterring escalation and
preparing to deal with it in the event. We must do
everything possible to prevent civilians from being
targeted. We therefore have a collective responsibility
to leave no stone unturned - to turn off our automatic
pilot - so as to find areas of agreement and together
explore every possible solution, including the most
creative, to avoid military escalation and open up the
way for a political settlement. Such a solution, if we
succeed in coming together, could be at hand tomorrow.
That is why we need to allow time for dialogue so that
solutions emerge. That is our first priority today. At the
moment, the guarantors' task is to avert the irreversible
and to take the time needed to find an agreement by
working together with us all.

Let us be clear as well that the situation in Idlib is a
further illustration, were there a need for one, of three
facts that everyone must clearly bear in mind: Syria
is in not a country that is returning to normalcy, quite
the opposite is true; the Syrian tragedy is not behind
us, indeed the worst could be ahead in the event of a
major offensive in Idlib; and the total military retaking
of Idlib, in which the regime and its supporters are
engaged, will not make it possible to stabilize the
country and will produce only more chaos, which is
to say that the same causes produce the same effects.
Therefore, and I say it again, the only real and lasting
way out of the conflict is a negotiated political solution
that is acceptable to all. There is no solution other than
recourse to the demanding path of negotiation.

And therefore our values, interests and realpolitik
demand that we come together to fully and collectively
support the efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy
to relaunch the Geneva process. That includes the
establishment of a constitutional committee as soon as
possible, which could be the key to at last clearing the
path to a political solution. Its work could begin without
delay, in a truly independent way, under the auspices of
the United Nations.

Resolution 2254 (2015) provides the elements for a
broader political solution, namely, a constitution, free
and transparent elections in which all Syrians, including
displaced persons and refugees, can vote, and the
establishment of a safe, secure and neutral environment,
guaranteed by confidence-building measures. We
are two weeks away from the commencement of the
general debate at the General Assembly, where our
leaders will all be gathered. Let us take advantage of
that opportunity before us.

The road map we are proposing is clear: strong
commitment by the parties to a ceasefire in order to
spare the civilian population of Idlib; speeding up the
political process, with the first step being collective
support for the launch of the work of a constitutional
committee; and the joining together by the members
of the Security Council in support of a constructive
political agenda at the General Assembly to force
destiny and seize a concerted, peaceful resolution to
the conflict. The reconstruction of Syria is conceivable
only on that basis - when an irreversible, credible and
inclusive political transition gets under way.

I say again to Russia that the ball is in its court.
It should assume clear and firm commitments to avoid
the irreparable in Idlib and reassure the civilians there,
afford more time for dialogue to identify a solution for
Idlib, and come together with us to chart the challenging
course towards peace in Syria. France stands ready to
contribute to that end without losing a minute. Let us
all get to work.

