Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): I would like
to begin by commending the Bolivian presidency of
the Security Council and the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) for
organizing this important debate. The fact that this is
the third open debate since August of last year on the
issue of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) by non-State actors clearly demonstrates
the urgency and gravity of the threat and challenges
before us.

Indeed, the seemingly unthinkable scenario of
terrorist organizations or other non- State actors gaining
access to WMDs has become a reality, as illustrated
by the identified uses of chemical weapons against
civilians in Syria and Iraq. The assessment of the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) that the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria, or Da'esh, may have the capacity to
produce chemical weapons is more than worrisome. At
the same time, there is simply no guarantee that nuclear
and biological materials are safe from the hands of such
malicious actors.

That is the reason that the Republic of Korea fully
aligns itself with the joint statement to be delivered
by the representative of Spain on behalf of the Group
of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004). Given the fact
that such non-State actors are taking advantage of
transboundary networks enabled by rapid advances
in science, technology and international commerce, I
would like to make additional remarks in my national
capacity, with a focus on the following three points
for further consideration in our joint efforts to combat
the proliferation od weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors.

First, with regard to building a multilayered
prevention mechanism, our response to non- State actors
must be as transboundary and tech-savvy as theirs is. In
addition to export and border controls at the domestic
level, mechanisms provided by the 1540 system provide
a rallying point for our regional and global efforts to
prevent the illicit acquisition of WMDs. On top of that,
as the representative of the country currently holding
the chairmanship of both the Nuclear Suppliers Group
and the Missile Technology Control Regime, I would
like to stress the importance of active participation in
initiatives taken by multilateral export-control regimes
to add one more layer of sharing proliferation-related
information, such as on updated dual-use items and
recent techniques used by non-State actors.

Secondly, with regard to creating a cascade effect
in awareness-raising, resolution 2325 (2016) calls for
more regional conferences and 1540-points-of-contact
training sessions. As terrorist groups' networks are
becoming wider-spread, we should invest more in
mobilizing public-and private-sector focal points so
that they can reach wider constituents of our society. In
that regard, last year, the Government of the Republic
of Korea successfully hosted the first of the regional
Wiesbaden conferences for industry outreach in the
Pacific region. The Republic of Korea will continue
to support 1540-points-of-contact training sessions in
various regions through its contribution to the Trust
Fund for Global and Regional Disarmament Activities.

Finally, national capacities should be scaled up
through tailor-made matchmaking. Two years of the
chairmanship of the 1540 Committee, from 2013 to
2014, taught Seoul that matching offers and requests
for assistance is most challenging, but we also learned
that through such matching we can close gaps in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) against the
wishes of ill-disposed non-State actors.

In conclusion, it would be remiss of me not to
mention the threat posed to the global non-proliferation
regime by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
continued pursuit of WMD and missile capabilities.
Considering that the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea is one of the weakest links in our joint
endeavours to prevent the proliferation of nuclear
and chemical materials and their means of delivery
to non-State actors, I would like to underscore the
importance of the full and effective implementation
of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016), in tandem
with the relevant Security Council sanctions resolutions
on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, by the
international community as a whole.

