Mr. Kama] (Pakistan): Since this is the first time
that I have addressed the Council under your presidency,
Sir, let me congratulate you on your assumption of your
onerous responsibilities and express the conviction that in
its deliberations the Council will benefit from your
experience. I would also like to express our admiration
for the manner in which your predecessor, the
Ambassador of Oman, conducted the business of the
Council during his presidency.

Pakistan supports the need for a more formal and
institutionalized mechanism of consultations between
troop contributors and the Security Council with the aim
of creating the broadest possible support among Member
States for peace-keeping operations of the Security

 

Council. We are confident that under your able guidance,
Mr. President, the Security Council and the troop-
contributing countries will continue to engage in a
constructive dialogue.

Pakistan has always closely followed and actively
participated in the deliberations on peace-keeping. We have
done so because we consider it to be extremely important
that the United Nations act whenever peace is threatened
and that it act before the outbreak of a conflict rather than
intervening once the conflict has already erupted.

Pakistan, for its part, has actively cooperated and
participated in the peace-keeping efforts of the United
Nations. At present, Pakistan is the fourth largest troop-
contributing country to United Nations peace-keeping
operations, with 2,418 personnel participating in United
Nations operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, in Croatia, in
Haiti, in Georgia, in Iraq-Kuwait, in Angola, in Liberia, in
Rwanda and in Western Sahara. Pakistan has also offered
an infantry battalion for the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) and two
brigades in response to the Secretary-General's proposal for
United Nations standby arrangements.

Even after the draw down of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR), and in View of its
established support for and cooperation in peace-keeping,
Pakistan will form part of the Implementation Force (IFOR)
by providing a brigade to help maintain peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Pakistan firmly believes that United Nations peace-
keeping operations exemplify the sustained political
commitment of Member States to the concept of collective
security and the maintenance of international peace and
security. South Asia itself continues to be a beneficiary of
one of the oldest peace-keeping operations, in the form of
the United Nations Military Observer Group in India and
Pakistan (UNMOGIP).

Pakistan thus supports all initiatives and mechanisms
which further ensure the efficient and effective
implementation of peace-keeping operations. A system of
prior consultations between members of the Security
Council, prospective troop-contributing countries and the
United Nations Secretariat should be institutionalized.
Moreover, there should be no alteration in the mandate,
character and duration of peace-keeping operations without
proper and complete consultations between the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries in an
institutionalized mechanism. It is of vital importance that
the Council and troop-contributing countries remain
seized of an operation at all its stages.

The Security Council, troop contributors and the
United Nations Secretariat have made valuable
contributions to improve the United Nations capacity in
peace-keeping. We are confident that under your able
guidance, Mr. President, we will all continue to engage in
a constructive dialogue which will further increase peace
and harmony among all nations.

