Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow us, at the outset, to thank
you, Mr. President, for having kindly convened this
important meeting of the Security Council on the
situation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
wish to welcome Mr. Javier Solana, High
Representative for Common Foreign and Security
Policy of the European Union (EU), and to express to
him our appreciation for his comprehensive statement
made following his visit to the region. We have also
followed with great interest the contributions to today's
discussions of Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Ngongi, who
have accurately described the reality in the field.

Before continuing with my statement, allow me to
tell the Secretary-General that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will have the
opportunity in due course to thank him for his
appointment of Ambassador William Lacey Swing his
Special Representative to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. For us, the Congolese, Ambassador Swing
is a well-known individual who needs no special
introduction.

Today we would like to pay a heartfelt tribute to
our brother, Amos Namanga Ngongi of Cameroon, for
his outstanding work. Under his mandate, the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) has worked for the
cause of peace and the restoration of dignity for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It has concluded
phase II of its operations and has contributed, as was
well emphasized by the Secretary-General, to the
recent progress made in the peace process, which has
entered a new phase, particularly with the
establishment of the Transitional Government of
National Unity and the upcoming establishment of
other republican and public institutions provided by the
All-Inclusive Agreement on The Transition in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We would like to
ask Mr. Amos Ngongi to continue to turn his thoughts
towards the people of the Congo, whom he has adopted
and sustained during the two years of his mandate. We
wish him every success in his new post.

Hope has emerged in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, but concerns still exist. The transitional
period, which is to conclude with free and transparent
elections, will not be easy. It should be supported,
because otherwise the result might be the collapse of
the entire structure that the Security Council has
patiently constructed over the years in partnership with
the Congo, the countries of the region and interested
countries. The efforts of the Interim Emergency
Multinational Force, which has succeeded in stabilizing
the security and humanitarian situation in Bunia and
the surrounding territory, would be futile if the
Bangladesh contingent, which has begun its
deployment, did not have, as we reiterated this
morning, an adequate mandate and rules of
engagement, as well as an overall strategy aimed at
restoring lasting peace in the Ituri district.
It is correct that the return to normality in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo depends primarily
on the Congolese themselves, whose leaders must
demonstrate self-sacrifice and patriotism. To that end,
the President of the Republic, His Excellency Major
General Joseph Kabila, has provided full assurance that
difficulties will be overcome and that the window of
opportunity open for peace will not be closed, so that
the transition can continue to make unimpeded
progress.

The international community, particularly the
Security Council, must therefore build on this
transition period. The Council must provide positive
follow-up to the recommendations put forward by the
Secretary-General in his second special report on the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC),
particularly by adapting the latter's mandate to allow it
not only to build on the achievements of the
Multinational Force, but to transform itself into a vast
multidisciplinary operation for peacekeeping operating
throughout the entire national territory.

The international community must continue to
provide assistance to the Transitional Government of
National Unity, particularly in implementing the
Transitional Constitution, the reform of the national
army and the police, the preparation and holding of
elections and the furthering of good governance and
development in order to enable the Congo population
to specifically benefit from the peace dividend.

The international community must also tackle
factors of instability; namely, the illegal exploitation of
natural resources and other forms of wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the illegal arms
trafficking in the region that fuels the war of
aggression. These activities must be terminated.

Regarding disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programmes, these must
be rethought and resolutely applied, on one hand, to all
Congolese nationals beyond the law and, on the other
hand, to all foreigners operating within armed groups,
regardless of their country of origin. The peace process
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo can be
concluded only if the democratic transition processes
under way in the other countries of the Great Lakes
region also progress. In that same vein, there is a need
to follow very closely the elections which will be held
in a few weeks in Rwanda. It is our most ardent hope
that the new leadership Rwanda will acquire following
these elections, which we hope will be free and
democratic, will have the political courage to work to
achieve the necessary national harmony in that country
in order to contribute fully and positively to the
stabilization of the Great Lakes region.

The restoration of relations of confidence is
therefore an absolute necessity. In Kinshasa we noted
that Mr. Javier Solana, the High Representative for the
Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European
Union, has supported the establishment of an
institution for collective security in the Great Lakes
region, which actually had existed recently.

It would therefore be advantageous to revisit the
idea of the now-defunct Economic Community of the
Great Lakes Countries (CEPGL). Its lofty objectives
were, first, to ensure the security of States and their
peoples, so that nothing would disrupt order and
tranquillity; secondly, to conceptualize, define and
promote the establishment and development of
economic activities based upon shared interests; and
finally, to advance and intensify trade relations and the
movement of individuals and goods.

We reiterate that for historical reasons, the core of
the CEPGL should be made up of former Belgian
colonies. However, there would be nothing to prevent
the new CEPGL from being expanded to other
countries such as Uganda and Tanzania, whose
interests are inextricably linked to those of the
countries of the Great Lakes region.

Efforts to establish such an institution should not
overshadow the fact that the countries of Central Africa
and the Great Lakes region all have subscribed to the
idea of discussing the future of their relations through
an international conference on peace, stability, security
and development, which they all fervently desire.

Allow us, before we conclude, to quickly touch
on some issues which seem to us of the greatest
importance.

Regarding human rights, I take this opportunity to
try to provide at least a few elements in answer to the
question raised by the representatives of the Russian
Federation and of the United Kingdom. It is clearly
imperative that justice be provided for the Congolese
people who have been the victims of numerous
atrocities - atrocities that still continue within the
national territory of the country.

As the head of State, Major-General Joseph
Kabila, has stated, our determination to unify the
country by overcoming artificial differences cannot,
however, sidestep justice, which will promote a lasting
reconciliation. Justice - independent and equal for
all - must play its full role in ending, once and for all,
impunity, which continues to incite anti-social
behaviour, and must also provide for legal redress for
the victims.

The urgent need to provide the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with solid national institutions
for the protection of human rights and with an adequate
institutional framework in which criminals will be held
responsible for their acts prompts us to request the
support of the entire international community for the
rapid establishment and early functioning of the
national Truth and Reconciliation Commission and the
National Observatory for Human Rights, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Global and All-
inclusive Agreement on the Transition in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We remain convinced that the question of
impunity will be among the priorities of the
Transitional Government of National Unity, whose first
meeting is planned for tomorrow, Saturday, 19 July
2003, and which in early August will present its
programme of work before the transitional parliament.

With regard to the humanitarian situation in the
areas affected by conflict, the lack of access to
populations in need and the lack of security created by
the activities of the parties to the conflicts has always
been the main obstacle to large-scale humanitarian
activity.

Now that the various parties to the conflict are all
working for the reunification of the country within the
Transitional Government of National Unity, there is an
imperative need for all means to be implemented to
ensure unimpeded access to those areas which were
previously inaccessible, and to facilitate the
distribution of humanitarian assistance to those areas in
need.

As for the specific situation of Ituri, we support
and encourage the implementation of the strategy for
Ituri - developed by MONUC and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, in cooperation with the
United Nations Development Programme, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
humanitarian agencies - in order to guide and
coordinate the activities of the United Nations agencies
and their partners by concentrating, first of all, on the
delivery of humanitarian assistance in Bunia.

Finally, regarding the protection of children, the
images of Bunia displayed by the media are odious.
Children represent a category of vulnerable
individuals, and their presence in fighting forces is of
the greatest concern to us, as is demonstrated by the
legal framework now in effect.

The Democratic Republic of Congo commits
itself to strictly implementing the provisions of Law
Decree No. 066 of 9 June 2000, regarding the
demobilization and reintegration of vulnerable groups.
That law lays down an unequivocal and strict ban on
the recruitment of children and reflects the will and
determination of the Government to ensure
harmonization between the Congolese legal system and
the international legal system concerning human rights.

The national programme for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of child soldiers must
be accelerated, given the large number of child soldiers
who remain on the front lines and in military camps
throughout the national territory. We call on the
international community to support this programme.

In conclusion, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo would like to express its deep gratitude to the
international community, in particular to the European
Union and to France, which has been playing a leading
role within the Multinational Force, for their
unswerving commitment to peace in the Congo.

We also take advantage of this opportunity once
again to reassure all of our partners, in particular our
brothers from neighbouring countries, as to our keen
desire to live in harmony with everyone in a spirit of
tolerance, solidarity and open cooperation.

The internal process of reconciliation and
national harmony, as well as improved prospects for
peace in the Great Lakes region, allow us to envisage
with much more equanimity the advent of a region of
greater peace, security, justice and prosperity.

