Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We extend our gratitude to the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Kai Eide, for their sincere efforts. I would also like
to thank all their colleagues in the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their
firm commitment and valuable dedication to the
consolidation of peace and stability in Afghanistan.
The central role of the United Nations in coordinating
international efforts in Afghanistan is of paramount
importance, and we fully support it.

The latest report (S/2008/617) of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Afghanistan, as well as the
reality on the ground, present us with a mixed picture.
On the one hand, we have witnessed remarkable
accomplishments by the Government and the people of
Afghanistan in various fields; on the other, despite all
those achievements, many daunting challenges - such
as insecurity, poppy cultivation, the production of
narcotic drugs, drug trafficking and humanitarian
crises, among others - have yet to be effectively
tackled and continue to endanger the stability and
development of Afghanistan, along with that of the
region and beyond.

It is of grave concern that, as indicated in the
report before the Council, the security situation in
Afghanistan has deteriorated. Increased terrorist
attacks and violence in certain parts of Afghanistan
caused by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other criminal and
terrorist groups, coupled with the pervasive drug trade,
have created grave challenges. The increase in civilian
casualties, which is a result of terrorism and is also in
part caused by the military operations of foreign
forces, is yet another concern preoccupying the people
of Afghanistan and international public opinion.

The hearts and minds of the Afghan people, who
have gone through various forms of hardship and
suffering in the past few decades, cannot be won by
relying solely on military operations; nor will it be
possible by trying to appease the extremists and
terrorists, who will not be satisfied with anything less
than returning the country to the extremism that it
experienced in the past. Rather, as was also mentioned
by the Ambassador of Afghanistan, it will be
achievable by making ordinary Afghans feel the results
of the help and support of the international community
in their day-to-day lives through the reconstruction of
infrastructure, capacity-building, training, education
and the development of important sectors such as the
agricultural sector.

The recent increase in insecurity in Afghanistan
clearly suggests that the attempts made by certain
countries to approach some extremist and terrorist
groups have been counterproductive and have only
emboldened them. That is a matter of great concern
that could create a new version of extremism in the
region.

Furthermore, we are of the view that the Afghan
National Army and Police should be more seriously
strengthened. The transfer to Afghans of full national
ownership over the security of their country should be
expedited if the insecurity in Afghanistan is to be
addressed effectively. An important step in that
direction was the hand-over, in August 2008, of leading
responsibility for security in Kabul to the national
security forces led by the Afghan National Army. That
important development should be built upon and
followed by more steps.

As indicated in the reports of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, crop yields have actually
increased in Afghanistan in 2008. The cultivation,
production of and trafficking in narcotic drugs, which
adversely affect the security of that country, have
continued unabated. Undoubtedly, combating that
menace requires a long-term strategy. The magnitude
of the threat requires more resolute and coordinated
efforts by Afghanistan and the international
community. On its part, the Islamic Republic of Iran
has spared no effort in combating that threat. I have
explained our endeavours in that regard in my previous
statements in the Council. While continuing that fight
with unwavering determination, we expect the
international community to join us and to become more
seriously involved in the fight in order to save peoples

across the world from the destructive impacts of that
menace.

However, despite all the concerns and
uncertainties to which I have referred, one thing is
clear - the Government and people of Afghanistan
continue to demonstrate their steadfast resolve not to
bow to the difficulties they are facing but to surmount
them and to work for a stable, prosperous and
democratic Afghanistan. In that regard, they need the
support of every one of us in the international
community. The Paris Conference of June 2008, at
which the Afghanistan National Development Strategy
was launched, provided the world community with
another opportunity to reassure Afghans that, as they
continue on their journey towards stability, security
and development, the international community stands
with them, offering its help and support. We concur
with the report that the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy and the Paris Declaration have
established a road map for future efforts by the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community to bring stability and development to
Afghanistan.

The Islamic Republic of Iran, along with other
neighbouring countries and the world at large, has a
vital interest in a secure, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan, and in an Afghanistan that is at peace
with itself and with its neighbours. Over the past six
years, we have spent more than $300 million in helping
the Afghans rebuild and reconstruct their country by
mainly spending on building infrastructure and
capacity-building. As an example, and as mentioned in
the report, the Islamic Republic of Iran recently
concluded memorandums of understanding with
Afghanistan on bilateral trade and has agreed to
construct a teacher training centre in Kabul. In
addition, the Independent Directorate for Local
Governance has signed an agreement with Iran to
expand public service training.

My country has also extended its hospitality to
over 3 million Afghan nationals over the past three
decades. As present, there are about 960,000 Afghan
refugees registered in Iran, with another 1 million
Afghan nationals living illegally in our country. For all
these years, the Afghan nationals have enjoyed, and
continue to enjoy, the educational and welfare facilities
in Iran and have been and are benefiting from the same
subsidies as our own people.

It is our earnest hope that the international
community will assist in the process of enabling
Afghan nationals to return to their homeland and in
helping create the conditions to facilitate their
voluntary repatriation in a more timely manner.

