Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Mr. President, I would
like to begin by expressing my appreciation for the
initiative and leadership you have shown in convening
today's open debate on the important issue of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. I will be very brief.

From their inception, United Nations peacekeeping
operations have been evolving. Contemporary
peacekeeping has become multidimensional, with
broader roles and responsibilities. Fifteen years after
the Brahimi report (S/2000/809), resolution 2086 (2013)
renewed our consideration of trends in peacekeeping.
Recent peacekeeping also has delivered several
innovations including the Force Intervention Brigade,
unmanned unarmed aerial vehicles and inter-mission
cooperation, inter alia. The most important fact is that
peacekeeping continues to be a flagship initiative of
the United Nations for international peace and security.
We should maintain and improve that important tool.
In that regard, a key question is how to make United
Nations peacekeeping operations sustainable in both
financial and human resources terms.

Let me first touch upon the financial challenge.
The United Nations peacekeeping budget for 2014-
2015 will probably greatly exceed its historical high
of $8 billion. While we fully recognize the important
role of peacekeeping operations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, the fiscal environment
of Member States, including Japan, does not allow
unlimited resources for peacekeeping. Very strong
efficiency measures are called for.

Right-sizing is a promising approach to meeting
such financial challenges. When an idea to establish
a new mission emerges, full consideration should be
given to whether it is cost-effective or not. The mission's
mandate has to be elaborated based on the reality on
the ground and should be responsive to the changing
situation in the field. To that end, the Secretary-General
should keep a close eye on developments on the ground
and make timely and realistic recommendations to the
Security Council. The Security Council should review
the mandate of each mission in a timely manner and
ensure the effectiveness of the mission's activities.
Automatic renewal of mission mandates should be
avoided and mandates of prolonged missions should be
thoroughly reviewed.

Let me move on to the challenge posed by limited
human resources. It is clear that a large number of
qualified peacekeepers is essential for peacekeeping
activities. However, we very often struggle to find
all the personnel we need. Due to today's surge in the
demand for peacekeeping missions, human resources
are overstretched. It is a pressing task to increase the
number of qualified peacekeepers and create a strong
pool of them. In that regard, I would like to highlight
two points.

First, broadening troop contributors is a way
to cope with the challenge. It is true that current
peacekeeping missions depend on a limited number of
troop-contributing countries. In order to overcome such
limitations, we should continue to assist prospective
troop-contributing countries.
Secondly, we need more training, which is a
very effective way to create qualified peacekeepers.
Upholding standards of discipline for peacekeepers,
including preventing sexual exploitation and abuse, is
essential to ensuring a mission's credibility. In addition,
peacekeepers are now required to be competent in
complex tasks. Therefore, we should provide full-
spectrum training to create qualified peacekeepers.

Japan has participated in peacekeeping operations
for more than 20 years. We have dispatched more
than 10,000 personnel to 12 peacekeeping operation
missions. I will skip the details now because of time
limitations; they can be found in the written text
that I will circulate in the Chamber. However, let
me emphasize that Japan wishes to contribute to
peacekeeping operations by broadening its involvement
under the banner of "Proactive Contribution to Peace".

In closing, I would like to express my heartfelt
appreciation to all peacekeepers. I also express
our deepest condolences to the survivors of those
peacekeepers who made the ultimate sacrifice in the
line of duty.

