Sheikh Al Sabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me to begin, Mr. President, by congratulating
you and the Federal Republic of Germany on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. I would also like to congratulate and thank
His Excellency Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian and the
friendly Republic of France for the able stewardship
of the Council in March. I also thank today's
briefers - Mr. Peter Maurer, Mr. Mark Lowcock and
Ms. Naz Modirzadeh - for their comprehensive and
enlightening briefings on what could be considered one
of the most important current issues, namely, promoting
the rule of law and providing humanitarian protection
in line with international humanitarian law.

As members know, the year 2019 marks
the seventieth anniversary of the 1949 Geneva
Conventions. In the light of the current international
situation, with ongoing armed conflicts in several
regions of the world, the issue of promoting the rule
of law, in particular international humanitarian law,
has become more important than ever before. The four
Geneva Conventions and their Protocols Additional
thereto provide the legal framework for humanitarian
protection in wars and armed conflicts. However,
it is also important to realize that, although the
Conventions have been universally ratified, regrettably
they are not adhered to or respected as required. The
world has continued to witness neglect and blatant
disregard concerning the texts of those Conventions in
recent times.

Amid fighting and bloodshed, which have regrettably
become the headlines of many of today's conflicts, we
are witnessing record levels of humanitarian suffering.
As we heard earlier in the briefing made on behalf
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, international humanitarian needs have reached
record levels. For example, as we meet today, more than
130 million people throughout the world are in need of
humanitarian assistance and protection.

The Israeli occupation of the Arab territories,
including Palestinian land, which has lasted for more
than five decades, is considered a blatant violation of
international norms and conventions. Israel's practices
and policies are a blatant violation of international law.
They include the expansion of existing settlements and
an unprecedented level of construction of new ones. Such
prolonged occupation has had a permanent negative
impact on the daily lives of the Palestinian people for
decades, in violation of the principles of international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. That
was clearly stated in the conclusions of the independent
international commission of inquiry on the protests in
the occupied Palestinian territory, which found that
Israeli soldiers committed violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
during the demonstrations in connection with the Great
March of Return. As confirmed by the commission,
some of those violations are tantamount to war crimes
and crimes against humanity.

In Syria, where the crisis is entering its ninth
year, we have witnessed the most reprehensible
violations of international humanitarian law, through
the continued and deliberate targeting of civilians and
their property, as well as public facilities. Moreover, we
have witnessed the ongoing obstruction of the efforts of
humanitarian agencies and organizations delivering aid
to those who need it regularly. How can we end those
violations and alleviate the considerable humanitarian
suffering in conflict areas? The answer to that question
is the essence of today's discussion, namely, we need
to promote the rule of law and respect humanitarian
principles during armed conflict. However, the more
important question is, how will we achieve that?

First of all, the United Nations, in general, and
the Security Council, in particular, have an important
and pivotal role to play in guaranteeing adherence
to international humanitarian law and in promoting
the rule of law. That is accomplished by ensuring the
full implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, especially in the context of protecting
civilians in armed conflict, and by adherence to
international humanitarian law on the part of parties to
a conflict and the international organizations working
on the ground. Moreover, United Nations peacekeeping
forces have a responsibility to protect civilians by taking
the necessary measures to guarantee such protection
within their mandated tasks for camps of internally
displaced persons and ensure medical evacuation for
the wounded, as well as strengthening the capabilities
of national police forces to enable them to perform
their duties.

The perilous security environment in which some
United Nations forces operate may require that they use
force in self-defence. It is therefore important for United
Nations forces to abide by all the relevant international
rules, including international humanitarian law where
applicable. Furthermore, parties to a conflict and
international organizations working in the field must
respect international humanitarian law. It is also
important to guarantee accountability for war crimes,
genocide and crimes against humanity. We must
condemn all human rights violations by any party to
conflict and ensure that those who target civilians in
any way are held accountable. Unfortunately, impunity
is one of the main features of today's conflicts,
which has served to encourage the commission of
the most blatant violations of every basic principle of
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions.

We nevertheless commend the efforts of the
General Assembly and the Security Council in adopting
the measures necessary to ensure accountability
with regard to many of the items on the Security
Council's agenda, including the establishment of the
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. The State of Kuwait was one of the sponsors of
General Assembly resolution 71/248, which established
the Mechanism. We also support the establishment
of an independent mechanism to hold accountable
those who have committed crimes against the Muslim
Rohingya minority in Myanmar. In addition, we
commend the unanimous adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 2379 (2017), which calls for the
establishment of an independent team to investigate the
crimes perpetrated by the group known as Da'esh and
hold it accountable for the heinous acts it committed in
Iraq. Those and similar mechanisms are important to
guarantee an end to impunity. Ensuring accountability
and prosecuting persons having violated human rights
and international humanitarian law are key to achieving
sustainable peace.

This morning's discussions at the Arria Formula
meeting on the protection of humanitarian and medical
personnel, which you convened, Mr. President,
demonstrate the importance of adhering to international
law. As Member States, we shoulder the responsibility of
implementing them more comprehensively by adopting
specific and pragmatic measures, including the
exchange of expertise and best practices among States
and the coordination of efforts in terms of adhering
to international humanitarian law. In that regard, we
note that the State of Kuwait supports the political
declaration proposed by the Republic of France on the
protection of medical personnel in conflict zones.

At the national level, the State of Kuwait carries out
a number of capacity-building and training activities in
the area of international humanitarian law. We recently
hosted the eighth regional workshop on international
humanitarian law for Arab judges, in collaboration
with the Kuwait Institute for Judicial and Legal Studies
and the International Committee of the Red Cross. The
State of Kuwait will continue its close cooperation
with interested stakeholders to spread the culture of
respect for, and the implementation of, international
humanitarian law.

The Charter of the United Nations aims

"to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought
untold sorrow to mankind".

Unfortunately today, seven decades after its signing, the
scourge of war continues to cause sadness and sorrow
throughout many of the world's societies and States. We
must never forget the Preamble of Charter, which states
that the peoples of the United Nations are determined

"[t]o ensure, by the acceptance ofprinciples and the
institution of methods, that armed force shall not be
used, save in the common interest".

In conclusion, I reaffirm that the State of
Kuwait stands fully ready to work towards ensuring
accountability and justice, as well as our commitment
to the basic principles of international law, especially
international humanitarian law.

