Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to thank the delegation of Chile for taking
the initiative of organizing this debate on a question
which is clearly central to the mission of our
Organization. I also thank Ambassador Munoz for
enabling our discussion of this question with the non-
governmental organizations at the Arria formula
meeting he organized on 22 January.

The spirit and the letter of the United Nations
Charter make civil concord among members of a single
human society - and reconciliation among them if that
concord is broken - the primary condition to be met in
order to build a world of peace.

Reconciliation follows a phase in which a
society's harmonious relations have been ruptured,
most often by a violent armed conflict in the case of
civil war, by violence practised by a State against
society or part of society in the case of dictatorships, or
by violence directed at both society and the State in
order to undermine their foundations for political
purposes. National reconciliation attempts to heal a
society of the effects of these breaches and therefore
can only be successful if a reliable and objective
diagnosis of the causes of the conflict is provided.

To that end, the observation of conflict situations,
of which the United Nations has been seized since its
creation, points to the recurrent presence of certain
symptoms, namely one social or ethnic group's
excessive domination over other groups or components
of society. This is reflected, generally speaking, in the
monopolizing of national resources and positions of
power, causing, more often than not, the use of State
repression to maintain this domination. This does not
allow for any kind of counterweights or opposing
powers, which are the hallmarks of the rule of law. The
absence of the rule of law, therefore, is at the source of
violent conflicts of interest within a society. These
conflicts would have been peacefully resolved if they
had taken place in a democratic environment
characterized by the sound practices of good
governance and respect for the law, a law drafted in a
spirit of fairness and with the aim of preserving
everyone's rights.

National reconciliation, therefore, cannot be
dissociated from the establishment or rehabilitation of
the rule of law, characterized by the idea of justice. In a
post-conflict situation, national reconciliation, to attain
its overriding goal, a peaceful society, necessarily
involves telling the truth, which is the basis of justice.
This occurs at two levels: first, setting the record
straight about the causes of conflicts, including the
inequalities and denials of rights which caused them,
and universal recognition of those imbalances;
secondly, telling the truth about the human rights
violations and atrocities committed during the period
of hostilities.

While the first stage naturally lends itself to
reconciliation by calling on the political arena to
summon up the will - and create the conditions - to
correct previous imbalances, the second does give rise
to many questions, since it rejects the idea of impunity
in favour of the idea of settling accounts, of
punishment, and of reparations due to the victims as
well as to moral rehabilitation, all of which increase
the chances of lasting reconciliation.

The main difficulty in this exercise lies in
reconciling the rejection of impunity - demanded by
the rule of law - and the risk of a conflict dragging on
because of the fears that the prospect of prosecution
gives rise to among those who have violated human
rights. This places the whole question of amnesty in
our discussion today.

The problem of amnesty does not come up in
situations where one of the parties to the conflict was
defeated militarily by the other party, whether by the
Victor's own means or with the support of the
international community. In that situation, generally
speaking, those who are defeated will be prosecuted. In
situations where the belligerents have the means to
prolong a conflict, along with its accompanying
atrocities, or in situations where the wielders of State
power negotiate the conditions for retreat, the scenario
is not the same. We all know that, while a settlement is
being negotiated, the mediators are always confronted
with demands for amnesty and this amnesty often
determines the success of their efforts.

Truth and reconciliation commissions, as in the
case of Chile and South Africa in particular, try to get
around this difficulty inherent in the rule of law, of the
obligation to prosecute, by emphasizing the therapeutic
value of digging up the truth. This practice has the
immense merit of fulfilling the duty to remember,
which is essential for building a new national
consensus, while avoiding a repetition of the errors of
the past. However, since it does circumvent the judicial
phase, it is nonetheless a kind of amnesty, similar to
the one that was negotiated and obtained recently for
Charles Taylor by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) mediators. These mediators,
to their credit, did spare Liberia the additional
tribulation caused by the inertia of the international
community in the face of a major humanitarian
catastrophe.

I now come to the question before us - the role
of the United Nations in the process of national
reconciliation.

First, on the question of impunity and amnesty,
the Organization seems to have opted for a firm
position of not granting any concessions to the parties
to the conflict that it is seized of, as Mr. Kalomoh
recalled. This is a position that is legally justified, but
its downside is that it reduces the Organization's ability
to put an end to the hostilities by mediation alone,
since some of the belligerents will distrust the
Organization if it has, in advance, opted in favour of a
criminal prosecution of these crimes.

Furthermore, the considerable developments in
international criminal law in recent years do not allow
the Organization and Member States much room for
manoeuvre in this area. In the specific case of
international crimes, namely, war crimes, genocide and
crimes against humanity, this room for manoeuvre is
henceforth practically nil. Yet it is interesting to note,
here, that even the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), in article 53, paragraph 2 (c),
gives the prosecutor some leeway and the discretionary
power not to open a judicial enquiry if "A prosecution
is not in the interests ofjustice, taking into account all
the circumstances, including the gravity of the crime
[and] the interests of victims ...".

In order to maintain its role as an honest broker,
the United Nations must first, as far as possible, avoid
placing itself in the position of accuser, even more so
since it is less and less the United Nations and
increasingly the States or regional or subregional
organizations that are involved in the difficult quest for
solutions to particularly bloody conflicts.

Secondly, the United Nations needs to establish
the conditions whereby it can credibly threaten the use
of force against recalcitrant parties. These conditions,
which, we think, are lacking today, depend on the
affirmation of a clear political will on the part of the
Security Council, in particular on the part of the
permanent members, and in the availability of
appropriate resources for the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

In the post-conflict period, the role of the United
Nations seems to have been clearly defined in the
Millennium Declaration. I do not want to go into any
details here, but in the specific case of national
reconciliation processes, it seems to us that this role
consists of supporting the former parties to the conflict
during the peace-building stage and in the transition to
the rule of law. This can be done in the following ways:
by sharing the Organization's experience and
recognized expertise in the resolute conduct and
completion of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes; through assistance in electoral
processes and the establishment of representative
democratic institutions, including political parties and
civil society organizations; by the establishment of an
independent, impartial and functioning judicial system;
by developing public information bodies that embody
the values of democracy and tolerance in order to
counter the adverse effects of partisan media,
sometimes referred to as hate media, which may not
only create a climate leading to the outbreak of conflict
but also cause the failure of national reconciliation;
and, finally, by the mobilization of international
assistance for reconstruction.

As I recalled in our debate on West Africa,
clearly, if the United Nations were to become
decisively involved in conflict-prevention by tackling,
in particular, the socioeconomic causes and by
mobilizing more resources for development, many
countries would be spared many conflicts, which are
costly in many respects. The international community
would thus have to finance neither peacekeeping
operations that are often burdensome, nor post-conflict
activities of sometimes questionable usefulness and
consistency. In other words - in the medical usage
evoked by Mr. Malloch Brown, with my regrets for
using such a prosaic formula - it is better to prevent
than to cure.

