Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan abstained in the
vote on the draft resolution just adopted by the
Council, with nine votes in favour, as resolution 1559
(2004). We did so for the following reasons.

First, the resolution is not consistent with the
Security Council's functions and responsibilities.
Article 39 of the Charter stipulates that the Security
Council shall determine the existence of any threat to
the peace, breach of the peace or act of aggression and
shall thereafter make recommendations for action. In
this case, the resolution establishes no evidence of any
urgent threat to peace. There has been no complaint
from the country whose sovereignty and integrity the
resolution purports to uphold. On the contrary,
Lebanese representatives communicated to the Council
their opposition to consideration of the draft resolution.

Secondly, the resolution addresses the wrong
threat. If there is a threat to Lebanon it is well known;
it does not arise from Syria. We construe the provisions
of paragraph 2, as now worded, as constituting a
reference to those foreign forces which have entered
Lebanon uninvited and by the use of force.

Thirdly, the resolution goes beyond the mandate
and the authority of the Security Council. Article 24,
paragraph 2, of the Charter states that Security Council
shall act in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the United Nations. A fundamental principle of the
United Nations is stated in Article 2, paragraph 7:
"Nothing contained in the present Charter shall
authorize the United Nations to intervene in matters
which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction
of any State". This resolution, in its sixth preambular
paragraph and in its operative paragraph 5, intervenes
in the internal affairs of Lebanon. Such intervention is
unacceptable and is contrary to the Charter. It also sets
an unfortunate precedent. It is, moreover, unclear, since
it will be impossible for the Council to determine
whether and when the constitutional rules of any
country, in this case Lebanon, are, in the words of
those paragraphs, "devised without foreign interference
or influence". For that reason, this provision of the
resolution is also unimplementable. Indeed, the
Security Council will find it impossible to enforce
changes in the national constitutions and rules of
sovereign States.

We have acted on this resolution under the item
on the Middle East. The Security Council must address
the real threat to peace in the Middle East arising from
the occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories,
including territory of the Syrian Arab Republic. We
trust that we shall not be deflected or diverted from
that objective by the resolution which the Council has
adopted today.

