Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his very comprehensive and
objective update on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). We are closely following his negotiations
with the key countries on this issue. In particular, we
appreciate Mr. Mladenov's meetings with politicians of
the Israeli, Palestinian and regional leadership, as well
as Russian and European Union diplomats, in an attempt
to restore calm and expand the range of humanitarian
assistance provided to that troubled zone.

We echo the warnings of the United Nations that
there is a cycle of conflicts in the Middle East that are
a cause for serious concern. They are raising tensions
at all levels and in numerous contexts, including
the situations in Syria, Yemen and the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict.

We have carefully followed the latest news on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). Since we
too signed the letter of 14 May on the reporting on
the implementation of that resolution, we note that no
written report has been circulated for this meeting,
as requested in our joint letter. We all welcomed the
circulation of a written report on 14 June, and we
believe that it is important to continue with the standard
practice. We look forward to receiving a written report
ahead of the next reporting period in December.
Kazakhstan calls on both sides to honour their
respective commitments under all Security Council
resolutions that have been adopted over the 50 years
since 1967. The Council must ensure compliance with
resolution 2334 (2016). We therefore call in particular
for a complete freeze on the construction of settlements.
The deliberate policy of demolishing Palestinian
buildings and expanding settlements in the West Bank
and in East Jerusalem, and the transfer ofthose lands for
the exclusive use by one party, undermine the viability
of the two-State solution.

In that regard, we are concerned by the intention
of the Israeli authorities to demolish a Bedouin village
that is home to a community of 181 people. Such actions
undermine the establishment of a viable Palestinian
State. At the same time, Kazakhstan is alarmed at the
announcement by the Israeli Civil Administration of
the plan to expand the illegal Israeli settlement of Tina
Omarim in the town of Al-Dahriyeh, in the southern
occupied West Bank district of Hebron. We call on the
Israeli authorities to halt the demolition and stop efforts
to resettle Palestinian communities in the West Bank.

With regard to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, Kazakhstan reiterates the critical need of
supporting that important entity in the light of its very
significant work, especially since the situation in Gaza
is desperate. Over a decade of blockade has deprived
the people of their basic rights and left over two-thirds
of the population dependent on humanitarian aid. My
country also underscores the importance of achieving
intra-Palestinian unity. It is absolutely vital to bring all
Palestinian factions together and to unite them under
a legitimate and democratic Palestinian Authority. My
delegation also appreciates the efforts of the Russian
Federation and Egypt to ensure intra-Palestinian
consolidation and urges all Palestinian political
parties and movements to integrate into one national
political structure.

Kazakhstan calls upon the Middle East
Quartet - the United States, Russia, the European
Union and the United Nations - to revive the work
of that international body. We believe that resuming
the Quartet's indispensable negotiations on the Middle
East settlement will help to consolidate multilateral
efforts for a peaceful settlement of this conflict.

Lastly, we call upon the leaders of Israel, Palestine
and all other involved parties to take concrete steps
to preserve the possibility of peaceful coexistence
and the solution of two States existing side by side. It
should be based, as we always say in the Council, on
the inalienable rights of Palestinians to statehood and
Israel's right to security.

