Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Please allow
me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. Please rest
assured of our fullest cooperation. I would also like to
take this opportunity to express our deep appreciation
for the warm words you had for our Permanent
Representative and for all the words of appreciation
and thanks that were expressed by other members of
the Council.

I would like to join other colleagues in thanking
Ambassador Nestor Osorio for presenting the 90-day
report of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). We commend his stewardship
of the Committee and the professionalism with which
the Committee has been implementing its mandate. We
have noted the work done by the Committee during the
reporting period, including its finalization of the
revised guidelines for the conduct of the Committee's
work. We hope that the Committee will soon approve
its updated programme of work. Reappointment of the
Panel of Experts consequent upon the adoption of
resolution 1984 (2011) should facilitate the
Committee's work.

We appreciate the quarterly update prepared by
the Panel of Experts assessing the implementation
reports of Member States submitted during the period
from 1 May to 31 July 2011. We encourage the Panel to
continue its work impartially, independently and
transparently, based on verifiable information under the
Committee's direction, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

I would like to reiterate India's consistent stand
on the Iranian nuclear issue. We support the right of all
States, including Iran, to the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. Exercise of this right should, however, be
consistent with their international obligations. We
believe that the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) should play a central role in the resolution of
technical issues concerning the Iranian nuclear
programme. The issues should be resolved peacefully
through dialogue and negotiations. Iran should
cooperate fully with the IAEA to restore international
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. We support all efforts aimed at the
peaceful resolution of the issue.

We also call upon all sides to fully implement the
resolutions adopted by the Security Council. There
should be no violation of the measures mandated in
those resolutions. At the same time, all efforts should
be made to ensure that the legitimate trade and
economic activities of Iranian entities and those of
other countries do not suffer.

In conclusion, I would like to assure the
Chairman of the 1737 Committee that we will continue
to work cooperatively with the other members of the
Committee and contribute constructively to the
Committee's work.

