Mr. Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): At the outset, allow
me to thank everyone for all the words of support
and sympathy that we have received and heard on the
horrendous terror attack in Pakistan.

We welcome to the Council Mr. Haysom as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
We thank him for his briefing. We look forward to
working with him in support of Afghanistan's decade
of transformation, and I would like to assure him of
Pakistan's fullest cooperation. I would also like to thank
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing today and, in the same
breath, pay tribute to former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis for his excellent
stewardship of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan. Pakistan would like to express its
appreciation for the statement made by Ambassador
Zahir Tanin this morning.

The security transition in Afghanistan is now under
way. We believe that the Bilateral Security Agreement
with the United States and the status-of-forces
agreement with NATO will provide the legal framework
for continued international military assistance post-
2014. The support expressed in resolution 2189 (2014)
is another positive signal. The International Security
Assistance Force will end its mission in Afghanistan
in approximately 13 days. Afghan forces will resume
full responsibility for security. The Resolute Support
Mission will be there to advise, train and assist. These
are historic moments, and we welcome the seamless
transition.

The recent visit by President Ashraf Ghani to
Pakistan, preceded by the visit of our adviser on
national security and foreign policy and high-level
contacts in both the civil and military fields, has
contributed to an auspicious beginning a a resetting
of the relationship, as the Secretary-General stated. We
have initiated actions to deepen security cooperation,
promote bilateral trade, streamline transit trade issues,
build a strong economic relationship and enhance
regional economic cooperation. We welcome the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process Ministerial Conference, held
in Beijing, and have offered to host its fifth Ministerial
Conference in Pakistan.

Let me reiterate that we fully support the work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We appreciate its good offices, capacity-
building and coordination of assistance roles. We hope
that it will continue to contribute to the peace and
stability of Afghanistan, which is our common goal.

I would also like to reiterate what Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif proposed for the consideration of the
international partners at the London Conference on
Afghanistan. First, we must send a clear message
of deeper engagement with Afghanistan. Secondly,
we must help address the urgent fiscal crisis and
provide sustained financial assistance throughout the
transformation decade for building a secure and self-
reliant Afghanistan. Thirdly, we must strengthen efforts
in the fight against narcotics production and trafficking.
Fourthly, we must support the new Government's
desire to bring back the 5 million Afghan refugees
living abroad by helping to create conditions conducive
to their sustainable reintegration. Finally, we must
implement the vision of Afghanistan as a land bridge
by supporting communications and energy corridors.

I would like to end by underlining that terrorism
is a common enemy. It must be fought with common
endeavours, without any distinction.

