The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Mali for the kind words he addressed
to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of France.

At the outset, Madam, let me say that seeing you
at the helm of the two International Tribunals as their
Prosecutor is for us a source of optimism. The manner
in which you have carried out your work since your
appointment and the determination you have shown in
achieving the ambitious but realistic objectives that
you have set for yourself make it clear to us that the
Council made the right choice last year in appointing
Ms. Louise Arbour's successor. I am pleased also to
pay particular tribute to you for your efforts to bring
together the various legal traditions, which will
enhance the efficiency of the two International
Tribunals. In the important and difficult task that you
are undertaking, you can count on the full support of
France and, ifI may speak on behalf of the other
delegations who took the floor before me, that of all of
the members of the Council.

The Security Council cannot but support your
work, because it was the Council itself that set up the
International Tribunals, in the belief that the search for
justice is inseparable from the maintenance of
international peace and security. Your presence here
today, Madam, at the first public meeting of the
Council this month, which France strongly supported,
symbolizes the importance of international justice. This
will be further confirmed by the statement to be made
on 21 June by the President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Mr. Jorda.

The information that the Prosecutor has provided
us on the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda is
of particular interest to us. Recently the Council
debated the lessons that the United Nations can draw
from the tragedy that took place in Rwanda. The first
lesson, which we learned in 1994, is that justice must
be done. In this regard, we find the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda exemplary,
in particular because of the consistent penal policy
carried out by the Prosecutor, which has resulted in the
prosecution not of the perpetrators but of the leaders or
their close advisers. The recent efforts of the Tribunal
aimed at preparing for collective trials seem to us to be
a step in the right direction. I would recall here that
France has made a concrete contribution to the
Tribunal by providing the equipment for the hearing
rooms.

Regarding the former Yugoslavia, the substantive
improvement in the relations between the Tribunal and
the Zagreb authorities, to which the Prosecutor
referred, is a noteworthy development. Of course, this
development needs to be consolidated by concrete and
close cooperation with the Tribunal, but the present
trend should be encouraged. Unfortunately, this
development sheds an even brighter light on the
absence to date of any satisfactory cooperation with the
Tribunal by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

France, for its part, has endeavoured to assist the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in
carrying out its work as well as possible, as soon as
possible and as effectively as possible. It is in that
spirit that we intend to continue consistently to support
the work of the Prosecutor and the Tribunal. Also
benefiting that work are the efforts being made by all
components of the Stabilization Force to arrest
individuals sought by the Tribunal, as certain recent
arrests have shown.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the representative of Rwanda.

