Mr. Annabi: Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving us the opportunity to brief the Council on
developments in Kosovo over the past two months.
During this period, Mr. Holkeri took up his
responsibilities as the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. Upon his arrival in Pristina, Mr.
Holkeri held a first round of meetings with
representatives of the Kosovo Provisional Institutions
and local political leaders from all communities. Mr.
Holkeri also had meetings with the political leadership
in Belgrade.

The Special Representative has reaffirmed the
commitment of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to the
"standards before status" policy framework and its
focus on progress towards achieving the benchmarks
for implementation of this policy. Mr. Holkeri is also
preparing an operational plan for the implementation of
the benchmarks, which is being drawn up jointly by
UNMIK and the Kosovo Provisional Institutions.

Mr. Holkeri has strongly emphasized the
importance of initiating direct and constructive
dialogue on practical matters of mutual interest
between Pristina and Belgrade. During his meetings
with representatives of the Kosovo Provisional
Institutions and the political leadership in Belgrade,
Mr. Holkeri sought their respective views on issues
relating to the proposed dialogue. He consistently
underlined during those discussions that the dialogue
should focus on concrete issues which serve the needs
of the people and are in the interests of all sides.
Preparations for this dialogue are under way, and Mr.
Holkeri is planning to propose modalities for the
dialogue in the coming weeks.

With regard to the security situation, the period
since July has been characterized by a number of
violent attacks and shootings, which have occurred
throughout Kosovo, primarily targeting the Kosovo
Serb community, as well as UNMIK law enforcement
authorities.

As we informed the Council on 13 August, two
Kosovo Serb youths were killed and four injured in a
shooting incident aimed at those youths, who were
swimming in a river near the village of Gorazdevac in
the Pec': region. On 18 August, a Kosovo Serb male,
who had been shot in the head on 11 August, died of
his wounds. Two Kosovo Serbs were also injured in a
shooting on 26 August at the returns site of Bica, near
Klina in the Pee region. On 31 August, four Kosovo
Serbs were injured and one killed in an explosive
attack in the village of Cernica in the anilane region.
UNMIK Police and KFOR have increased security in
these areas following the incidents and are continuing
to investigate those crimes.

All Kosovo political leaders made statements
condemning the attacks and inviting the public to help
find the perpetrators. The Special Representative, Mr.
Holkeri, called upon them to show greater resolve in
calling for an end to violence and in using their
authority to support all efforts to bring the perpetrators
to justice. The Special Representative has also
appealed to the general public to do all it can to assist
the law enforcement authorities in efforts to apprehend
those responsible for the incidents.

Those violent incidents have further raised
feelings of insecurity among Kosovo Serbs, and there
have been signs of an increase in inter-ethnic tension.
Although protests against the incidents in Kosovo Serb
communities have largely been peaceful, there have
been instances of intimidation and harassment in both
Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb communities. In
addition, many regular inter-ethnic meetings and multi-
ethnic events have been cancelled or boycotted by
Kosovo Serb and/or Kosovo Albanian representatives
out of fear for their security. The past two months have
also seen an increase in violent incidents directed
against UNMIK law enforcement personnel and
property. On 3 August, an UNMIK international police
officer was murdered in a sniper attack in the northern
part of Kosovo. On 6 September, an off-duty Kosovo
Police Service (KPS) officer was also murdered near
Djakovica. On 10 September, another KPS officer was
shot and injured in Pristina, and a person who was with
him was killed.

Property used by the police and judiciary,
including an UNMIK police station, UNMIK vehicles
and the Pristina district court, were damaged in
explosions and other attacks. No one has claimed
responsibility for any of these attacks. The majority of
local politicians and representatives of the Provisional
Institutions have made statements condemning the
incidents.

Some of those attacks came after the conviction,
on 16 July, of four former Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA) members for war crimes committed primarily
against fellow Kosovo Albanians during 1998 and
1999. The decision was the first conviction of former
KLA members for war crimes. The initial negative
reaction among the general public and local media
coverage subsided quickly.

On 4 September, inmates of the Dubrava Prison,
which is Kosovo's largest detention facility, occupied a
prison block in protest against living conditions, and
refused to return to their cells, despite reassurances
from UNMIK officials that their complaints would be
addressed and that no disciplinary action would be
taken against them. Following the prison guards'
attempt to enter the occupied block, the prisoners set
fire to their mattresses. Five prisoners died and a
further 16 were injured in the ensuing fire. A police
investigation into the incident was launched
immediately, and an independent inquiry will look into
its causes and provide recommendations.

As regards political developments, owing to the
summer recess the period has seen a lull in legislative
and Government activity in Pristina. The Kosovo
Assembly reconvened on 4 September. Since July, the
Government has focused on legislative development
and the security situation. It has not taken up the
initiation of direct dialogue with Belgrade.

On 27 August, the Serbian Parliament endorsed a
"declaration on Kosovo and Metohija", and on 5
September the Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro
adopted a "resolution on Kosovo and Metohija".
Kosovo Albanian leaders were critical of these
documents, particularly the references to Kosovo's
status. Kosovo Albanian leaders have also stated that
such moves have strained chances of direct dialogue
with Belgrade. On 3 September the Kosovo
Government publicly expressed its concern over the
adoption of the Serbian declaration, and stated its
intention to build an independent State.

With regard to returns and inter-ethnic relations,
although the level of returns remains low, minority
returns continue to exceed those in 2002. In the past
two months, some promised funding from several
major donors was received, and work on returns
projects began. In addition, almost 150 cases have been
referred to the Rapid Response Returns Facility, which
is a joint project by UNMIK and the United Nations
Development Programme providing housing
reconstruction assistance for individual returnees. The
security situation has, however, heightened the level of
fear within the Serb community, leading to delays in
returns efforts and the possibility that more returns
might be postponed until next spring.

Kosovo's political leaders have expressed support
for returns, including - as previously reported -
through an open letter published on 2 July in Kosovo's
major dailies in which they encouraged displaced
persons of all ethnicities to return. On 10 July, the
Kosovo Assembly also held a session dedicated to
minority returns and adopted a resolution backing
returns and emphasizing the need for Kosovo's
Government to support return and reintegration
activities. On 21 August, Kosovo Prime Minister
Rexhepi committed to funding 7million euros for
return activities from the 2002 Kosovo Consolidated
Budget surplus funds, and emphasized that this
contribution by the Provisional Institutions was
intended to demonstrate the Government's commitment
to minority communities in the wake of the recent
security incidents.

Kosovo President Rugova and Prime Minister
Rexhepi have also travelled to returns sites to show
their public support for the returns process. However,
statements and concrete support for returns at the
central level have not, by and large, been replicated at
the municipal level. Cooperation on returns projects
has been productive in a number of municipalities, but
the actions of some municipal officials in the areas
affected by violence against Kosovo Serbs have not
been conducive to reconciliation.

Turning to local self-government, political
infighting ~ primarily between Kosovo Albanian
parties - in a number of municipalities continued to
negatively affect the ability of local authorities to
deliver effective local government. Also, financing for
minority communities from municipal budgets remains
poor and, as of the end of June, only six of Kosovo's
26 mixed municipalities had met their required fair-
share financing levels in the areas of municipal
administration, health and education. UNMIK is
working with the Kosovo Ministry of Finance and
Economy on developing modalities to address this
outstanding problem.

In Mitrovica UNMIK has focused on promoting
inter-ethnic activities and dialogue. However, Kosovo
Serb members of the northern Mitrovica advisory
board have not yet started participating officially in the
meetings.

With regard to the economy, bids for the two
successive sets of tenders for the privatization of
socially owned enterprises were opened by the Kosovo
Trust Agency on 14 July and 2 September. A total of
24 enterprises have now been tendered for
privatization, and the amount in bids received has
reached over 29 million euros. On 6 September, the
first three contracts for the privatization of socially
owned enterprises were signed. On 1 July, the second
meeting of the Kosovo stabilization and association
process tracking mechanism took place in Pristina.
During the meeting, European Commission experts,
UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions discussed
aspects of justice and home affairs, media policy,
telecommunications and transport policy, and made
recommendations to ensure conformity with
established European Union norms and standards.

UNMIK and KFOR have continued to take action
against suspected extremist elements in the Kosovo
Protection Corps (KPC). An enquiry is ongoing in
order to identify those members of the KPC with
possible links to extremist organizations and criminal
groups. Following interviews with 50 members of the
KPC, a total of 18 officers have been recommended for
dismissal. One of the 18 has already resigned and a
second has been dismissed for a separate disciplinary
offence. The head of the KPC has suspended a further
seven of those on the list, referring the cases to
UNMIK police for further investigation.

In conclusion, I wish to say that, under Mr.
Holkeri's leadership, UNMIK will remain committed to
fully implementing Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) and to working with all interlocutors to achieve
progress on the benchmarks within the "standards
before status" policy framework. A priority at this time
is to initiate the dialogue on practical matters of mutual
concern between Pristina and Belgrade. Through that
dialogue practical benefits can be realized for the
people of Kosovo, with a view to developing an
atmosphere of mutual trust and confidence. Mr. Holkeri
is actively engaged in pursuing this matter in
consultation with all parties concerned. At the same
time, he is trying to manage the competing interests
and unilateral pronouncements of parties concerned,
which are not always conducive to the initiation of that
dialogue. We also remain concerned about the security
situation in Kosovo. In that connection, we shall
continue to emphasize the need for everyone to do their
part in stopping the violence. The Council's continued
and active support has been, and will continue to be,
crucial in realizing those objectives.

