Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I join earlier speakers
in thanking Special Representative Nicholas Haysom
for his briefing. We also commend Mr. Haysom and
all members and personnel of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for
their dedication in carrying out their duties under
challenging circumstances. I also thank Ambassador
Saikal for his statement.

Allow me to begin by reiterating Malaysia's
firm support for the reconciliation and reintegration
efforts undertaken by the Government of Afghanistan
and for UNAMA's strong support in that regard. We
also commend the Afghan Government's continuing
commitment and efforts to address the increasing
political, economic and security challenges faced by
the country. We believe that those steps demonstrate the
Government's aspirations to establish a more unified
and stable country, which, in our view, will contribute
positively to regional stability.

The maintenance of peace and stability across the
country remains a major challenge and preoccupation
of the Government and the security forces. We are
concerned that the security situation has markedly
deteriorated and the level of security incidents has both
increased and intensified. In particular, the Taliban's
temporary seizure of Kunduz city and 16 district
centres highlighted how fragile the security conditions
are. We also share the concern that affiliates of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham are making inroads
in Afghanistan. We are also increasingly concerned by
the increased involvement of United Nations personnel
in security incidents and note that 43 such incidents
occurred during the reporting period, including the
murder of a United Nations staff member in Kandahar.
Malaysia strongly condemns the targeting and attacks
on any United Nations personnel and facilities.
It is appalling that Afghan civilians have to
continue to suffer the brunt of the conflict, and what
is worse, children account for close to one fourth of all
casualties. In particular, Malaysia is alarmed that at least
159 children were killed and 505 children were injured
just within the span of three months. We continue to
urge all parties to the conflict to exercise restraint,
and we reiterate that those responsible for violations of
international human rights law and humanitarian law
must be held accountable.

Despite the challenging security circumstances,
Malaysiacommendsthedeterminationandcommitments
shown by the Afghan Government in undertaking
political reforms, including electoral reform. In that
regard, we are pleased to note the Government's
approval of seven of the ten recommendations of the
Special Electoral Reform Commission submitted
in August. Malaysia also welcomes the progress
made towards the formation of the new Independent
Election Commission and the Independent Electoral
Complaints Commission. In addition, we are pleased
to note the conclusion of a local ceasefire agreement
in Baghlan province, with the attendant immediate
reduction in violent clashes. Furthermore, the adoption
of a resolution in October by the first Ulema National
Conference in support of peacebuilding in Afghanistan
further illustrates the desire and aspirations of the
Afghan population to achieve lasting peace, dialogue
and reconciliation with all sides of the conflict. In that
regard, Malaysia reiterates that a peaceful, negotiated
political settlement is the only way to achieve
sustainable peace and stability in the country.

Malaysia commends the ongoing efforts of the
Afghan Government to counter the spread of narcotics.
We were pleased to learn of the first decrease in opium
poppy cultivation areas since 2009, specifically, the
cultivation area decreased by 19 per cent in 2015.
Potential opium production in 2015 also shows a
marked reduction of 48 per cent. Those are certainly
significant and encouraging achievements, despite the
myriad of political and security challenges faced by the
country. The National Drug Action Plan, approved by
the President of Afghanistan, is another positive and
important step forward in the efforts to combat illicit
drugs production and trade, and is a manifestation of
the Afghan Government's determination to counter
narcotics. We are confident that the close cooperation
between the Government of Afghanistan and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime will continue to
yield success in addressing the issue ofillicit drugs in a
comprehensive manner.

Malaysia believes that it remains imperative, at
this stage, for the United Nations and the international
community to continue to lend their support,
encouragement and assistance to the Government of
Afghanistan through reconstruction and redevelopment
efforts aimed at rebuilding the country. In that context,
Malaysia greatly appreciates the ongoing efforts of
UNAMA, which has continued to operate in extreme
and increasingly challenging conditions. We also
commend the active collaboration of regional partners
in promoting security, development and economic
advancement in Afghanistan and the region.

I conclude by reaffirming Malaysia's commitment
to working closely with all regional and international
partners in supporting the Afghan Government in its
effort to achieve peace, security and stability.

