Costa Rica thanks Indonesia, as President of the Security Council during the month of August, for having convened this debate, as well as Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary-General, and briefers Mr. Ban Ki-moon, former Secretary-General, and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation, New York University, for their contributions to this debate. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has impacted all sectors of society, creating multiple crises that threaten peace and stability. Its impact is and will continue to be greater in countries in conflict or emerging from it, hence the importance of this debate. Even though the Security Council has not recognized the new coronavirus pandemic as a threat to international peace and security - which does not mean that it is not - the Council must ensure that it does not pose yet another threat to peace processes and undermine the gains already made. In the Council are the world's main arms exporters, and Costa Rica would remind those countries of the need to carry out international arms transfers in a responsible manner, thus helping to prevent violent conflicts and alleviate tensions. It is largely up to the Council to respond to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and to redouble its efforts to ensure that in those conflicts in which it has not yet been possible to silence the guns, that goal can be achieved in a timely manner. The most vulnerable and unprotected are those who are suffering twice, as a result of both the conflict and the health emergency. Boys, girls and women require special protection at this time. It is not acceptable for hospital facilities and care centres for COVID-19 patients to be targeted by groups in conflict, especially when health systems cannot cope with the pandemic. The Governments of the world and their resources have to be focused on fighting the virus that has caused this crisis. Silencing the guns will help bring immediate humanitarian relief but will not ensure the consolidation of the peace to which we all aspire. Lasting peace will be achieved if the only fight waged is against the pandemic and the socioeconomic effects of the prevention measures taken, mainly in areas where conflicts prevail and in countries with fewer resources. That will be achieved only if we comply with the mandate of the Charter of the United Nations as contained in Article 26, which demands that the Security Council promote the establishment and maintenance of international peace and security with the least diversion for armaments of the world's human and economic resources. Costa Rica fully supports the Secretary-General's call for solidarity and the creation of a fund dedicated to COVID-19, as well as General Assembly resolution 74/270, but we must guarantee that such resources are used only for sustainable development and peacebuilding. The steps that we take to recover from the impact of the pandemic must involve building and rebuilding egalitarian and inclusive societies, in keeping with the commitment that we made when, as Members of the Organization, we adopted the Sustainable Development Goals. We must not lose sight of the fact that where there exist inequalities such as those suffered by young people and women, which are accentuated in crisis and conflict situations, organized crime and extremist groups will exploit them for their own gain, threatening lasting peace. To conclude, the Security Council must remain vigilant so that the achievements made in terms of international peace and security are not reversed, as COVID-19 has pushed many countries to the brink of a societal crisis and revealed political discontent in others. Some States will not be able to face those consequences on their own, and therefore the response they require must come from the United Nations system as a whole, based on international cooperation and the spirit of solidarity reflected in the purposes and principles of the Charter and expanded on in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
