Ms. L¢j (Denmark): I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of July and to thank Ambassador
De La Sabliere for leading our work during the month
of June.

Let me also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Danilo Turk for his briefing today and, indeed, for his
contribution throughout the years to the work of the
Council and of the United Nations.

Denmark commends the United Nations Observer
Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB) for the work it has
performed. With the successful conduct of the
elections, my country is encouraged by the political
process. The Observer Mission has played a crucial
role in the final stages of the process and, together with
previous missions, has contributed significantly to the
success of the work of the United Nations in
Bougainville. The swearing in of the new Autonomous
Bougainville Government and the dissolution of the
Peace Process Consultative Committee mark another
milestone for the Bougainville peace process. We
encourage the new Government to continue on the way
back to stability and peace, democratic government and
the rule of law.

On 26 May, during the Danish presidency of the
Security Council, we had a fruitful debate on post-
conflict peacebuilding (see S/PV.5187). At that
meeting, the Permanent Representative of Papua New
Guinea, His Excellency Ambassador Robert Guba Aisi,
gave us an excellent account of the developments in
Bougainville, from bloody civil conflict through peace
and reconciliation to the present stage. As Ambassador
Aisi rightly pointed out, it took real commitment by the
leaders and the people of Bougainville to achieve peace
and to choose the type of Government that would bring
about development and prosperity. We commend Papua
New Guinea for the constructive role it has played
towards reaching that goal.

Denmark supported the Secretary-General's
proposal to close the United Nations mission in
Bougainville. That does not mean that Bougainville no
longer deserves international political and financial
attention. Indeed, Bougainville's success will not be
complete until its socio-economic development is on
the right track. United Nations funds and programmes
are active in Bougainville, and so are many bilateral
donors. Their assistance is irreplaceable and is a
precondition for further progress.

In terms of the peacebuilding agenda,
Bougainville is a success beyond itself. This case
proves that, with local commitment, regional
participation and the involvement of the United
Nations, conflicts can be overcome, peace can be built
and development can prevail. The Bougainville peace
process constitutes an example to follow where
possible and to learn from where relevant. It deserves
our recognition.

The Secretary-General's proposal to establish a
Peacebuilding Commission is an important part of the
intention to improve the international community's
engagement with peacebuilding. Even if Bougainville
has already moved past the early post-conflict phase
and is well into the development phase, we should all
actively commit ourselves to ensuring that
Bougainville continues to be a success in the years to
come.

