Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): May I congratulate the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Gambia for serving as President of the Council
in this month of March. We would like also to extend our
warmest thanks to Ambassador Dangue Rewaka of Gabon
for having contributed, during his term in the month of
February, to creating an atmosphere conducive to the
Secretary-General's complex and far-reaching mission in
Baghdad.

In the same context and at the same time, on 17
February last, under circumstances of dramatic uncertainty,
the President of Argentina, Mr. Carlos Menem, addressed
a letter to the Secretary-General in support of a diplomatic
solution to this serious crisis.

Today we can welcome the determination, the calm
and the diplomatic skill shown by the Secretary-General
and those officials who accompanied him on his good-
offices mission to the Government of Iraq. Because of that
success, the indispensable role of the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security has been
enhanced and has gained greater visibility. In addition, the
jurisdiction of the Security Council has been strengthened.
Its responsibilities are clearly set out in the Charter and
may not under any circumstances be evaded.

The Memorandum of Understanding reached by the
Secretary-General in Baghdad addresses the question of
compliance with Security Council resolutions, including
observance of those aspects related to the mandate of the
Special Commission. That agreement should be strictly
interpreted and complied with in good faith and in
conformity with international law. This too is the clear
message that the Government of Argentina, holding the pro
tem presidency of the Southern Cone Common Market, sent
on 26 February last on behalf of that organization.

Furthermore, we believe that the statement made by
the Secretary-General at the start of today's meeting very
accurately and eloquently summarized the thinking of the
Government of Argentina.

Lastly, we express to all members of this Council
our gratitude for the sensitivity shown in the unanimous
adoption of resolution 1153 (1998). We hope that its
prompt implementation will substantially improve the
humanitarian situation of the people of Iraq and contribute
to mobilizing definitively the economy of the region,
which has excellent human potential for progress and
sustained development.

