Ms. Wolcott (United States of America): I wish
to thank Foreign Minister Bassole and Mr. Moussa for
their briefings. We are pleased to have Ambassador
Djedje here with us as well. The United States would
also like to acknowledge the essential role played by
President Compaore and his Government in brokering
the Ouagadougou Peace Agreement. We look forward
to working with such proven diplomats in the Council
next year.

The United States applauds the launching of the
mobile courts on 25 September. However, as those
courts are not operating throughout the country, we
urge the Ivorian Government to expand the
implementation of that process as soon as possible.
Only through a complete, thorough and credible
identification, and later registration, process can the
ground be paved for free and fair elections in Cote
d'Ivoire.

We were pleased to see the formal
commencement of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) efforts on 20 July, but we are
all frustrated by the slow progress of DDR in C6te
d'Ivoire since. We hope the ongoing disagreement over
ranks and numbers of personnel expected to join the
unified army can soon be resolved so that this
important process can move forward.

The United States reiterates its condemnation of
the attack on Prime Minister Soro on 29 June and the
several deaths that resulted and stresses that the
perpetrators of that criminal act must be brought to
justice. We note the decrease in reports of human rights
violations in C6te d'Ivoire since the signing of the
Ouagadougou Peace Agreement but are still concerned
that human rights abuses against civilians continue
throughout the country. We encourage all Ivorian
parties to abide by international human rights
standards.

The United States is encouraged by a new bill
drafted in January 2007 and mentioned in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2007/593) that would
establish anti-trafficking programmes in the Ministry
of Family, Women and Social Affairs, the judicial
police, the International Organization for Migration
and several national and international organizations.
We understand that that measure is now with the
Council of Ministers, and we encourage Cote d'Ivoire
to adopt the law soon.

Finally, let me also indicate United States support
for the draft press statement on Cote d'Ivoire that was
distributed by the French delegation.
