Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express to the Security Council the
satisfaction of the Government of Colombia with
resolution 1970 (2011), which the Council has just
11-24528
adopted - the result of a timely and responsible
consultation process in keeping with the sense of
urgency that the situation and the international
community demand. Unanimously and with
determination, the Council has conveyed a firm and
blunt message: the violence must cease and those
responsible for attacks against the population must
answer for their crimes. Thus the decision to refer the
situation to the International Criminal Court (ICC) is
most appropriate.

We have followed the escalation of the violence
and repression of the population with concern.
Colombia reiterates the urgency of stopping them and
demands that the Libyan authorities strictly comply
with their international obligations and with
international human rights law.

We unequivocally reject the calls for violence
from official sectors and condemn the violations of the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of the Libyan
people. The State must assume its primary
responsibility to guarantee the security and the rights
of its citizens, including the rights to life, freedom of
expression and peaceful assembly.

My country has maintained a firm and coherent
position in all forums where this situation has been
examined. We co-sponsored Human Rights Council
resolution A/HRC/S-15/2, which established an
international commission of inquiry into the violations
in Libya and recommended suspension of that
country's membership. Additionally, we co-sponsored
the resolution that submits that recommendation to the
General Assembly for consideration.

Libya must find ways to respond effectively to
the legitimate aspirations of its people in the search for
a more just and equitable society, in which its citizens
can freely exercise their fundamental rights and
freedoms. Reconciliation will require the establishment
of responsibility, confronting impunity and ensuring
that those who commit or have committed crimes
against humanity are brought to justice. The
international community must remain united and
continue taking measures leading to stopping the
violations that the executioners of the Libyan people
ruthlessly commit.

