Mr. Miyet: We appreciate your request, Mr.
President, for a briefing on the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), since this
gives us the opportunity to provide Council members
with a progress report on this Mission, as was
suggested by Council members during the last round of
consultations on UNMIBH in June.

Council members will recall that the Secretary-
General, in his last report on UNMIBH, which has
been circulated as document 8/2000/529, identified
police restructuring, police reform and strengthening of
the common institutions in the police sector as the
main priorities for UNMIBH. I will therefore focus my
briefing on these issues.

In the context of police restructuring, the
International Police Task Force (IPTF) Commissioner
has reduced the allowed maximum police strength in
the Federation by about 1,000, to 10,600, because of
the introduction of the State Border Service and
reduced needs in some of the smaller Federation
cantons. Meanwhile, registrations of police officers
continue, and since 2 June 2000 more than 2,800
additional officers have been registered. The Mission is
on track to conclude the full registration process by
mid-December 2000, resulting in the first transparent
and comprehensive Law Enforcement Personnel
Registry in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In parallel to the registration of the current police
officers, UNMIBH continues to assist local authorities
in fulfilling their obligations to ensure adequate
minority representation in their police forces. This is
being done by means of, first, the recruitment of
minority cadets for the police academies; secondly, the
voluntary redeployment of existing minority officers
between entities; and, thirdly, encouragement for
displaced and refugee former police officers to return
to their pre-war homes and rejoin local police forces. In
total, nearly 450 minority officers are currently
attending or have graduated from the two academies,
and 130 minority officers have been identified for
redeployment across entity lines.

To promote police reform, UNMIBH has
continued its efforts to establish police commissioners
in the Federation police, in order to create a
professional, non-partisan, civil-service type of
leadership for the police and insulate it from the direct
political influence of the Ministries of the Interior. In
canton 9 (Sarajevo), which was selected as a pilot
project, the appropriate laws have now been adopted,
and in canton 6 (Central Bosnia), canton 2 (Posavina),
and the Federation and the Republika Srpska Ministries
ofthe Interior, preparatory work has commenced.

With regard to inter-entity police cooperation and
the strengthening of the common institutions, a major
initiative was taken on 27 June with the establishment
of Joint Entity Task Forces on Illegal Immigration and
Organized Crime through the Ministerial Consultative
Meeting on Police Matters. In practical terms, the
Doboj Public Security Centre in the Republika Srpska
and the canton 2 (Posavina) Ministry of the Interior in
the Federation cooperated to break up a group involved
in drug smuggling and the production of counterfeit
deutsche marks. In the Federation, Croat and Bosniac
officers started to cooperate in the formerly divided
Mostar police in carrying out the joint investigation
and subsequent arrest of a group producing counterfeit
passports.

Inter-entity police cooperation was admirably
demonstrated at the commemoration of the 1995
Srebrenica massacre. Weeks of preparation, led by
UNMIBH and closely coordinated with the
Stabilization Force (SFOR), ensured a peaceful event
that was attended by more than 3,000 people. The
Zvornik Public Security Centre in the Republika
Srpska and the canton 3 (Tuzla) Ministry ofthe Interior
in the Federation had drafted and implemented detailed
security plans, and during the event the IPTF
monitored more than 700 Republika Srpska police
officers who were deployed to the area and were
deemed particularly effective.

(spoke in French)

A visible and significant step towards building
State institutions was the inauguration of the State
Border Service entry point at the Sarajevo airport on 6
June. Similarly, in late July and early August this same,
new Border Service opened three additional crossing
points at Doljani/Metkovic, in an area that was
formerly controlled by Croatian police; at Izacic, which
was formerly controlled by Bosniac police; and at
Zvornik, which was formerly controlled by Serb police.
There are now 358 officers assigned to the State Border
Service. Ofthis total, 176, or 49 per cent, are Bosniacs;
114, or 32 per cent, are Serbs; 67, or 19 per cent, are
Croats; and there is one "other". The opening of the
Border Service has enabled the authorities and
UNMIBH to gather reliable data on movements
through the Sarajevo airport and, in particular, on the
apparent organized use ofthe airport as a point of entry
for illegal immigration into Europe.

Meanwhile, UNMIBH's judicial system
assessment programme is finalizing its work. It has
concentrated on drafting a set of laws relating to the
police and the courts for the Brcko District. Some of
these laws have already been adopted. Similarly, the
programme has continued with its work to design a
methodology for nominating judges and prosecutors by
means of the newly established Judicial Review
Commissions. This work is being done in close
coordination with the Office of the High
Representative, which, as Council members know, is
expected to assume most of the judicial assessment
functions when UNMIBH'S mandate in this area
expires in the fall Ofthis year.

Finally, it can be reported that the returns of
minority refugees and displaced persons continue to
show progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina. These
include, in particular, returns to areas that were
formerly considered hard-line in the Republika Srpska,
with 300 Bosnian families having returned to the
Prijedor, Doboj, Visegrad and Foca municipalities. All
in all, over the last six months, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
has registered over 19,500 minority internally
displaced persons and refugees returning to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, compared to just over 2,000 returns
registered in the same period last year. Thus, the
increase is very marked here - from 2,000 last year to
more than 19,500 this year. Some Governments, in
particular those of the United States and Germany,
have provided additional resources to encourage and
sustain this return movement.

For its part, in order to facilitate this movement,
UNMIBH continues to advise the local police on
setting up security plans and at the same time monitors
the implementation of these plans, which is generally
considered to be satisfactory thus far. UNMIBH is also
working very closely within the Republika Srpska and
the cantonal Ministries of the Interior to identify and
resolve cases of illegal double activities of police
officers.

In short, and by way of assessment, it can be
noted that UNMIBH continues to move ahead
positively in the implementation of its mandate. There
has been progress in all areas, including inter-entity
law enforcement arrangements and growing day-to-day
cooperation between the Ministers of the Interior of the
Federation and of the Republika Srpska. State
institutions such as the State Border Service are
beginning to function, judicial reform is slowly gaining
ground and restructuring continues in all the entity
police forces. However, although UNMIBH has
instituted mechanisms for minority recruitment of
police officers, still more needs to be done by the local
authorities to ensure that adequate levels of minority
representation are achieved in local police forces, in
line with existing agreements.

