Mr. Babaa (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I congratulate you most sincerely, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August. I have every confidence that,
with your wisdom, skill and leadership, you will ably
guide the Council in its consideration of the important
and serious issue before it today with a view to
bringing about peace with justice, for there can be no
peace without justice.

My thanks go also to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of China, for his successful
presidency last month.

The Palestinian question and its causes, its
reasons and its consequences are well known to all, and
have been well documented in the United Nations.
There are dozens of relevant United Nations
resolutions, and prominent among them are those
adopted by the Security Council. As long as those
resolutions remain unimplemented - and
implementation includes the return of the Palestinian
people to its land and the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State - the problem will
continue to pose a threat to international peace and
security.

The core of the Palestinian problem is not the
implementation of the Mitchell plan or the Tenet
recommendations. It is the 34 years of continued
occupation that have naturally led to the violence. The
real sources of the violence are: the Zionist military
occupation; the attempts by the forces of occupation to
impose a fait accompli of occupation, settlement-
building, expulsion and annexation and to create new
facts on the ground to provide a rationale for
expanding settlements, building new ones, seizing
more land and expelling and displacing Palestinians;
the refusal of the Tel Aviv regime to honour its
commitments; and that regime's continuous violations
of international law and international humanitarian law.

The problem is that the Palestinian people
continues tenaciously to embrace its land and, in a
variety of ways, to put forth its just demand for
freedom and independence - a demand shared by all
other occupied peoples. The problem is that this
collides with the Zionist ambition to seize all
Palestinian land and create a national homeland for the
Jews in the whole of the promised land. The problem is
that, like any other indigenous people, the Palestinians
have sanctified the land of their forefathers, on which they
have lived for thousands of years; like every other people,
they can be immensely steadfast. There can be no sacrifice
too great for them as they defend what remains of their
land, despite the use of heavy artillery, F-16 aircraft, tanks,
missiles and the latest military technology against unarmed
civilians, towns, villages and other population centres.
Stones thrown by children do not deserve a response by
Apache aircraft and tanks, leading to mass killing which
does not discriminate among women, children and babies.
The result has been more than 600 Palestinians martyred,
100,000 wounded and 10,000 disabled, some of them
blinded because the occupying forces are carefully trained
to shoot their victims in the eyes.

The problem is that, in addition to this arbitrary
killing, the forces of occupation regularly bulldoze
Palestinian houses, farms and factories; seize
Palestinian land and give it to new settlers; prevent
Palestinians from working; and stop food, water and
even medicine from reaching them.

The collective punishment against them is
diversified and deftly implemented. That has led the
Palestinians to resort to throwing stones and staging
peaceful protests, which have been met with bullets,
missiles, tanks and aircraft. Psychiatric hospitals and
centres in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank are filled
with hundreds of Palestinian children suffering
psychiatric disorders because of the Israeli raids,
aggressions and brutalities that they see before them
every day. UNICEF has noted that 1,300,000
Palestinian children are living in a state of terror and
hypertension, suffering from an inability to concentrate
due to their nightly suffering from nightmares and
involuntary urination, because of the daily
bombardment of their houses and their population
centres. All these practices occur daily before the eyes
of the whole world, which does nothing about it. This
records the degree of man's cruelty towards his
brothers.

Another problem is the racist laws implemented
by the Zionist authorities in the occupied Palestinian
land, among which is the right of return, which allows
Jews everywhere in the world to immigrate and to
reside in the occupied territories, while it does not
allow the Palestinians born there, where their
forefathers lived for thousands of years, to reside there.
Such racist policies and practices have compelled them
to emigrate, which has led to the establishment of a
new apartheid regime in the Arab region. But this new
apartheid regime does not just attempt to control the
indigenous population, as was the case in South Africa,
but also seeks to expel the Palestinian people and to
seize their land and their property.

The problem is that the Zionists in Tel Aviv
consider that the Zionist project will not be completed
until a "Greater Israel" has been established on biblical
land reaching from the Nile to the Euphrates, as
symbolized by the two blue lines on the Israeli flag.
Jews are therefore brought from everywhere in the
world, whether they are 100 per cent Jewish or even 1
per cent Jewish. The important thing is to reinforce the
demographic power of the Zionist entity and reinforce
what they call their defences, while, in fact, these
offensive forces carry out the Zionist dream of
expansion.

The problem is that the brutal occupier wants
both peace and land, and he will not be capable of
getting both. Within the context of this horrible plan,
we would like to point out that the Palestinian territory
that was occupied in 1967 was called, in the
terminology of the United Nations, "the occupied
territories". The Jews complained, and it was later
called "the territories". This was part of its campaign in
every part of the world. Now they call this occupied
land the "disputed territories".

One of the problems with respect to this question
is that the Palestinians, the rightful owners, who have a
continuous history of living in this land, are not
allowed to enjoy their rights in a legal manner.
Meanwhile, the usurpers, the Israelis, those who
falsified history and created it through historical myths
with the assistance of the major Powers. At a time
when the international community is trying to bring
war criminals who have committed crimes against
humanity before the courts, we see that the war
criminal of Sabra and Shatila, who is known to all of
you, has returned to become another butcher in Gaza,
Nablus, Hebron, Khan Younis, and many other
Palestinian towns and cities. To justify this, they say he
has changed. He has said to his press that he has not
changed. In fact, he was a war criminal, and he is still a
war criminal, and he will continue to be a war criminal.

The policy of organized assassinations and
liquidations, which is implemented by the occupying
Zionist forces against the symbols of resistance, and
against unarmed civilians, is also a clear violation of
article 32 of the Fourth Geneva Convention. The death
squads sent by the occupying forces to assassinate
those they consider the leaders of the resistance to the
continuous occupation act before the eyes of the world,
in broad daylight and not at night. These are the brutal
practices of the Tel Aviv regime, which considers itself
above international law, while Palestinian prisoners are
treated as guilty and not innocent. All forms of torture
are practised against them clearly and explicitly. This
criminal conduct, this continuous policy of terrorism,
should be condemned by the international community
and by the Security Council.

The occupying force has recently occupied Orient
House and many of the buildings that represent
Palestinian sovereignty in the occupied city. If the
Security Council does not take immediate action
against the occupation of Orient House, it means it is
giving a green light to the occupying force to seize Al-
Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock, and all the
churches and all quarters of Jerusalem, and to Judaize
them. If the Council does not take any action now, it
will contradict all previous action it has taken, actions
that consider Jerusalem part of the occupied Palestinian
territory, to which the norms of international law and
the provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention apply.

In addition to the expulsion, the killing, the
starving, the assassination and destruction, the Zionists
have added another element to their racist practices.
This is the racial and ethnic contempt and despite of
Palestinians and Arabs. The British newspaper, The
Independent, on 17 April, reported how Zionist leaders
have described Arabs and Palestinians. Menachem
Begin, the former Prime Minister, described Arabs as
cattle walking on two legs, Rafael Eytan, the former
chief of staff, called them "cockroaches", Barak calls
them "crocodiles", Rehavam Zeevi, the present
Minister of Tourism, calls them "scorpions", Rabbi
Ovadia Yosef, the spiritual leader of the Shas party, and
many other rabbis have provided a religious cover for
Zionist practices and describe Palestinians and Arabs
on one occasion as "snakes and serpents", and on
another as "apes, pigs and ants" that should be
exterminated. The paper pointed out that the racist
regime in South Africa, during the days of apartheid,
did not dare to describe the blacks in South Africa
using racial epithets, but Tel Aviv does it openly and
insolently. All the countries of the world curtailed
relations with the apartheid regime. But the Tel Aviv
regime, which had excellent relations with the
apartheid regime in all spheres and, in particular, the
military sphere, was not called to account owing to
double standards, despite its racist practices and its
continuous violation of the rights of the Palestinian
people, a matter that contradicts the commitments of
the countries of the world to defend human rights and
to suspend relations with any country that continues to
violate those rights.

We have learned from the recent past that if a
Zionist kills 20 Palestinians, he is immediately
declared to be mentally disturbed. And they create a
memorial for him to sanctify him, as occurred in the
case of the criminal Goldstein at Hebron. But if a
Palestinian kills Israelis that have seized his land and
his honour, then he is considered a terrorist. This
Zionist stereotyping is a matter that the Arab world has
had to put up with for a long time, but everybody
should understand that there is no difference between
Arab blood and Jewish blood. Arab blood is not cheap
water and Jewish blood is not expensive plasma. We
are all equal.

The siege, the starvation, the killings, and the
ethnic cleansing that are now taking place in the
occupied Palestinian territories are marketed by the
Zionist campaign as the appropriate response to
Palestinian violence. In fact, what is happening now in
the Palestinian territory is similar to the massacres,
ethnic cleansing and mass expulsions that took place in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo, which required
international humanitarian intervention. The failure of
the international community and the Security Council
to intervene in the occupied Palestinian territories and
to provide protection to the Palestinians is a crime
against humanity.

The hesitation of the Security Council, which is
entrusted with the maintenance of international peace
and security, to intervene and protect the Palestinian
people not only rewards the aggressor and enables it to
continue its actions, but will encourage any future
aggressor to violate international law in other parts of
the world. That constitutes a threat to international
peace and security.

Some Zionist writers in the Zionist media try to
justify the heinous crimes against the Palestinian
people. In their articles, which are published regularly,
they use words such as "beating", "expulsion",
"attack", "destruction", "seizure" and "assassination"
in a way that encourages Zionist stereotypes of people
in the occupied Palestinian territories and promotes
ethnic cleansing and the idea of finding a final solution
in the form of extermination, transfer or expulsion.

Such writers continue to fill the media with
strange articles and to tell lies, as if the Palestinians are
the aggressors and the Zionists are the victims. They
continue to defend the inhumane and racist policies
implemented by the occupation forces against the
Palestinian people - the displacement, starvation and
humiliation - with impunity within the international
community.

A brutal Jewish campaign was launched against a
British journalist, Robert Fisk, who exposed Israeli
practices in southern Lebanon and Palestine. Fisk
pointed out that if a journalist in the West wants to
escape criticism he must follow the rules prescribed by
the Israelis - as if Israel is the party that is under
siege and occupied and the Palestinians are the party
engaging in violence and forcing their children to be
killed. Nobody asks why Israeli soldiers kill so many
children and young people. The Zionist organizations
attack anybody who tries to point out what is
happening in the occupied Arab territory.

The International Committee of the Red Cross
was harshly criticized for telling the truth and for
considering the establishment of settlements in the
occupied territories a war crime under international
humanitarian law. Human Rights Watch was likewise
criticized, as well as Amnesty International, which was
planning to introduce a comprehensive report at the
Conference against racism to be held at the end of this
month in Durban, South Africa. That report includes
details about the inhumane racist practices to which the
Palestinian people are subjected by the Zionist
occupying forces on a daily basis in the occupied
territories.

The Vienna-based organization, international
friends of humanity, has condemned the attempts to kill
Palestinian infants and children in cold blood. Even the
French organization, Reporters Without Borders, has
condemned the practices of the occupying forces
against journalists who are trying to cover events and
tragedies during the intifada in the occupied territories.
In its report of last month, it placed responsibility for
injuries to 30 journalists on the Israeli forces and called
on the occupying forces to provide them with
protection.

His Holiness the Pope has pointed out the
importance of returning to the norms of international
law, ending the seizure of land by force and
emphasizing the right of people to self-determination
and respect for the purposes and principles set out in
the articles of the Charter.
On 10 June 2001, an Israeli journalist, Gideon
Levy, wrote an article stating that Palestinian violence
is the result of occupation. He said:

"Who will state that the occupation is an act of
violence, the most terrible of all, that terrorism is
not only suicide bombers ...? ...That depriving a
whole nation of freedom of movement and
placing that nation in a prison is an act of
violence more cruel than any in the past, and stirs
a people to fight using whatever means it has?
That the incitement in the Palestinian media is not
that much worse that the incitement on Israeli
television and radio? That the present war is first
and foremost a war over Netzarim and Yitzhar,
and that if they or all the settlements did not exist
our situation would be immeasurably better? That
the roots of Palestinian terrorism have to be
sought in the Israeli occupation and not in the
Palestinians' genes?"

Israeli journalist Uri Avnery wrote in April this
year:

"The mighty Israeli army has not succeeded in
breaking the backbone of the uprising. It has tried
everything: gunship helicopters, tanks, cannons,

liquidations, destruction of whole
neighbourhoods, closure, siege, demolition of
homes, uprooting of plantations - and the
Palestinians continue to be stand on their feet and
fight."

He continued:

"The Sharon-Peres Government enjoys the

overwhelming support of the United States,

which provides it with arms and money and
exercises its veto in the Security Council on

Israel's behalf a European diplomat has said

that Israel is in practice the fifth permanent

member of the Security Council with the veto
power."

The forces of hegemony in the international
community have given the Zionist entity great powers
and continue to overlook international law; they have
not called it to account. Arab countries are still
subjected to cruel sanctions by the Security Council on
the basis of accusations that have not been proved, yet
the Israeli regime continues for half a century to violate
international law and the principles of the United
Nations Charter.

In an earlier report, the Secretary-General called
for the protection of the weak and the innocent from
the harm that results from armed conflict and for the
development of strategies to achieve those objectives
and to punish all those who violate international law.
The international community responded in the case of
Bosnia, Kosovo and East Timor, but it has done
nothing when faced with the tragedies of the people in
the occupied Palestinian territories. The Security
Council last March should have abided by its
responsibilities under the Charter and intervened to
protect the Palestinian people from the butchers and to
stop the bloodshed. But the only super-Power in the
world, which is supposed to be an honest broker,
stopped it from doing so and has given the occupying
force a green light and a licence to kill children and
other innocent people. If we want to put an end to the
volatile situation in the region, and if the Security
Council wants to maintain its credibility, the
international community and the Security Council must
intervene quickly before it is too late to save the
situation and to save the occupied Palestinian people
from their executioners.

