Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
the delegation of Cote d'Ivoire for having organized
this briefing and giving me the opportunity to address
the Security Council as outgoing Chair of the following
sanctions Committees: the Security Council Committee

pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities; the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011), on the Taliban; and the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Somalia.

Since Kazakhstan's tenure on this important body
ends on 31 December, and this is not a regular meeting
for the presentation of official reports, I should like to
take this opportunity to share some of my reflections
with the Council.

As the Chair of the 1267 and 1988 Committees, our
main objective was to ensure the full implementation of
the core mandates ofboth subsidiary bodies. In steering
the work of the Committees, Kazakhstan tried to be
transparent, followed the procedural rules strictly and
refrained from politicizing the issues.

Given the changing and evolving terrorist threat,
we are pleased that this year we managed to update
and adopt the guidelines for the conduct of the work
of the 1267 and 1988 Committees, which we hope will
greatly enhance their functioning and make it more
efficient. But my message to our successors is: do not
relax. There is plenty left to do to improve the work of
the Committees.

During the Council meeting held on 6 February (see S/PV.8175), held under the Kuwaiti presidency on the
issue of the methods of work of the Security Council, a
number of States Members of the United Nations voiced
a great deal of criticism about the closed nature of the
discussions in our sanctions Committees. In particular,
opinions were expressed on the lack of transparency of
the deliberations and the fact that it was not possible to
make objective and realistic assessments, questioning
the accountability of the Security Council. Under these
circumstances, such views should be taken seriously
and responsibly.

These issues are being partially resolved through
the current practice of the holding of regular open
briefings by the Chair for interested Member States.
This tradition of holding briefings received positive
feedback from the States that attended the meetings,
which expressed the hope that this practice would
continue. We therefore urge the Chairs that succeed us,
as well as members of the Council, to continue with this
tradition, which provides an opportunity for Member
States to interact with the Committee.
Another possible area of improvement in the
transparency of the Council's work could be to invite
interested Member States to informal Committee
meetings to hear the Chair's reports and make remarks
during a dedicated period oftime; that would strengthen
mutual trust and confidence. I believe that such an
opportunity needs to be given to any Member State
whose interests are affected by the listing of individuals
or organizations. Currently, according to the rules of
procedure, such States find themselves listed in the
documents because their territories have been used by
terrorists or terrorist groups, but this is only after the
official publication has been issued.

Such States are not able to present their evidence to
the Committee before a decision is made or to challenge
the information provided by another State, for one
simple reason: the listing State is not on speaking
terms with that country. Moreover, members of the
Committee and Monitoring Team experts are bound by
the privacy policy, which is not considered to be a fair
or transparent procedure.

In this context, transparency is essential in the work
of the Committees, particularly in the area of sanctions.
The Member States concerned should be aware of
the process of listing and delisting, contribute their
information in a way that ensures maximum objectivity
and fairness of the process, be informed on the status
of consideration of cases and be able to understand
with complete clarity the obligations that they must
fulfil. Without proper transparency, the work of the
Committees will increasingly be prone to politicization
or to the settling of scores among countries. We are
convinced that it is necessary to take every measure
to contribute to ensuring the highest standards of
transparency when the Council discusses issues that
have serious and far-reaching consequences for Member
States. This is not something new; I broached that issue
in the Committee and have discussed it previously.

In addition, the Chair's visits to select countries
enhances the engagement of the sanctions Committees
with Member States. The visits help to inform
Member States about the activities of the Committee
and ensure their knowledgeable engagement in the
Committee's work.

The 1988 sanctions Committee was specifically
designed to help the Afghan Government to bring
about peace and stability through the use of the
sanctions regime imposed on the Taliban. The regime's
effectiveness is evident because the lifting of the
sanctions on the Taliban is one of the key conditions for
the movement to start negotiations. However, the overall
effectiveness of the 1988 sanctions measures relies on
close coordination with the Government of Afghanistan
and its work on listing and delisting procedures.

Such a practice, in our opinion, will further
contribute to obtaining more accurate first-hand
information and an understanding of the current
situation on the ground, which would enable us to make
more effective use of sanctions regimes so as to begin a
peaceful dialogue in Afghanistan.

For me, the most memorable point of my
chairmanship in the Committee on Somalia and Eritrea
was my visit to the region of the Horn of Africa in
May. That visit was the first since 2010 and included a
number of significant and meaningful meetings with the
regional leadership at the highest level, United Nations
country teams and other key actors. Following the visit,
the Committee adopted important recommendations
aimed at strengthening the implementation of the
arms embargo and the charcoal ban on Somalia. The
visit resulted in a better understanding of current local
misconceptions and expectations during the sanctions
regime. I therefore encourage future Committee Chairs
to continue the practice of regularly visiting Somalia
and the region.

It must be clearly understood that the existing
sanctions regime is not a punishment for Somalia. On
the contrary, the arms embargo is a useful tool for
improving control over a large flow of weapons into the
country, through both official channels and smuggling.

On the issue of improving weapons and ammunition
management, it is important for the Secretariat and
the relevant United Nations agencies on the ground to
continue to provide support to the Somali authorities.
The Committee also should support and assist that
conflict-ravaged country in its efforts to recover
through constructive guidance, rather than punishment.
The commitment and coordinated actions of all United
Nations States Members towards the implementation of
the ban on the export of charcoal from Somalia will
also have a positive effect on the fight against terrorists
and significantly reduce their financial income.

This year's most important development - and I
hope all members of the Council will agree - was the
historic normalization of relations between the countries
of the Horn of Africa region, which was initiated and
promoted by Ethiopia. We have witnessed how peaceful
dialogue, political will and commitment to people's
best interests can dramatically change situations
between countries that have been in confrontation for
many years. It is gratifying to note that that positive
wave swept through the entire Horn of Africa region
and culminated with the lifting of sanctions on Eritrea.
My delegation had the great honour and privilege of
being part of that process. In order to preserve and
multiply those achievements, the coordinated efforts
of the African Union and the United Nations are now
needed to strengthen economic cooperation among the
countries of the region and create favourable conditions
for their prosperity. We note and support the decision of
Secretary-General Guterres to appoint a Special Envoy
for the Horn of Africa for that very reason.

I am also convinced that stricter compliance and
more complete implementation of the sanctions regime
can be ensured through more effective information
outreach and mutual understanding. In that regard, we
introduced the practice ofissuing regular press releases
on the work of the Sanctions Committee in order to
inform a wider audience about our work and, in turn,
gain further support.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation's sincere gratitude to all members of the
three Committees for their cooperation. I also express
my appreciation to the Ombudspersons, secretariats
and experts groups of all three subsidiary bodies for
their dedication and professionalism in supporting the
Chair in his daily work. I convey special gratitude to
the teams of interpreters; we would not be able to fully
carry out our activities without their help. On behalf
of our delegation, I thank all Member States for their
support and cooperation during the two years of our
country's chairmanship, especially the delegations of
Afghanistan, Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines,
Somalia, Ethiopia, Djibouti, Russia and the Regional
Anti-Terrorist Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization. I would like to assure future Chairs who
will replace Kazakhstan on the Committee concerning
ISIL, Da'esh and Al-Qaida, the Committee concerning
the Taliban and the Committee concerning Somalia
that they can count on our unwavering cooperation
at all times. We wish them every success in their
important assignments.

