Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): At the outset,
Thailand congratulates Uruguay for assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. My delegation would also like to express
its appreciation to the delegation of Uruguay for the
comprehensive concept note (S/2016/22, annex), to the
Deputy Secretary-General, the Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, as well as to
the Senior Humanitarian Policy Advisor of Oxfam, for
their substantive briefings.

Thailand aligns itself with the statement of the
Human Security Network, to be delivered by the
Permanent Representative of Slovenia.

Thailand shares the international community's
serious concern about the rising number of civilian
casualties in armed conflict. There are no legitimate
reasons that can justify deliberate attacks against
innocent civilians, including humanitarian actors, for
either military or political purposes. Please allow me
to highlight pertinent points that Thailand deems very
important.

First, the protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of host Governments. In cases where
Governments have the political will but lack the
capacity, the international community can provide
capacity-building support in addressing root causes of
conflict and in the area of preventive measures, namely,
the rule oflaw, good governance, socialjustice, security
reform, social and economic development and equality,
for instance.

Secondly, peacekeeping operations with protection
mandates are very crucial when the host Government
fails to live up to its responsibility to protect. A
mission's mandate needs to be clearly endorsed by the
Security Council. It is also important for peacekeepers
to have a clear mandate, responsibilities and chain of
command. The protection of civilians guidance and
the code of conduct under specific circumstances,
particularly when the use of force is necessary, need
to be put in place to ensure a mission's credibility
and success. Comprehensive predeployment training
and periodic in-mission training are necessary, as
recommended by the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations. Peacekeepers must also be well
equipped with knowledge of international law.

Thirdly, the allocation ofresources forpeacekeeping
missions needs to be adequate and predictable to enable
missions to fulfil their mandates efficiently.

Fourthly, the changing nature of conflicts
necessitates the protection of civilians. The Security
Council needs to assess the situation on the ground
and review the scope of the mandates of peacekeeping
missions on a regular basis based on the situation and
risk assessment provided by the Secretariat. That will
enable the Council to employ the right tool at the right
time. It is also crucial that the Council work closely with
troop-contributing countries to enhance coherence and
coordinated responses.

Fifthly, Thailand strongly supports the inclusion
of the protection-of-civilians advisers, as well as
protection officers for children and women, in
peacekeeping operations with protection mandates.
The early detection of human rights violations and
other tactics of war will save more innocent lives.

Sixthly, the increased number of civilian
casualties is a clear indication of non-compliance with
international law and universal principles. The strong
and repeated calls of the international community
on parties to conflicts, including non-State armed
groups, to uphold international human rights law and
international humanitarian law, as well as to implement
all the relevant Council resolutions have been ignored.
Thailand therefore supports the work of fact-finding
missions and commissions of inquiry, which will help
to end impunity and to hold accountable those who
have committed serious crimes against civilians.

Lastly, we see the urgent need to strengthen
coordination among relevant United Nations bodies to
protect civilians, as well as to address the root causes of
conflict. Thailand also underscores the indispensable
role of regional and subregional organizations, local
communities and civil society in that respect. Their
insights and understanding of specific situations on the
ground can contribute to the Council's swift response
to imminent threats to civilians.

In conclusion, Thailand will continue our
constructive role and close cooperation with the
international community in the important endeavour to
protect civilians and alleviate their sufferings.

