Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno for his usual comprehensive briefing, which
has brought us up to date on the situation in Kosovo.

It is no secret that our delegation has from time to
time expressed reservations about having regular
public meetings on Kosovo, if only because this does
not seem to be a practice that applies to all the major
peacekeeping operations. We seem to do it for Kosovo
and not for the others. Strangely enough, the United
Nations Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
is not even the most expensive peacekeeping operation
that we have. I was just looking at a Fifth Committee
document that came out just three weeks ago -
A/C.5/56/45 - that gives the appropriations for 2002-
2003 for peacekeeping operations. The most expensive
peacekeeping operation listed there is the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, with a budget of $699
million. The second most expensive peacekeeping
operation is the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which gets
$608 million per year. UNMIK is now number three,
with $344 million per year. East Timor has gone down
to fourth place. So why are we giving, in a sense,
greater public attention to Kosovo?

At the same time, what is paradoxical about the
situation in Kosovo is that we have public debates
without public scrutiny. We seem to take a snapshot of
the situation in Kosovo each time, but we seem to do
little evaluation of long-term trends and our directions
with regard to Kosovo. That is why I think that
members who have heard us speak on Kosovo before
have noticed that we always ask the question: What is
our destination?

The reason we are very pleased to speak today is
that to some extent the answer has finally been
provided to us, first, of course, in a Council meeting
two months ago, by Mr. Steiner in his statement to the
Council. When he talked about the benchmark process,
he said:

"Attaining these benchmarks is an objective
in itself. Kosovo can advance towards a fair and
just society only when these minimum
preconditions are met and when these changes in
institutions are sustainable even without an
international presence.

"I offer this to the Council as an exit
strategy, which is, in reality, an 'entry strategy'
into the European integration process. The
benchmarks complement the preconditions that
Kosovo needs to meet to qualify for the
stabilization and association process."
(S/PV4518, p. 4)

The good news is that Mr. Steiner did not just
stop at what he said in those two paragraphs. He
actually has gone much further and has now published
an article in Focus Kosovo, which has, fortunately,
been circulated to us this morning and which I was
reading before the debate began. It is worth quoting
what he says in that remarkable document:

"One of my main responsibilities in
implementing resolution 1244 is to design a
process to determine Kosovo's future status. We
will not be able to get to this stage until Kosovo's
society and institutions show that they are ready.
Therefore, we must spell out what is required in
order to get there. This is why I have devised a
series of benchmarks that will identify what
needs to be done before we can launch the
discussions on status. Kosovo can only advance
towards a fair and just society when these
minimum preconditions are met. First standards,
then status. These standards also mirror those that
are required to be considered for integration into
Europe. On the one hand, they represent the
beginnings of an exit strategy for the international
community, but they are also in reality an entry
strategy into Europe." (Focus Kosovo, April 2002, p. 5)

The thing I found most remarkable is that he goes
beyond those general words to spell out an extremely
detailed set of benchmarks of a kind that probably I
had not seen for any other United Nations operation,
touching on areas such as functioning democratic
institutions, the rule of law, freedom of movement and
reintegration, and even touching on the sensitive
subject of the dialogue with Belgrade, where he refers
normal relations with Belgrade and eventually with
other neighbouring areas.

I do not know whether it is a practice for the
Security Council occasionally to send letters of
commendation, but I think that Mr. Steiner deserves
one for spelling out such detailed benchmarks for us.
Of course, I do not want in any way to suggest that
other Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
do not do equally good work. But Sergio Vieiro de
Mello has done good work. But uit is important to
commend officials when good work is provided to us.

Equally important, if such an innovation is found
to be useful in Kosovo, the question is whether or not
we can apply it to other operations also. I say this
knowing, of course, that Kosovo has not up to now
been one of the most successful files of the Security
Council. I think that the prize for this, as we said in the
final wrap-up session in December last year has to go
to operations like East Timor, Sierra Leone and maybe
Bosnia and Herzegovina. But with this development we
have an innovation that is actually very helpful and
very constructive, and which we hope will be shared
with others.
I also want to add there that when Mr. Steiner put
forward these benchmarks, he did not put them forward
in a mechanical fashion. He actually put them forward
within a larger vision that he had for the future.

I shall quote from some remarks he made in his
article, which in a sense provide the backdrop for these
benchmarks. He quotes the Sufi poet Jelaluddin Rumi.
"Some people say," Rumi wrote, "there is no road to
the mountain, and no mountain either." Mr. Steiner
goes on to say:

"For me the mountain, whose existence was
being questioned by all those who had voted in
November's elections, was a peaceful and self-
sustaining Kosovo. The road to it was the
development of a Government and civic ethos
committed to cultural pluralism and the rule of
law. Happily, the events of the past three months
has proved beyond any reasonable doubt that both
the mountain and the road to it do indeed exist.

at

"But this mountain also belongs to the range
that is Europe. Yes, it is sometimes cut off from
the rest of the range by inclement weather so that
the other mountains seem all but unreachable. But
weather cannot change the fundamentals of
geography; all the roads to Kosovo pass through
Europe." (p. 4)

So, he is also articulating a larger vision for where we
should be heading on Kosovo.

I hope in future discussions on the subject, since
we are going to meet every month to discuss Kosovo,
that we will reflect on both the benchmarks and the
vision that Mr. Steiner has given to us and also on how
much progress we are making in terms of achieving
what he has set up for us.

