Mr. Takasu (Japan): At the outset, Mr. President,
I would like to express my appreciation to you for
having convened today's debate on small arms. We are
grateful also to Ms. Hannelore Hoppe for her
introduction of the Secretary-General's report on small
arms (S/2008/258). The report serves as a valuable
guidepost for our discussion.

Conflicts are now fought primarily with small
arms and light weapons. The international community
must make every effort to end the illicit trade in small
arms in order to bring about peace and development in
post-conflict countries.

The question of small arms and light weapons
requires a multidisciplinary approach, as they threaten
human security at the nexus of peace and development.
The widespread use of small arms results in a large
number of casualties and prolongation of armed
conflicts. It also gives rise to socio-economic problems
such as child soldiers and disruption of post-conflict
peacebuilding and recovery efforts.

Japan has already participated actively in United
Nations efforts to tackle the issue of small arms and
light weapons and has taken the initiative to promote a
General Assembly resolution on this issue almost every
year since 1995. Since 2001 we have worked together
with Colombia and South Africa for the same cause.

We are convinced that it is essential to implement
effectively the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade of Small Arms
and Light Weapons. Within this framework, Japan
welcomes in particular the adoption of the International
Tracing Instrument in 2005 and the submission of the
report on illicit brokering by the Group of
Governmental Experts in 2007 (A/62/163 and Corr. 1 ).

The most important task before us in this context
is to make real progress in implementing the
Programme of Action and the International Tracing
Instrument. For that purpose I suggest two things.
First, we should make full use of the biennial review of
the implementation of the Programme of Action at the
meeting of States. We hope that the third biennial
meeting of States, in July, will be successful, because it
would provide an opportunity for substantive and
action-oriented discussion on priority issues such as
international cooperation and assistance, illicit
brokering, stockpile management and disposal of
surplus. Secondly, international cooperation and
assistance should be strengthened to support the needs
of countries and regional organizations in building
their capacity.

For our part, Japan has been active in supporting
promotion of the International Tracing Instrument,
including supporting the recent subregional workshop
for Central and West Africa. Japan has also assisted
projects in many countries, including in Asia and
Africa, to build national, regional and subregional
capacity for collection; stockpile management and
destruction of illicit small arms and light weapons;
import and export controls; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; and security sector
reform.

Regional and subregional dimensions need to be
strengthened and emphasized for effective
implementation. Most recently, through the Economic
Community of West African States, we supported the
establishment of national commissions in Sierra Leone,
Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire to tackle the illicit
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. In
selecting and implementing projects, we should
coordinate more effectively to match the needs of
States with available resources and to achieve tangible
results.

I would like to touch on another effort to end the
illicit trade and to regulate the transfer of small arms.
As a non-exporter of weapons, Japan attaches
importance to transfer controls to prevent the illicit
trade of small arms and light weapons. We therefore
support the initiative to promote a comprehensive,
legally binding instrument establishing common
international standards for the import, export and
transfer of conventional arms. An arms trade treaty
would be a valuable initiative in that regard.

We welcome the fact that the Security Council
continues to pay utmost attention to the illicit trade in
small arms as one important cause of insecurity, with
valuable input from the Secretary-General.

