Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I join others in
expressing our heartfelt condolences to our Swedish
colleagues on the terrorist act in Stockholm.

My delegation is greatly concerned by recent
developments and the absence of unity among Security
Council members over the chemical attack in Syria.
We would like to make the following observations
and recommendations on the critical political aspects
pertaining to the situation in Syria.

We call on all parties concerned to refrain from
actions that could increase the risks of a military
escalation of tensions in Syria. We would like to
emphasize that the lack of unanimity may destroy the
new hopes of the Syrian people that arose following the
adoption of the historical resolution 2336 (2015). We
should not undermine an inclusive political negotiating
process, as provided for in resolution 2254 (2015).
The fifth round of intra-Syrian talks, held in Geneva
from 23 to 31 March, were able this time to move
from discussing formal and procedural issues to the
substantive and political aspects of future peace talks.
In that regard, we simply cannot allow a ceasefire to
dissolve, as it is our last chance to realize the long-
awaited peace on Syrian territory.

We consider the gas attacks in Syria to be a crime
against humanity, and we strongly condemn the use of
chemical weapons. It is important to conduct a thorough,
objective and impartial investigation into all aspects of
the chemical attack on Khan Shaykhun on 4 April, which
will make it possible for the international community
to render a fair verdict against the perpetrators, in full
compliance with international law.

We would like to remind members of the Council
that the principled position of Kazakhstan is not only
the most severe condemnation of the use of weapons of
mass destruction by any party, especially against the
civilian population, but also the resolution of conflicts
exclusively by peaceful means. We also have to respect
the sovereignty of States that are States Members of
the United Nations and the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. More
important, we urgently need a political solution. Only
a political diplomatic solution can bring about peace in
Syria, and we call upon the international community to
exert political will to overcome their differences and
negotiate peace and Syria.

The legitimate authorities of the Syrian Arab
Republic and other parties must thoroughly execute
their obligations of complying with the relevant
recommendations made by Organization by the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the
United Nations by accepting the personnel designated
by them, while providing for and ensuring the security
of activities undertaken by the personnel. In that regard,
they must provide staff with immediate and unfettered
access to, and the right to inspect, any and all sites in
carrying out their functions, and allow immediate and
unfettered access to individuals whom the OPCW has
grounds to believe to be of importance for the purpose
of its mandate.

The crisis in Syria, which is still unfolding, is
having an impact not only on the region, but on the
whole international community. Kazakhstan therefore
believes that a regional approach involving neighbouring
countries with influence on the parties in the Syrian
conflict should be considered as a very effective method
in mitigating the situation and preventing deterioration.
There is a strong need to continue supporting the aims
of the Astana talks and further Geneva negotiations
in order to see positive outcomes. We welcome the
significant results of the successful ministerial-level
conference held in Brussels in April, chaired by the
European Union and the United Nations and attended
by many international governmental organizations and
non-governmental organizations. The pledges made
are encouraging and send a message of solidarity
to the people of Syria and all those impacted by the
conflict. The pledges made at the meeting will increase
the amount of the much-needed essential humanitarian
assistance provided to the Syrian people, which is most
important element to achieve our political objectives.

Finally, I will conclude by quoting Secretary-
General Guterres who, at the opening plenary meeting
of the Brussels conference on the theme "Supporting the
future of Syria and the region", said, "the most difficult
times call for the greatest efforts". And, I would add,
and also the greatest of compromises.

