Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
First, my country welcomes your return, Sir, and the
fact that you are presiding over this public meeting of
the Security Council. We congratulate China on the
political process it conducted through its Party
Congress.

My delegation wants to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Kieran
Prendergast, for the information he has just given the
Council in his briefing on developments in the situation
in Bougainville. I also wish to express my country's
recognition of the work of the representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Noel Sinclair, head of the
United Nations Political Office in Bougainville, and of
his staff. We also recognize the work and support of
Governments that have participated in the Peace
Monitoring Group: the Governments of Australia, Fiji,
New Zealand and Vanuatu.

I also reiterate Mexico's support for the peace
process and our wish that all the parties concerned will
continue to work for a peaceful and definitive solution
to the conflict. We also support continued cooperation
by the United Nations and the international community
as a whole with the Bougainville authorities in order to
achieve the economic and social recovery of that
country.

In that context, my country emphasizes how
important it would be for the Security Council to
appeal to donor countries to support the establishment
of the economic and social conditions and
infrastructure conducive to consolidating a peaceful
transition towards Bougainville's political future.

My country is concerned at the delays and
obstacles to the process in Bougainville, on which Mr.
Prendergast has fully briefed us. We believe that it is
essential that this process be completed and that it
would be desirable to conclude the process within the
deadlines established for it. One crucial element for
meeting those deadlines is the complete
implementation of the weapons disposal plan which is
under way, in the circumstances that have been
reported to us.

There are therefore a few questions that we would
like to ask Mr. Prendergast on the possible impact of
that delay. We wish to emphasize the possible impact
that a delay in weapons collection might have on the
very process of drafting the constitution and on the
establishment of the autonomous government. What
would be the consequences of a delay in the work of
the Consultative Committee and of a delay in meeting
the deadlines set for the adoption of the constitution
and the holding of elections leading to establishment of
autonomous government, taking into consideration that
elections are planned to be held, as Mr. Prendergast
recalled, by the end of June 2003? Some authorities in
Papua New Guinea, for example the Minister for Inter-
Governmental Affairs, have said that as of now it
seems unlikely that that date will be met. What are the
prospects in view of this likely failure to meet this
schedule, and what would be the consequences of the
above-mentioned delay on the conclusion of the work
of the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB) and of the Peace Monitoring Group?

In addition, my Government wonders what might
happen if some members of the Peace Monitoring
Group were to withdraw before the scheduled dates.
Once again we thank Under-Secretary Prendergast for
the information he has given us.

