Mr. Menkveld (Netherlands): I align myself with
the statement to be delivered later today by the observer
of the European Union (EU).

I thank the Egyptian presidency for its excellent
and detailed concept note (S/2016/428, annex) on this
pivotal subject.

In this short statement, I would like to address
the three main phases of the continuum of conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and sustaining peace.

On conflict prevention, we need to get better. Let
me highlight mediation in particular. We must learn
from successes, but also from cases that did not bring
about the desired results because responsibilities
and strategies were not well enough coordinated and
undermined mediation efforts. The United Nations
and the African Union (AU) have strengthened their
mediation systems. The AU regularly deploys special
envoys and negotiators. The Department of Political
Affairs (DPA), too, has become more effective, and
its work is in high demand. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands has increased its contribution to DPA by
25 per cent, which brings it to $1.25 million a year.

We finance the Clingendael Mediation Facility,
which trains groups of senior AU African women
mediators together with the Department of International
Relations and Cooperation, UN-Women and the AU.
The women are also supported to develop a sustainable
network, gain access to resources and increase their
own expertise and skills set, thereby strengthening the
position of women in peace processes.

On peacekeeping, the growing role played by the
AU in crisis situations on the African continent is
encouraging and inspiring, thanks to the African Peace
and Security Architecture. When missions are rehatted,
the process is arduous. More institutionalized and
practical cooperation between the AU and the United
Nations could improve that process. In the words of the
Secretary-General, we need

"to move away from improvisation in how we work
together." (S/2015/582, para. 30)

On sustaining peace, the post-conflict phase
requires an integrated approach with a coherent and
cooperative attitude towards African initiatives from
both the United Nations and the EU. An example of
increased EU-United Nations-AU collaboration on
security sector reform (SSR) serves to illustrate that.
The three organizations jointly worked on strategies
and experiences and plans to jointly boost SSR efforts
in the Central African Republic, Guinea-Bissau and
Madagascar. We are proud to contribute and stand
ready to support similar joint SSR-efforts in Mali and
Somalia. Such efforts should keep in mind long-term
reconstruction and development needs, in line with the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and the AU Agenda 2063 for
African development.

In conclusion, a new form of cooperation between
the AU and the United Nations must be worked out in
every phase of the continuum. In that regard, apermanent
African presence on the Security Council may not be
without merit. We hope that the joint AU-United Nations
framework for an enhanced partnership will succeed
in institutionalizing the strategic partnership between
both organizations, thereby creating the conditions for
an equal partnership between the AU and the United
Nations with a common understanding of threats to
international peace and security. The presence of
ambassadors from the AU Peace and Security Council in
the Chamber today is a great step in that direction. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands, a partner of the Council
for peace, justice and development, is committed to
supporting such cooperation.

