Mr. Heinbecker (Canada): I would like to join
the representative of the United Kingdom in expressing
our serious concern at the arrest of two Canadians and
two Britons, who have been held without consular
access for nine days. Suspicions of espionage and
terrorism are unfounded. If every tourist who arrived in
our country, or in any of the other countries represented
at this table, was immediately regarded as a spy or a
terrorist, we would not have the facilities to hold them.
The appropriate thing to do in the circumstances is to
issue a visa or to impose a fine.

These types of accusations put at risk personnel
working for the United Nations. This is not a concern
just for Canada, the United Kingdom and the Dutch.
People who work for the United Nations are vulnerable
and, as we have seen, can be subject to political
manipulation. We look forward to an appropriately
quick conclusion of this issue and a prompt release of
the detainees.

Turning to the question of Kosovo, the
Government of Canada welcomes the signing of the
Airlie Declaration by representatives of the Serb and
Albanian communities as an important step forward in
the long march towards reconciliation. We strongly
encourage the parties to continue.

The Government of Canada commends the
recently issued United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) regulation on the self-
governance of municipalities in Kosovo. By granting a
wide range of responsibilities to municipalities, this
regulation lays the foundation for local democracy,
which we hope will begin to take root with the
municipal elections in October. The municipal election
law and the law governing campaign financing are
important measures in ensuring that the fall elections
will be free and fair.

We do not hide our disappointment at the level of
registration of Kosovo Serbs on the electoral lists for
the upcoming municipal elections, but we believe that
the registration process was successfully managed, and
we commend the efforts undertaken by UNMIK in that
regard. The challenges UNMIK faces in organizing
free and fair elections are serious. UNMIK needs the
support of the international community, which is
essential to the process.

Ongoing, intensive security measures will be
crucial in the upcoming months. The Government of
Canada condemns the upsurge of violence and
intimidation seen these days in Kosovo. We believe,
however, that we must continue to impress upon the
Kosovo Serbs that full participation is the best
guarantee for their community, and for all
communities, to be fairly represented in the public
administration and to contribute to the shaping of their
own futures in that province.

As to the Trepca metallurgical smelting complex,
we support Mr. Kouchner's decision to close it down.
Such levels of atmospheric pollutants would not be
tolerated in Canada. The people in Kosovo - be they
Serb or Albanian - deserve, and indeed need, the
same kind of protection.

