Ms. Power (United States of America): Let me
start by paying tribute to Special Representative Laj
for her briefing, but above all for her more than two
years of service in one of the most difficult Missions on
the planet. We could tell, from our two trips to South
Sudan - one at the beginning of her deployment and the
other, recently, at the tail end of her deployment 4 just
how much of herself she had invested in the Mission.
We saw the kind of relationship she had with local South
Sudanese staff, many of them terrified by the events
unfolding around them, the relationship she managed to
have even through difficult times with Government and
opposition actors and the respect that people in civil
society had for her.

For me watching Special Representative Laj
dodge bullets in July, stay to be with the people of
South Sudan, open the United Nations gates with the
support of the Secretary-General and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, and shelter local staff
who feel that they have no place to go or sleep other
than under their desks because they were so afraid was
reflective of her bravery but also of her compassion for
the people of that country. She will be missed by a lot
of people.

I thank the Special Adviser to the Secretary-
General on the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Dieng, for
taking the trip that he took and for when he took it,
his candour and the level of the detail in his briefing,
as well as the knowledge that he brings from other
contexts and history. I believe that it is chastening for
us all. I thank Ambassador Seck for his leadership of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan and his dark briefing,
which was in keeping with the general tenor here today.

South Sudan is a nation on the precipice. As
Mr. Dieng said upon completing his Visit to the country
last week, there is "a strong risk of violence escalating
along ethnic lines with the potential for genocide".
When the United Nations designated Special Adviser
on the Prevention on Genocide reaches the conclusion
that genocide might be imminent, it should serve as a
wake-up call for us all. As he so aptly put it last week
in Juba, all the ingredients exist for the already horrific
violence to escalate dramatically. Let me touch upon a
few of those ingredients.

First, as has been stressed by our briefers, we
have seen violence escalating not merely along
political lines - which was bad enough - but also
now dramatically along ethnic lines. This is not an
assessment that anyone reaches lightly. It is an empirical
assessment from a range of credible sources, including
the Panel of Experts on South Sudan, the Secretary-
General, serious independent human rights groups and
independent journalists. We heard this ourselves with
our own ears from petrified and thoroughly unscripted
civilians. As just one example * unfortunately, there
are too many - Sara Kakuni, who fled her village on
the outskirts of Yei, is now living in a refugee camp in
Uganda from where a lot of our information is coming
because reporters are able to debrief those who arrive
there often with nothing more than the shirts on their
backs. This young women told a reporter that she and
her two young daughters were kept awake at night by
gun shots. She said,

"[w]hen it stops, that is when they are slaughtering
people with knives and pangas. Dinkas will open
your door and kill you if you do not have their
tribal scars".

This is the ethnic dimension.

Secondly, we do not have adequate forces in place
to stop mass atrocities should the violence continue to
escalate, as all those who watched South Sudan closely
deem likely. The Secretary-General has said that even
if the soldiers and police personnel deployed in the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan were to use
all necessary means to protect civilians under attack,
as the Security Council has mandated them to do,
they "do not have the appropriate reach, manpower or
capabilities to stop mass atrocities" (5/2016/95], p. 16).
And that is a big "if" because, as we all know, the South
Sudanese Government continues to block peacekeepers
from conducting the basic operations, such as the
routine patrols that are necessary to even have a chance
of protecting civilians. Many troop contributors cannot
get access to their equipment. They are either delayed
or blocked. These are capabilities that are being
systematically denied to those who are there.

Even if they had them, the Secretary-General
assesses that they would not be enough. The shortage
of appropriate manpower is in part because the South
Sudanese Government also continues to stand in the
way of the deployment of the 4,000-strong Regional
Protection Force to Juba, which the Council authorized
more than three months ago - a force whose
deployment would give an important and much needed
boost to the 14,000 soldiers and police officers who are
currently deployed.

The third ingredient involves a growing climate,
which we have seen, of incitement, fear and intimidation.
Government officials openly threaten journalists, as
when the Minister of Cabinet Affairs, Martin Lomuro,
with whom we met in Juba, told journalist at a press
conference in September, "[i]f you are going to say
something which is not correct... we will go after you,
whichever hole you are in". When the Council visited
the country that same month, we heard directly from
civil society leaders, felt their palpable sense of fear
and, in many instances, were made aware of the threats
that they received because of their work. A group that
calls itself the Angry Youth of former Northern Bhar
el-Ghazal posted the following message on Facebook
directed at civilians in the southern Equatoria region:

"We are going to take a quick revenge attack against
Equatorians anywhere and anyplace from now on.
We will find you and kill you. We will despicably
and barbarically kill you."

If these were just words or incitement, that would be
one thing, but as another recent example - once again,
I stress that are too many - 20-year-old Abraham
Aloro was recently interviewed in the Bidibidi refugee
camp in Uganda shortly after fleeing an attack on his
home town of Yei, the same town as Ms. Kakuni's.
Aloro said,

"[a]bout two weeks ago, soldiers came to my
brother Emmanuel's house at night and demanded
that he open the door. They accused him ofjoining
the rebels. He had not, but they cut him to death
with pangas, that is machetes".

Aloro's brother was 24-years-old.

And yet those who perpetrate these attacks, hack
innocent civilians to death, burn down their homes,
rape women, conscript men and young boys to fight
and threaten journalists and human rights defenders
enjoy nearly total impunity. The same goes for those
who incite others to carry out such hateful acts. The
message that the Government sends by not holding
them accountable is crystal clear: "Keep at it; keep
doing what you are doing".

The ingredients that I have described and that
others have in more powerful and greater detail are ones
that create a climate conducive to massive atrocities.
With each of these factors, we are reminded of all of
the warnings that the United Nations missed or saw but
chose to ignore in places like Srebrenica and Rwanda
in the 1990s. Given the accumulation of warnings,
we have lost the right individually and collectively to
act surprised in the face of even greater atrocities in
South Sudan. None of us can say that we did not see
it coming. The question therefore for us is - what
will we do? We can start by acknowledging the deeply
precarious situation on the ground and the fact that
the international community's current approach is not
stopping the cycle of violence.

Let us not treat the leaders of South Sudan as
though they are responsible and credible interlocutors
but engage them as the cynical actors whom they
unfortunately have shown themselves to be, too often
putting their short-sighted personal interests above
the welfare of millions of their own people who are
suffering. Let us stop asking for permission to carry
out a mandate authorized by the Security Council in
the interest of peace and security and, instead, start
demanding it to unite around that message and mandate.
Let us stop acting as if the principle of sovereignty, as
critical as it is to the functioning of the international
order, gives the South Sudanese Government or any
Government license to commit mass atrocities against
its own people or fuel a humanitarian crisis that has left
millions of lives hanging in the balance.

In the coming days, the United States will put
forward a proposal to impose an arms embargo on South
Sudan and targeted sanctions on the individuals who
have been the biggest spoilers to achieve lasting peace
in the country. In the interest of the people of South
Sudan and the region, this constitutes an important step
towards curbing the ongoing violence perpetrated by
the Government and opposition forces against civilians.
Let me anticipate some of the comments that we will
hear today from countries expressing scepticism with
regard to these steps.

First, we know that no embargo can completely
stop weapons from entering the country. To state the
obvious, we also know that an arms embargo will not
remove those weapons already in South Sudan, but
an arms embargo could have a significant impact on
the ground, particularly with regard to preventing the
acquisition of arms that occurs daily. As we sit here,
more arms are flowing into that country, including the
acquisition of heavy weapons, aircraft and military
vehicles that have been used to inflict such devastating
violence in the conflict and were used in the conflict
in Juba in July, during which United Nations staff,
including our Special Representative and others, had
to take shelter and duck the incoming gun fire aimed
at them.

As the crisis escalates, we should all flash forward
and ask ourselves how we will feel if Adama Dieng's
warnings come to pass. We will wish we had done
everything we could to hold spoilers and perpetrators to
account and limit to the maximum extent that we could
the inflow of weapons. As we have learned elsewhere,
an arms embargo is effective if there is a broad and
robust commitment to its enforcement. Imposing
new targeted sanctions designations will isolate the
individuals who have consistently been responsible for
the acts that have brought South Sudan to this moment
and caused so much suffering. Such sanctions will limit
the ability of such individuals to travel freely as they
are doing now across the region or to move assets that
could be used to fund further violence. There is no
good reason why we would not deprive those who have
shown a willingness to commit mass atrocities of the
means of doing it more efficiently.

There is also no good reason why we should not try
to prevent at least some weapons from getting into the
hands of people who have consistently used them to kill
innocent men, women and children. Those who have
argued against taking such modest steps in the face ofa
conflict that has so many ingredients of mass atrocities
have honestly had months to show that an alternative
approach can work and help those people on our visit
who cried out for our support for those actions. The
approach we have been pursuing has been an approach
of dialogue, of patience, of waiting for the next South
Sudanese Government Cabinet meeting or the next
letter to the Security Council - letters that include
happy talk and bureaucratic language but describe no
material change in the Government's behaviour. They
are letters that also include falsehoods, including, as
we saw yesterday, and as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General just reminded us, blatant
misrepresentations.

The United States advocates continuing our
engagement. We agree with all those who stress that
dialogue is critical. However, we must complement
that engagement with steps that show a far greater
seriousness of purpose and steps that show that the
Council means what it says and intends to actually
perform the mission that was given to us, which was to
enforce international peace and security, support our
peacekeepers, take seriously the warning of multiple
United Nations officials and protect civilians in
desperate need.

