Mr. Grauls (Belgium): I thank you, Sir, for
allowing my delegation to take the floor during this
debate and for Germany's leadership on this issue.
Belgium aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union. My delegation also
fully supports what was said on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.

Like so many other delegations, my delegation
would like to take this opportunity to express our
sincere and profound gratitude and admiration for
the work of former Special Representative Radhika
Coomaraswamy. Her efforts and commitment have
greatly contributed to the advancement of the issue of
children and armed conflict on the United Nations and
indeed the international agenda.

My delegation would also like to congratulate
Ms. Leila Zerrougui on her recent appointment as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. As a long-term supporter
of the mandate, Belgium and my delegation are looking
forward to working closely with her and with her office.

We welcome the annual report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/261), as well as the report prepared by
Ambassador De La Sabliere, whom my delegation would
also like to commend. Ambassador De La Sabliere was
one of the first supporters of the cause of children in
armed conflict and his commitment is unabated to this
day. The annual report of the Secretary-General speaks
of progress made and of challenges that remain in
addressing grave violations committed against children
in armed conflict. It is a balanced but realistic approach
to that important issue.

Important successes have indeed been achieved
towards preventing the commission of grave violations,
by the signing of several new action plans, which are
key tools in protecting children from current and future
abuse. Belgium was particularly satisfied to learn from
the Special Representative's statement to the Human
Rights Council last week that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has committed itself
to the signing of an action plan with the United Nations
to end the recruitment of and sexual violence against
children in the security services of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. My delegation does hope that
this commitment will materialize soon.

Significant progress has also been made in the fight
against impunity. The conviction of Thomas Lubanga
by the International Criminal Court on the issue of
child recruitment can undoubtedly be considered as a
landmark judgment in the efforts to combat impunity.

But there are also challenges. And the biggest
challenge lies, no doubt, in the increasing number of
persistent perpetrators who deliberately continue to
ignore the resolutions of the Security Council. In our
opinion, the Security Council has no other option than
to increase even further the pressure on those persistent
perpetrators of grave violations against children and
to continue considering the application of targeted
measures against the criminals. That is simply an issue
of accountability for grave Violations against children,
and as we all know accountability is a deterrent.

Belgium also shares the concern of the Secretary-
General and the Special Representative concerning
the use of explosive weapons, especially in densely
populated areas. We deplore that explosive weapons
have been used in direct physical attacks against
schools and hospitals. Those acts constitute a grave
violation of children's rights. Belgium strongly
supports the concrete recommendations made by the
Special Representative regarding the use of explosive
weapons with wide-area effect in populated areas,
and calls for the universalization of the relevant
international instruments, including the Conventions
on the prohibition of antipersonnel mines and cluster
munitions.
Belgium also welcomes the increased cooperation
on the issue of children in armed conflict with regional
organizations, such as the European Union and NATO,
in particular in the field of training, awareness-raising
and conduct of operations.

My delegation encourages Ms. Zerrougui to
strengthen this type of cooperation with other
organizations, such as the African Union, the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.

Lastly, Belgium wishes to reiterate its support
for the joint universal ratification campaign of the
Special Representative, UNICEF and the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. My delegation
encourages all States that have not yet done so to ratify
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement on children in armed
conflict.

I have two final comments. First, Belgium would
like to launch an appeal to the wider United Nations
membership, and to the members of the Security
Council in particular, to support, without any hesitation
or reluctance, the mandate of the Special Representative
as it stands. The interests of children worldwide will
only be served, and their rights protected, when children
at last cease to be helpless victims in the cynical game
of power politics.

Let me also react to statements we have heard in
this Chamber with regard to national sovereignty. For
my country, it is crystal clear that sovereignty, as a
matter of principle, should never, ever be invoked in
order to deprive children of the protection they deserve,
since sovereignty is a means for a State to protect its
own citizens, whatever their age. Allowing the United
Nations access in situations of concern, and allowing
it to report and verify incidents of violations against
children, is, in Belgium's View, merely part of a correct
implementation of the sovereignty principle.

