After almost 10 years of conflict, the Syrian people continue to suffer from aggression, foreign occupation and terrorism. Through unlawful occupation, inhumane sanctions and the politicization of the return of refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs), and by preventing international support for Syria's reconstruction, certain countries are responsible for the prolongation of the conflict as they attempt to impose their own will on the Syrian people. Such attempts are unlawful and immoral and doomed to fail. The Syrian crisis can be settled only through political means, and the right to determine the future of Syria belongs exclusively to the Syrians. The international community should assist them in realizing that right. This means that the sovereignty, political independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria must be fully respected by all. Any separatist agendas as well as illegitimate self-rule initiatives must be rejected, and all foreign forces whose presence is not permitted by the Syrian Government must leave Syria. In that context, the full, immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the United States forces from Syria is essential. Instead of combating terrorism, they continue to support United Nations-designated terrorist groups such as the Al-Nusra Front - Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham - as well as to loot the oil and wealth of the Syrian people. The combat against terrorists in Syria must be continued until the total elimination of the threat that they pose. Obviously, this must be done with the utmost care for the lives of civilians. Terrorists must not be allowed to continue taking a large number of civilians as hostages or to turn places such as Idlib into a safe haven for themselves. We strongly condemn Israel's continued acts of aggression against Syria's sovereignty. The occupation of the Syrian Golan by Israel is unlawful, and the recognition of its annexation to Israel by the United States is null and void. The recent provocative visit to the Syrian Golan by the United States Secretary of State was designed to legitimize the annexation. The Golan is and will remain part and parcel of Syrian territory. Underlining the importance of a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned and United Nations-facilitated political process, we continue to support the efforts of the United Nations and Special Representative of the Secretary-General Pedersen for a political settlement of the Syrian crisis. Iran will spare no effort to that end. In that context, useful consultations, including on the work of the Constitutional Committee, took place during the recent visit of Mr. Pedersen to Tehran, where he met with our Minister for Foreign Affairs and other high-ranking officials. We support the Constitutional Committee, which must operate without any external interference or pressure or the setting of any artificial deadline for the conclusion of its work, and are hopeful that the true interests of the Syrian people will prevail over all other interests. Parallel to the political process, international efforts must continue to facilitate Syria's reconstruction and the safe and voluntary return of refugees and IDPs to their original places of residence in Syria. As an important effort in that regard, we welcome the international conference on the return of Syrian refugees held on 11 and 12 November in Damascus, which, unfortunately, was boycotted by some countries that politicize almost every issue related to ending the conflict, the return of refugees and Syria's reconstruction. The interests of millions of Syrian refugees must not be held hostage for political gain by certain Powers. As the Syrian people are facing the challenges of conflict and the coronavirus disease pandemic, failing to assist the return of refugees will only increase and prolong their suffering, which has already been intensified owing to the imposition of inhumane unilateral sanctions by the United States. The international community should not leave the Syrian people alone in their struggle to overcome the threats of terrorism and foreign occupation as well as that of economic terrorism resulting from those unlawful sanctions.
