Mr. Acharya (Nepal): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of January. I
also take this opportunity to express my sincere
appreciation to you for providing me with this
opportunity to speak before the Council for the first
time since taking up my assignment here.

Through a formal note dated 9 January 2010, I
have conveyed to the Secretary-General the decision of
the Government of Nepal to request the extension of
the duration of the current mandate and the
continuation of the related works of the United Nations
Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) until 15 May 2010. In
seeking the extension of UNMIN to that date, the
Government of Nepal has given due consideration to
the current transitional situation of the country and has
recognized the important role played by UNMIN in
providing support and facilitation within its mandate to
our nationally driven peace process.

We have taken note of the report of the Secretary-
General on UNMIN (S/2010/ 17), which highlights
UNMIN's assessment of the situation in Nepal over the
past six months. I would like to express my thanks to
Ms. Karin Landgren, Representative of the Secretary-
General in Nepal and head of UNMIN - as she said,
we work together in Nepal - for her statement on
recent developments in Nepal.

In the context of the consistent evolution of the
situation, I would like to inform the Council on the
latest situation in the country and provide our
perspective on the overall course of the peace process.

The Council is aware that we are going through a
transition from a 10 year-long conflict to sustainable
peace and stability with a nationally driven peace
process. This has received wide support and
cooperation from the international community. Since
June 2006, we have come a long way and, as I fully
understand, with many ups and downs, which is only
natural for a complex peace process. We are also aware
that we still have some way to go. Yet, along the way
we have made tremendous progress in terms of our
political transformation. We are equally committed to
institutionalizing it and bringing about social and
economic transformation together with State
restructuring. Our agenda has therefore remained a
forward-looking, inclusive and democratic Nepal,
which would ensure peace and prosperity for itself and
also stability and progress for the region as a whole.

In our efforts towards attaining these goals,
international good will, support and cooperation have
played an important role. We thank the United Nations
for its support and consistent encouragement and
UNMIN for its contribution in the mandated areas of
the peace process.

We consider that writing a Constitution on time is
essential to accelerating the peace progress during this
transition period, which would help us conclude the
peace process in Nepal. I am happy to inform the
Council that all the parties have committed themselves,
repeatedly and very recently, to writing the
Constitution on time, by May 2010. A large majority of
the thematic committees of the Constituent Assembly
have already deliberated on the issues under their
purview and submitted input to the respective bodies of
the Constituent Assembly. The new Constitution is
expected to usher in a new Nepal, which would be
more inclusive, federal and democratic. This would
ensure sustainable peace, together with the rule of law,
human rights and basic principles and norms of
democratic governance.
Similarly, with a view to narrowing down the
political differences among the major political parties
on key national issues and steering the country towards
a logical conclusion of the peace process, a high-level
political consultative mechanism has also been
established recently under the leadership of the former
Prime Minister, Mr. Girija Prasad Koirala.

We have now come to a stage wherein we have to
deal with important and fundamental issues, including
the future of the combatants. All the political parties
are committed to resolving this issue as soon as
possible and, as a result, the Special Committee and the
Technical Committee have been working hard on the
issue of the integration and rehabilitation of the Maoist
combatants. These Committees will be guided by the
principles as stipulated in the interim constitution, the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, the Agreement on
the Monitoring of the Management of Arms and
Armies and the agreement of the political parties of
25 June 2008. The process of integration and
rehabilitation is expected to be completed before the
promulgation of the new Constitution.

In an important recent development, the release
of the disqualified minors living in the cantonments
has begun in earnest on the basis of the action plan
signed on 16 December 2009. We expect the release to
be completed by the middle of the next month.
Similarly, a mine action committee has been working
assiduously with a View to completely clearing mines
as per its schedule as early as possible. That will have a
salutary impact on protecting the lives and limbs of all,
including children and women.

Likewise, the Government has taken a number of
important initiatives. A draft bill on the establishment
of the commission of inquiry on disappearances has
already been submitted to Parliament following its
approval by the Cabinet. Efforts are under way to
finalize a bill for the establishment of a truth and
reconciliation commission. I would like to stress that
substantial consultations with all the stakeholders were
held in the preparation of these bills with a view to
making them consistent with the international
standards and national aspirations.

Nepal's commitment to human rights is
unflinching. We are party to more than 16 major
international human rights instruments, including the
Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, Aiming at the Abolition
of the Death Penalty. We are fully aware that the
protection and promotion of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms strengthen the sustainability of
peace and progress. The Government is determined to
ensure, through the effective enforcement of law and
major institutional reforms, that there is no impunity in
the country.

The Government has been supporting the tasks of
the National Human Rights Commission, a
constitutional body empowered to investigate and
recommend suggestions on cases of human rights
violations. The independent judiciary has been an
important institution in protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms. In addition, a vibrant civil
society and the media have all played an important role
in promoting awareness and protecting human rights,
despite the fact that there have been some occasional
cases of violations of human rights.

In conclusion, let me stress once again that we
are emerging from a decade-long armed conflict. The
transition has not always been easy or smooth, and has
not followed a straight line. However, if we take a long-
term view, we can see that Nepal has made significant
progress over the years. A compartmentalized view of the
peace process may not capture the essence of our
genuine determination to bring the peace process to its
logical conclusion. More than anybody else, the people
of Nepal are eagerly looking forward to a post-
transition era. Therefore, and looking at the successive
developments in the country since the inception of the
peace process in June 2006, we have reason to be
optimistic about its overall direction.

In realizing our goal of a peaceful, stable,
democratic and prosperous new Nepal, we need more
than ever before an enhanced level of support,
understanding and encouragement from the
international community. Against this backdrop, we
look forward to the extension of the mandate of
UNMIN until 15 May 2010 in order for it to complete
its mandated tasks within the stipulated time.

