Mr. Zahid (Morocco) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Moroccan delegation, I would first of all
like to extend to you, Mr. President, our sincere
congratulations on presiding over the work of the
Security Council this month. I would also like to thank
you for responding promptly to the requests addressed
to you for the Council to deal urgently with the events
that have taken place at Al-Quds Al-Sharif and in other
parts of the occupied Arab territories. I would also like
to congratulate and pay heartfelt tribute to Ambassador
Moctar Ouane for the excellent and competent way he
guided the work of the Council during the month of
September and during the Council's Millennium
Summit.

We have looked on with horror at the
unimaginable scenes that have taken place in recent
days on the esplanade of the mosque at Al-Haram Al-
Sharif and in various towns of occupied Arab and
Palestinian territory. We were aghast at seeing Israeli
forces use so much violence against demonstrators who
had legitimately risen up after the monstrous
provocation by the head of that country's opposition.
The police, which should have prevented Sharon from
committing an irreparable act, fired upon those who
were expressing the emotions, hurt and shock they felt
at the moment.

However one interprets the facts, what happened
is to be resolutely condemned. The figures that have
been given include 80 dead and 1,000 injured, numbers
one expects to see when fighting against an army, and
not against a people.

At a time when we were beginning to see a
glimpse of hope that Palestine and Israel would at last
find peace and begin to try together to repair the
dozens of years lost by the hundreds of thousands of
people who have suffered in body and spirit; and at a
time when we truly believed that wisdom was going to
prevail over hatred, one man was allowed to call into
question everything that had been so patiently and
courageously woven together by people of good will. It
will take a long time for the families who lost family
members in these incidents to forget what has
happened, and even longer for the hundreds of millions
of believers throughout the world who felt their deepest
beliefs insulted and their strongest values offended.

These inexcusable acts could have been
prevented. Unfortunately, the violence continues. It is
inadmissible and nothing can justify it. The Palestinian
people did not have to be tested again in such a
horrible way. They have made enough sacrifices and
have paid their dues for peace and independence. Let
them at last be allowed to live in peace and to bind
their deep wounds.

Everything that has happened is so ghastly that
those responsible for it should be ashamed of
themselves. They should know that those who have
unleashed these events and massacres undoubtedly
wanted to destroy all the peace efforts made to date.
They almost succeeded. At any rate, they have partially
destroyed the large reserve of trust, which had already
been eroded.

It is equally serious and reprehensible that the
victims fell to the bullets of the police. The
international community should understand that if
peace, which has once again been jeopardized, does not
soon see the light of day and is not defended by all,
both the immediate and the long-term future of this
region near to all our hearts will be doomed.

Morocco extends its condolences to the families
of the martyrs and reaffirms its support for the peace
process. Morocco believes that there can be no just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the region unless
the principles that emerged from the Madrid
Conference are respected, particularly that of land for
peace, and Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) are fully implemented, so as to help the
Palestinian people regain their inalienable and
legitimate rights, primarily the right to establish an
independent State in their territory, with Al-Quds Al-
Sharif as its capital.

We sincerely hope that the meetings that a
number of countries, including France, the United
States and Egypt, are attempting to organize will be
successful, for there is no alternative to the imperative
need to continue the peace process, regardless of the
obstacles it faces.

