The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of the Russian Federation. We thank our information provided. briefers today for the It is encouraging to note that the Political Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic of 6 February 2019 is functioning. It has already led to a reduction in the general level of armed violence in the country. However, we are concerned that certain armed groups are not fulfilling their commitments, which seriously complicates the national reconciliation process and exacerbates the already difficult situation. All parties must strictly adhere to the provisions of the Political Agreement and refrain from undermining the political situation in the country. Regional partners, including the guarantors of the agreement, also have an important role to play in supporting the peace efforts. We trust that the country's leadership will successfully overcome the challenges, including those related to the coronavirus disease pandemic, and continue to implement the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme for former combatants, as well as the formation and deployment of joint security units. We are convinced that it is in the interests of the Central African Republic to hold peaceful, free and transparent presidential and parliamentary elections in accordance with the national legislation and the constitutional timeframes. We highly appreciate the efforts of President Touadera in de-escalate political tensions, including his initiative to hold a frank dialogue with national political actors and partners of the Central African Republic in preparation for the elections. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic remains a key element in ensuring security in the country. We trust that peacekeepers will provide the necessary technical and logistical support to Bangui during the electoral cycle. At the request of the Government of the Central African Republic, the Russian Federation is helping to strengthen the capacity and training of national security agencies. The work of the Russian trainers was highly commended by the authorities in Bangui. In addition, we continue to provide military equipment to the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic. Armoured reconnaissance and patrol vehicles are currently being delivered to the country. At the same time, we see that the rigorous sanctions regime does not allow Central Africans to effectively strengthen the capacity of their security institutions and combat rampant crime. The Security Council must ensure that sanctions are commensurate with the political context and do not hamper conflict resolution. In addition, we consider it essential to pay close attention to Bangui's efforts, including its delisting requests, which will improve the engagement of the Central African people with the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic. We believe that resolving the problems facing the Central African Republic requires the concerted efforts of all actors in the country based on the principle of mutual respect, while taking the interests of all parties into account. We will continue to work closely with the Central African Republic in coordination with the country's leadership, its international partners and the African Union, as well as the United Nations, including the Security Council. I resume my function as President of the Council. There are no more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting so that the Council can continue its discussion on the subject in closed consultations. The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.
