Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting on a
subject of particular importance. France's best wishes
go out to the United States presidency of our Council
this month.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his lengthy presence among us this morning. I would
also like to welcome very warmly the Ministers of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Rwanda
and Burundi, who are also present in the Chamber.

As my colleague from Ireland has said, the
Ambassador of Sweden will in a short while set out the
views of all the countries of the European Union. As
my colleague has done, I too would like to add some
comments in my national capacity as representative of
France.

The information contained in the Panel's report is
not, in fact, entirely new. Numerous elements had
already surfaced in the press, and non-governmental
organizations had also attested to the situation in
various ways. But this is the first time that an overall
picture of the looting of the resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has been provided
to us. That picture is extremely disquieting.

I would like to commend the work done by
Ms. Ba-N'Daw and the other experts. The report of the
Panel is courageous and well documented. It should be
stated clearly that we know that the safety of the
experts was at times under threat. This is a matter of
concern for the whole Council.

With regard to methodology, the Panel strictly
followed the mandate given to it by the Security
Council. This explains the large number of States
investigated pursuant to the broad interpretation given
to the concept of illegality.

One conclusion must be drawn. Not only does the
looting of resources feed the conflict; today we may
even ask ourselves whether looting has itself become a
motive for the continuation of the conflict. The
Security Council must henceforth take into account this
facet of the deadliest conflict currently besetting the
African continent. All of us recall the figures put
forward by New York's International Rescue
Committee: 2.5 million deaths since 1998, 200,000 of
which were directly related to combat. These figures
are appalling. They demand action and mobilization on
the part of our Council and of all the parties.

The Council's responsibility is to work with all of
the parties concerned to help end the looting, and this
report will help us do so. By a unanimous decision of
the Council, we will be extending the Panel's mandate
for a three-month period. Over the next three months
the Panel will keep us informed. It will further expand
its knowledge of this very important issue, and, in three
months' time, it will present to us a fresh appraisal of
the situation.

In the Panel's work and in the mobilization of the
international community, it will be important to ensure
that, beyond the United Nations, the multilateral
institutions concerned and the countries involved all
participate fully in this endeavour. We would like the
Council to work in a spirit of dialogue with all of those
involved.

From this standpoint, I should like to welcome
not only the presence of the Ministers around this table
but also the statements that they have made. We must
listen attentively to one another. We welcome their
spirit of cooperation, and, in the same vein as my
colleague from Ireland, we would also like to welcome
the announcement by Minister Mbabazi of the creation
in Uganda of an independent commission of inquiry. I
welcome also the statement made by the Minister of
Finance of Burundi.

All of the countries involved must demonstrate
this same spirit of dialogue. For our part, we are
listening attentively and objectively to them. At the end
of the three months, when we have the additional
report, we will consider in this Chamber possible
further measures, which may be necessary if the
progress that we hope to see towards ending the looting
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has not been
achieved.

All of the States involved must demonstrate a
spirit of dialogue. Some of them have chosen not to
state their position today, and I appeal to those not
present in the Chamber and which have been
implicated to demonstrate the spirit of cooperation
shown by the Ministers who are here today.

Above and beyond this report, I think that we
should all keep in mind the key objective that the
Security Council wishes to achieve in the Great Lakes
region. Our goal is to put an end to the conflict. Our
goal is the restoration of peace - peace with security
for all. Ultimately, our objective is a return to
economic development. All of this requires the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.

The United Nations is resolved to lend its fullest
support to that goal, but, of course, it is the actions of
the parties themselves that will make it possible to
advance in that direction.

