Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): Like others, I
would like to begin by thanking the three Committee
Chairmen for their detailed briefings, as well as the
experts and staff who support the Committees.

My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement to be made by Ambassador Pfanzelter of
Austria on behalf of the European Union.

We find these regular quarterly briefings to be
very helpful. The level of detail and focus that
delegations have already generated in this discussion
underlines, I think, their value. It demonstrates, we
believe, the key importance of all three Committees as
part of the collective efforts that the United Nations
and the international community are making to fight
terrorism.

Many good points have already been made. Ijust
want to make some brief ones on each Committee and
then say something about all three Committees.

Turning first to the Al-Qaida and Taliban
Sanctions Committee, my delegation is pleased at the
completion of several major tasks by the Committee in
the last reporting period. We would highlight in
particular the important partial revision of the
Committee guidelines completed in December. I look
to the Committee to conclude its revision of the
guidelines by introducing improved guidance on listing
and delisting procedures in the near future. I would
echo the Ambassador of France's points in that area.

I should like also to commend the Committee and
in particular its Monitoring Team for their work with
Interpol. The issuance of Interpol's special notices for
those on the Consolidated List should prove to be a
valuable tool for enforcement and border authorities.

During the next reporting period, we look
forward to the Committee's completing its
consideration of the Monitoring Team's fourth report.

Turning to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), I want to underline how useful the
Council's review of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) was in December last year. That
process set some clear priorities and direction for the
year ahead of us, as well as an agreement that a further
review would be appropriate at the end of 2006.

The CTED is at last beginning to function as we
planned when we created it, and I am pleased to see
that the CTC, with the aid of the CTED, is intensifying
its dialogue and interaction with Member States. I am
also glad to note that the CT C is currently reviewing
the reporting cycle and procedures for that dialogue in
order to take into account the varying needs and
situations of individual Member States.

The United Kingdom attaches real importance to
clear objectives for the CTED that will enable us to
measure and demonstrate the difference the Council is
making. We look forward to hearing very soon, in very
concrete terms, what impact the CTED has made in the
world outside New York.

We are also pleased that the CTED is beginning
work on the report on implementation of resolution
1624 (2005) that it needs to submit to the Council in
six months' time. The United Kingdom intends to
anticipate the request for information from the
Committee under resolution 1624 (2005) and
proactively submit the information required, and we
would like to encourage others to do the same.

I wish also to say a few words about the 1540
Committee. First of all, I would like to thank the
outgoing Committee Chairman, Ambassador Mihnea
Motoc, for his contribution to the Committee over the
last two years. His experience and thoughtful
leadership of the Committee have been a great asset to
the Council. Of course, I heartily welcome Ambassador
Burian to his new responsibilities as Chairman of the
Committee.

That brings me to the question of how long
Ambassador Burian will continue to have a job. The
United Kingdom strongly supports a renewed mandate
for the 1540 Committee. I want to say, and underline,
that resolution 1540 (2004) remains a key strategic
piece of the international community's defences
against the threat of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, in particular to non-State actors. We
see no need to review the basic framework of the
resolution. It will remain a vital tool in the
international non-proliferation and counter-terrorism
effort, with or without a Committee. But we see a lot of
work for the Committee still to do that it cannot
complete by the end of April.

Thanks to the contributions of Member States, the
Committee has amassed a significant amount of
information. However, information alone is not
enough, and it is not the purpose of resolution 1540
(2004). The key challenge of the resolution, in our
View, still lies ahead - translating that information
and that knowledge of the current situation into
improved implementation of the resolution itself. We
know that that cannot be achieved overnight. It is a
challenge for all Member States, for the 1540
Committee and for the Council.

In looking at the new mandate, therefore, we need
to think about those issues that will promote
implementation - for instance, how to unlock
technical assistance for States that need it, including
the potential for assistance from international and
regional organizations. The United Kingdom has
supported one regional seminar in the field of
resolution 1540 (2004), and we would like to see more
of that sort of outreach activity. The key should be how
we can use the Committee to make a difference on the
ground.

Finally, looking at all three Committees, I want to
reiterate that the United Kingdom remains committed
to getting results from the Council this year on the
summit conclusion of September last that the Council
should consider ways to strengthen its monitoring and
enforcement role in counter-terrorism, including by
consolidating State reporting requirements, taking into
account and respecting the different mandates of its
counter-terrorism subsidiary bodies. In the same
context, we welcome the efforts that the three
Committees and their respective experts are making to
ensure that their work with States is better coordinated,
including with respect to information-sharing and
visits. We hope that this coordination will increase.

I wish also to welcome Ambassador Oshima's
interest in this area in his capacity as Chairman of the
Informal Working Group of the Security Council
concerning the Council's documentation and other
procedural questions.

Finally, I want to add that the United Kingdom
attaches importance to the United Nations counter-
terrorism effort as a whole, including all the
membership and all the United Nations family. United
Nations efforts are an essential part of the global fight
against terror. We therefore look forward to receiving
the Secretary-General's revised strategy and his
proposals to improve United Nations capacity and
coordination in helping States to combat terrorism. My
Government, of course, stands ready to play a full part
in the upcoming General Assembly debate on this
issue.

