Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this open
debate. As this may be the last formal meeting of the
Security Council in 2012, may I take this opportunity
to thank the outgoing members - Colombia, India,
Portugal, Germany and South Africa - for all their
cooperation and their efforts on the Security Council
over the past two years.

I should also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comments and the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Momen, for his briefing this
morning.

In May of this year, my Council colleagues and I
travelled to Cote d'Ivoire, Sierra Leone and Liberia.
In Sierra Leone and Liberia, we saw how the United
Nations system works closely with international and
regional partners to be the bedrock of support for
countries recovering from brutal civil wars. During
our visit, we saw how the United Nations planned to
support the successful and peaceful elections in Sierra
Leone that took place just last month, a real turning
point for the country. In Liberia, we saw how that
United Nations is helping to re-establish the rule of
law through building a functioning police, justice and
corrections system.

The United Kingdom recognizes the important role
of the United Nations in helping national Governments
and communities recover from the scourge of war.
That is why we are the largest contributor to the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund, providing about
$20 million a year. We are committed to spending one
third of our rising aid budget in fragile and conflict-
affected States.

The United Kingdom welcomes the recent Secretary-
General's report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of
conflict (S/2012/746). It is important that the Council
and the broader membership regularly review the
progress made by the United Nations on peacebuilding.
The report shows that the United Nations is moving
forward on key peacebuilding issues. Progress has been
made on inclusivity and institution-building, but much
work remains.
Further attention is required in three key areas
in particular. First, the United Nations must adapt
the evolving international context for peacebuilding
and adopt the principles outlined in the New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States. Agreed by the Group of
Seven Plus (g7+) States, those principles set out how
the international community can improve its support
for countries emerging from conflict. Transparency
of support, predictability of action and the building
of national systems all are essential in improving the
way in which the international community supports
conflict-affected countries.

We call on the whole United Nations system to
ensure that its support for countries emerging from
conflict adheres to those New Deal principles. To that
I would like to add that we must also consider how the
issue of conflict and fragility can be incorporated into
the wider discussion on the post-2015 development
framework.

Secondly, the United Nations must improve the
way in which it supports countries with missions in
transition. Sustained, adaptable international support
is vital. We see the success of such support in countries
such as Timor-Leste, where there is a successful move
from the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste to a country team, or Sierra Leone, where in 2013
we should see the drawdown of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone and
the country move onto a development path.

To achieve successful transitions such as these,
we need a well-coordinated United Nations system
that plans strategically from the outset of a mission's
deployment. United Nations development actors must
also plan ahead and be ready with the right programmes
and the right resources.

Thirdly, the United Nations must do more to
encourage women's engagement in avoiding and
dealing with conflict. The Secretary-General's report
clearly shows that insufficient progress has been made
on the role of women in building peace, and we must do
more on that agenda.

We are pleased that the presidential statement
cites sexual violence in conflict. Peace cannot be built
without ending the use of that terrible weapon of war. In
May, the United Kingdom's Foreign Minister launched
his Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative. The Initiative
works closely with the United Nations, international
partners and civil society on a sustained campaign to
build a global partnership to prevent sexual violence in
conflict. We must ensure that the United Nations has
the capabilities to deliver on that ambitious agenda.

Since 2009, the Secretary-General has consistently
identified the need for the United Nations to broaden
and deepen the pool of civilian expertise for critical
peacebuilding tasks, in particular, drawing on capacities
from the global South.

Recent figures show that over 20 per cent of
civilian rule of law posts in United Nations missions
remain vacant. That is unacceptable. If we truly want
the United Nations to perform well in peacebuilding,
we must deal with that shortcoming. We welcome the
Secretary-General's efforts to address the issue and
look forward to discussions in the General Assembly
and its subsidiary bodies on the proposals that he has
put forward.

Peacebuilding is a long-term project. It requires
patience and perseverance. It is seldom linear and
always complex. But we know that peacebuilding is
absolutely critical to the maintenance of international
peace and security, and in that, the United Nations has
a unique and central role to play.

