Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First, I would like to thank Ambassador
Arias for the information he has given us on the work
of the last few months, and the proposals agreed to in
the Committee on its reform.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
remains an important instrument in pooling and
coordinating international efforts in the fight against
the global threat of terrorism and in implementing the
tasks set out in Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). The constructive nature and mutual
understanding that characterizes the work of the CTC
and its relation with all the Member States of the
United Nations are an important positive factor for
maintaining unity and for providing for the
Committee's effectiveness. The CTC has consistently
continued its policy to create security mechanisms to
meet the new demands of the counter-terrorism fight.
Despite the difficulties, the process whereby States
adopt contemporary anti-terrorism legislation in
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001) is becoming
more effective.

An important positive outcome of the CTC's
work is the significant momentum generated by the
universalizing of the 12 anti-terrorism conventions,
which is definitely helping to improve the international
legal basis for countering terrorism.
The mechanism being established for close,
regular interaction between the CTC and international,
regional and subregional organizations is acquiring
particular importance. We hope that the upcoming third
meeting to be held in Vienna on 11 and 12 March 2004
between those organizations and the CTC will lend
additional impetus to the regional dimension of the
Committee's work and will help to increase the
concrete contributions of all cooperating organizations
to carry out a global anti-terrorism strategy.

At the same time, we cannot ignore the real
problems that have faced the CTC recently. Right now,
the Committee is moving on to a new stage in its work,
central to which are the practical activities of States in
counter-terrorism, in keeping with the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001). This in and of itself presents
the CTC with essentially new and important tasks. It is
clear that the multifaceted nature of the international
counter-terrorism agenda and the expansion of the
geographical area of terrorist activities - which
encompass, inter alia, countries that do not yet have
sufficient potential or resources to avert specific
terrorist threats - increase many times the demands on
the future work of the CTC. We welcome the fact that
the Committee has adopted a responsible approach and
has promptly realized the need to adapt to these new
conditions. It has conducted a thorough analysis of the
main problems confronting countries in carrying out
their counter-terrorism tasks and of the difficulties in
the work of the CTC.

All of this has been reflected in the report of the
Chairman of the Committee (S/2004/124, annex). In
order to resolve the problems enumerated in the report,
a structural reorganization of this subsidiary body of
the Security Council and a strengthening of its expert
and organizational capacities are of particular
importance. We support the proposals of the CTC to
revitalize and reactivate its work. We deem timely the
creation of a CTC Executive Directorate, which could
become an important instrument for providing effective
operational support to the CTC in its future work and
in carrying out its tasks as defined by the Security
Council.

We wish to actively work on a draft resolution on
the basis of the proposals contained in the 19 February
report of the Chairman of the CTC. We are sure that,
given the new conditions, this will help the Committee
successfully carry out the functions entrusted to it as
the key coordinator in the fight against terrorism.

