Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thankyou, Mr. President, forconvening this debate
on the situation in Somalia at this crucial moment in the
efforts to make progress towards Somalia's political,
economic and security normalization. I would also like
to thank and pay tribute to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Political Office in Somalia, Mr. Augustine Mahiga.

Somalia has made significant strides towards
achieving peace and stability. The last phase of the
transition has been proof of the efforts of Somalia's
stakeholders towards establishing a more legimate
and representative Government, with new leadership
and new institutions, capable of guiding the future of
the Somali people. While we look with optimism on
the significant progress achieved in security matters,
we are aware that that progress must be consolidated
on various fronts. We must contribute to guiding the
country towards sustainable economic and social
development.

While the new Somali authorities have the primary
responsibility for restoring security, political stability,
the rule of law and economic development, it also is
essential that the international community continue to
provide support, albeit not unlimited, but recognizing
the inherent challenges facing a country in the process
of consolidation. In that context, we must adopt a
comprehensive strategy aimed at strengthening the
institutions and national capacity-building of the new
Somali State in step with the vision of the Somalis
and the priorities established by the Somali authorities
and in a manner that is also consistent with the future
presence ofthe United Nations in Somalia. We must also
ensure that there is clear consistency and coordination
in the efforts undertaken by the different entities and
agencies of the United Nations and other regional and
international partners.

We must recognize the significant expansion of
territorial control by the Somali National Security
Forces and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). Today that includes important and strategic
cities such as Mogadishu, Afgoye, Baidoa, Marka and
Kismayo. Despite that progress, Al-Shabaab terrorist
attacks continue to represent a serious threat to Somali
institutions and the political process itself. For that
reason, the work and presence of AMISOM. continues
to be crucial for Somalia's stabilization.

We cannot fail to note that the expanded capacity
of AMISOM. hinges to a large degree on whether the
Mission has the resources and equipment needed for
meeting its mandate. Similarly, it is essential that the
Mission have force enablers and multipliers in order
to afford greater operational capacity and flexibility
to the Mission. Along those lines, it is crucial that we
renew the entirety of the logistical support measures
granted under resolution 2036 (2012). We must also
give due consideration to the request of the African
Union for the inclusion of a maritime component and
the strengthening of the civilian component within
AMISOM. We must also provide greater technical
and financial resources and resources for training of
the Somali forces so that they can undertake a more
significant role in the ongoing operations. Efforts
to reform and restructure those forces must continue
through a regularization process that allows for a clear
command and control structure.

We must also harmonize and synchronize the
various political and military efforts with an eye
to achieving a true stabilization of the situation in
Somalia. For that reason, we believe it is important to
support the efforts of the Somali authorities with regard
to the consolidation ofthe recently recovered areas and,
in particular, with the implementation and launching of
the national policy for reconciliation and stabilization,
as well as the national security and stabilization plan.
We must also give due consideration to addressing the
immediate needs of a growing number of combatants
who have abandoned the ranks of Al-Shabaab, as a first
step towards a far-reaching process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.

The end of the transition does not mean the end
of the peace process. On the contrary, it is the time
to address the fundamental tasks that have remained
pending in the Somalia end-of-transition road map on
progress towards the training of local administrators
and the development of functioning institutions capable
of supporting the economic and social recovery of the
country. We must also move forward in the creation
of an inclusive Government Cabinet, the submission
of the national Constitution to a referendum and the
organization of local and national elections in order to
definitively advance the peacebuilding process.

Piracy off the Somali coast is a problem that will
not end with the transition. A stable and sustainable
solution must be an integral part of the efforts
undertaken to strengthen the rule of law in the country
and the capacity-building of national institutions, areas
in which factors relating to the economy, security,
the judiciary and the correctional system can be
simultaneously dealt with.

One of the areas in which the international
community and, in particular, the United Nations are
called upon to provide technical assistance to Somalia
is that of the demarcation of its maritime spaces in
accordance with international law. That will allow for
a clear definition of its territorial waters, exclusive
economic zone and maritime borders. That would
enable Somalia to strengthen its ability to maintain
sovereignty over its waters and maritime resources
and further develop activities such as fishing and
port activities as viable economic alternatives for the
population, given the current dependency on activities
linked to crime surrounding the piracy networks.

In conclusion, I would like to recognize again
AMISOM's meaningful contribution to the search for
peace in Somalia. I call upon the Somali authorities and
other relevant stakeholders to maintain and broaden the
unity of purpose seen throughout the transition and to
look upon the stabilization and strengthening of the
Somali State as the principal objective in the long term.

