Ms. Banks (New Zealand): Thank you,
Mr. President, for calling this open debate. New
Zealand welcomes the latest report of the Secretary-
General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2007/643), which provides an important assessment
of developments and highlights challenges to the
effective protection of civilians in contemporary
conflict situations.

New Zealand is appalled by the number of
civilians who continue to be the victims and targets in
armed conflicts - from Darfur and Somalia in the
Horn of Africa, to West Africa, Iraq, Afghanistan and
the Middle East. It is a sad reality that the changed
nature of contemporary conflicts has placed the safety
and security of unarmed men, women and children at
even greater risk.

In addition, the number of violent and frequently
fatal attacks deliberately targeting humanitarian
workers, most of them unarmed civilians participating
in or supporting United Nations missions in the field, is
simply intolerable. The safeguarding of humanitarian
personnel remains a key challenge for the United
Nations. Another concern for New Zealand is the rising
number of journalists and media personnel killed or
injured while reporting from areas of conflict.

The recognition in the report of the impact of
armed conflict on older persons and persons with
disabilities is also strongly supported by New Zealand.

New Zealand commends the steps taken so far to
strengthen the normative framework for the protection
of civilians. We welcomed the acceptance by leaders at
the 2005 World Summit of the international
responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity, including, potentially, through collective
action under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. We were pleased by the reaffirmation of that
language in resolution 1674 (2006). Looking ahead, we
continue to support further operationalization of the
concept. In that context, we welcome the appointment
by the Secretary-General of a special adviser on the
responsibility to protect within the office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities.

We also welcome efforts to provide a more active
role for peacekeepers to protect civilians through the
mandates of Security Council resolutions - for
instance, in resolution 1769 (2007), which established
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur.

Despite some progress, much more needs to be
done on combating impunity. We continue to be
appalled at the high level of impunity that has been
allowed to exist, which sends a message that the
international community is not prepared to take action
even when fundamental human rights are breached.

New Zealand encourages members to provide
their full support to the International Criminal Court
(ICC) by acceding to the Rome Statute. We also call on
all United Nations Member States, especially States
parties to the Rome Statute, to cooperate fully with the
Court. Universality and our full support are crucial if
we are to end impunity for the perpetrators of the most
serious crimes against civilians, such as those carried
out in the Darfur region of the Sudan, where ICC arrest
warrants remain outstanding. We urge the Sudan to
take measures to prevent further violations of human
rights, ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice in
accordance with international law and facilitate
assistance to vulnerable populations.

We recognize that the greatest challenge in
protecting civilians, as identified in the report, is
humanitarian access. Facilitating the passage of
humanitarian relief for civilians is required by
international humanitarian law. The increase in
deliberate attacks on humanitarian workers as part of
efforts to prevent such access is an abomination. For
that reason, New Zealand strongly advocated the
conclusion of an optional protocol to the Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel. We signed the Optional Protocol in
September last year and urge other States to do the
same.

Perpetrators who deliberately prevent
humanitarian access must be held accountable for their
actions. Grave instances of denial of access, such as
intentionally using starvation as a method of warfare,
are war crimes and fall within the jurisdiction of the
ICC. New Zealand strongly supports efforts aimed at
raising awareness around serious access situations. The
proposal for the Emergency Relief Coordinator to bring
serious challenges to the attention of the Security
Council is therefore a welcome initiative.

The use of sexual violence as a method of
warfare is completely abhorrent and cannot be allowed
to continue. Rape and other forms of sexual violence
may be war crimes or crimes against humanity and
within the jurisdiction of the ICC. We note that earlier
this year the ICC Prosecutor launched an investigation
in the Central African Republic in relation to alleged
offences that includes many serious sexual crimes.

New Zealand remains deeply concerned about
acts of sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeepers and other United Nations
personnel. These acts constitute an appalling breach of
trust by those charged with the responsibility of
protecting vulnerable people. New Zealand welcomed
therefore the recent adoption by the General Assembly
of amendments to the model memorandum of
understanding with troop-contributing countries as one
important part of the broader United Nations response
to this issue.

We are strongly supportive of many of the
practical concrete action points recommended in the
report, which we hope will be instrumental in
developing the tools and strategies necessary to help
address the significant challenges that remain. Critical
to the success of these actions will be the ability to
keep these issues at the forefront of this Council's
work.

