Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank the briefers for their
updates on political developments and the human rights
situation in Ukraine. On political developments, we
are pleased to note that, after months of conflict and
escalating tensions, the people of Ukraine now have
an opportunity to peacefully resolve the crisis that has
destabilized their country.

We have carefully studied Petro Poroshenko's
lS-point peace plan. We see it as the best way forward in
the current circumstances to address the various issues
that led to the conflict in eastern Ukraine. We urge the
people of Ukraine and the international community
to support the plan. Of particular significance in the
plan are the week-long ceasefire, steps to decentralize
power, the protection of the Russian language and
constitutional reform.

We welcome the support of Russian President
Vladimir Putin for the ceasefire. We believe that it
has played a role in the decision of the pro-Russian
separatists to respect the ceasefire. We see it as a
positive development that raises hopes for an end to the
fighting that has caused substantial damage to property,
left hundreds dead or wounded, displaced hundreds
of thousands of people and disrupted livelihoods. We
are pleased to note that the ceasefire is holding, as the
Government has announced that there has been no
fighting in eastern Ukraine since yesterday.

We take positive note of the promise ofthe rebels to
release the observers of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) who have been held
hostage since May. That is a significant development.
According to news reports, a representative of the
rebels at the negotiations held yesterday in Donetsk,
in line with President Poroshenko's peace plan, stated
that the release of the OSCE observers would "be one
of the steps that will improve mutual understanding on
both sides". We would like to see the OSCE observers
released unconditionally and without delay.

All things considered, the prospects for a peaceful
resolution of the Ukrainian crisis have been enhanced.
We hope that the people of Ukraine will build on
the momentum and goodwill generated by President
Poroshenko's peace plan. We have consistently
advocated dialogue as the way to resolve the crisis in
Ukraine, and we are pleased to see that happening now.

On human rights, we have carefully examined the
third report of the human rights monitoring mission
in Ukraine, which covers the period of 7 May to
7 June. We note that the reporting period precedes
the peace plan of President Poroshenko. The report
links the deterioration of the human rights situation
in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions to the conflict
in eastern Ukraine. We condemn all violations of
human rights, including abductions, torture, forced
disappearances and illegal detentions. We would like to
see the perpetrators brought to justice in order to send
a strong message that impunity will not be tolerated. It
is our hope that with the current ceasefire and eventual
cessation of hostilities the human rights situation in
eastern Ukraine will begin to improve.

In conclusion, we would like to stress the need
for all concerned to respect the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence of Ukraine, in line with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

