Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I would like to
welcome the representatives of the five countries that
have just joined the Security Council, including your
own, Mr. President.

While in principle our discussions were supposed
to focus on the latest quarterly report on the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2019/6), I will
limit my remarks to the most recent facts.

The implementation of the electoral process
is entering its final stages. The elections initially
announced for 23 December were finally held on
30 December throughout the national territory, with the
exception of the cities of Beni and Butembo in North
Kivu and Yumbi in Mai-Ndombe province, where
the Commission electorale nationale independante
decided to postpone them to next March for health and
security reasons.

Millions of Congolese went to the polls, often
with fervour and, in the vast majority of cases, voting
took place peacefully as voters went to choose their
future President and their national and provincial
representatives. I would like to congratulate them on
the impressive maturity they showed on that long-
awaited election day and since then. I also commend
the work done by the Commission e'lectorale nationale
independante, as well as the election observers.

All national and international observation missions,
as well as the teams of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) that are deployed in the
field, reported in their preliminary reports that the
elections were conducted correctly despite technical,
logistical and security problems. All agreed that those
difficulties had not, however, hindered the freedom
of movement of citizens or the exercise of their right
to vote. The waiting period for the publication of the
provisional results, which was extended by three days,
was also calm. Once again, I was greatly impressed by
the patience shown by Congolese men and women, who
were anxious to preserve and protect the expression of
their votes, but above all fully aware of the importance
of those elections for the future of their country.

I used that time to meet with the country's President
and the main stakeholders in the electoral process to
convey the importance of ensuring calm in anticipation
of the publication of the provisional results, which
were announced overnight on Wednesday to Thursday
and which, for the presidential election, Mr. Felix
Tshisekedi is in first place, followed by Mr. Martin
Fayulu and Mr. Emmanuel Ramazani Shadary. That
message was preceded by the announcement of the
provisional results of the provincial elections.
(spoke in English)

Reactions to the Commission electorale nationale
independante's announcement were swift and varied.
Mr. Tshisekedi welcomed his victory and vowed to
be a President for all Congolese. Although the Front
commun pour le Congo stated that it would respect the
Commission's results, the Lamuka coalition denounced
what it called electoral fraud, with the potential to
provoke disorder throughout the country. While the
results were greeted by scenes ofj oy in some strongholds
of the Union pour la nation congolaise and the Union
pour la de'mocratie et le progres social, many Lamuka
supporters received the news with a sense of disbelief.

Regrettably, serious security incidents were
noted in several locations. Most concerning, in Kwilu
province, violent protests reportedly left at least
12 dead, including two national police lynched and
10 civilians killed by live ammunition, as well as
significant damage to public property. Our teams are in
the process of deploying to Kikwit, where MONUSCO
has no presence, to ascertain further details and engage
with a view to de-escalating tensions. In Kisangani and
several locations in Kasai province, incidents of clashes
and destruction have been reported, with injuries,
arrests and possible deaths still being verified.

The situation has also been tense in several
communes in Kinshasa, following clashes between
supporters of Lamuka and Cap pour le changement
supporters, and in some cases also with the police. I
deplore all such acts of violence and appeal to the
Congolese people and security forces alike to exercise
calm and restraint in this critical period.

The week ahead may be characterized by a period
of contestation and a judicial review of provisional
presidential results, with the final results expected
to be announced by the Constitutional Court within
a week. The coming days are therefore critical to the
conclusion of this historic electoral process. I continue
to discharge my good offices by engaging with all
Congolese stakeholders to reinforce the need for calm
and recourse to establishedjudicial procedures, as well
as to emphasize that a supreme sense of responsibility
must prevail in the days ahead.

Millions of Congolese women and men have
demonstrated their commitment to the political process
in their country and their determination to exercise
their democratic right to vote. We must therefore show
our collective solidarity with them as the electoral
process is finalized and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo prepares to undertake the first peaceful transfer
of power in the country's history.

