Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Bernard Kouchner, for his
briefing. Unfortunately, his statement has not given
cause for either optimism or a change in our well-
known assessment of the persistent crisis situation in
Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

Resolution 1244 (1999) is being implemented
partially and in an unsatisfactory manner. As in the
past, the principles agreed in the framework of that
resolution for the settlement of the Kosovo crisis
continue to be disregarded. Despite isolated positive
developments and the selfless efforts of the personnel
of the international presence under the most dire
conditions, the leadership of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) continue to act in
contravention of the Security Council and in violation
of resolution 1244 (1999) on many questions of
principle.

It is true that Bernard Kouchner has been
endowed with great powers, but they are not unlimited.
He is compelled to act strictly within the framework of
his mandate. We consider absolutely inadmissible the
statements by Mr. Kouchner in the interview in The
Financial Times of 16 September, where he openly
preached his own views and actually called for
independence for Kosovo. We also find inappropriate
his references to alleged ambiguities in resolution 1244
(1999). The provisions of that resolution that are being
disregarded today were formulated very, very clearly.
The responsibility for their non-implementation rests
squarely shoulders of the leadership of UNMIK and
KFOR.

We View the recent incident in which the Russian
Ambassador to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was
detained at Kosovo's administrative border by KFOR
soldiers who attempted to search him as a flagrant
violation of the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999),
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and of the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations. There were
similar acts by KFOR with respect to diplomats from
Spain, Japan and other countries. KFOR personnel
demanded that the head of the Belgrade office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Barbara Davis, undergo a search of her person. All
this can be viewed only as attempts to impede
diplomatic representatives from working on part of the
territory of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia where
they are accredited. We find absolutely unacceptable
the requirement to have any additional authorization
beyond the normal diplomatic accreditation to Belgrade
in order to perform diplomatic functions in Kosovo.

Russia has made a very strong protest against
these incidents. However, the leadership of KFOR and
UNMIK have not only failed to take adequate measures
to put an end to the illegal practice of searching foreign
diplomats, but have also involved UNMIK's
international police and the Albanian police in those
searches. There is thus a deliberate policy to impede
the work of diplomatic personnel accredited to
Belgrade, a policy aimed at cutting off the Belgrade
diplomatic corps from Kosovo, illustrating the
customary attempt to tear Kosovo away from
Yugoslavia.

The 14 September statement of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Contact Group stressed that the
security situation in Kosovo continued to be tense.
KFOR and UNMIK themselves recognize the
unsatisfactory security situation with regard to the non-
Albanian population, the removal of illegally held
stocks of weapons and the inadequate control of the
activities of former members of the Kosovo Liberation
Army (KLA), who are now incorporated in the Kosovo
Protection Corps. In this context, a recent decision of
the Belgian division of the influential organization
Doctors Without Borders is telling. It decided to cease
its activities in Kosovo due to the inability of KFOR
and UNMIK to stop the "ethnic cleansing", terrorism
and violence against the non-Albanian population of
the region.

As a result of the campaign of violence unleashed
by Kosovo Albanian extremists, members of the non-
Albanian communities continue to leave the area. As
before, nothing is being done to create safe conditions
for a return to the region of non-Albanian refugees.
There continues to be a danger of the spread of inter-
ethnic conflict to communities in the south of Serbia. It
is essential to do everything possible to prevent the
emergence of a new threat to regional peace and
security.

As we have done before, we insist on an early
commencement ofthe negotiating process on the status
of Kosovo. An excellent basis for the work to define
the parameters for substantial autonomy for Kosovo
could be found in the principle on interim self-
government for Kosovo adopted in May at the Tokyo
meeting of the G-8 working group. Clearly, work in
this area should involve official representatives of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. To that end, it would
be appropriate to actively use the mechanism of the
UNMIK-Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Joint
Committee. In the context of that Committee it will be
possible to resolve the question of beginning
negotiations with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
define the status of the international presence in the
region. We are concerned that the UNMIK command is
ignoring this important provision of resolution 1244
(1999).

It is also high time for a return to the region of
the agreed number of Yugoslav military personnel. At
the first stage, it should be possible to reach agreement
on a limited contingent of Yugoslav border guards
coming to the Kosovo part of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia border.

We continue to view as erroneous the concept
developed by UNMIK of total privatization of locally
situated State property of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. The destruction of economic ties in the
region only strengthens the drive to separate Kosovo
from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

Our position is well known: at present, the
requisite conditions for holding municipal elections are
lacking. For such elections to mark an important step
towards democracy in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999), they must be thoroughly prepared and must be
democratic.

In practice, violence reigns in Kosovo. Even
Albanian political parties are subjected to a
coordinated campaign of intimidation and blackmail by
the former KLA. Kosovar Serbs and members of other
ethnic minorities confront terrorism and are forced not
to participate in the elections at all. When it comes to
organizational preparations for the elections, the
situation is no better. As reported in the Kosovo
newspaper Koha Ditore on 21 September 2000,
UNMIK officials have acknowledged that from the
very outset there were significant logistical and
organizational difficulties with the voter registration
process. Lists of voters were lost, and voter
information even contained distortions. Consequently,
the newspaper concluded, only 900,000 of the more
than one million registered inhabitants of Kosovo had
actually participated in the registration, and by no
means all of those had succeeded in being properly
registered. In the view of experts, there were errors or
distortions with respect to some 350,000 inhabitants of
Kosovo. To correct those errors, it would for all intents
and purposes be necessary to repeat the registration
process. Given that situation, we consider it essential
that independent experts carry out an unbiased review
ofthe results ofthe registration.

In view of all those facts, the municipal elections
that Mr. Kouchner has been urging for October cannot
at this stage be democratic, free and fair. They risk
strengthening the position of the Albanian extremists
and the proponents of a mono-ethnic Kosovo.

We are obliged once again to draw the
Secretariat's attention to its disregard of our repeated
requests for specific information. Let me cite just one
example. Three times, we have officially requested that
members of the Security Council should be acquainted
with the report of the Finnish forensic experts who
investigated the tragedy that took place at Racak in
March 1999. Information from that report was
published in the German press last spring. To date, we
have had no response to our requests. The wall of
silence onto which our requests fall obliges us to think
seriously about what it is that underlies the Kosovo
cr1s1s.

I had expected to take advantage ofthe Secretary-
General's presence in the Chamber today to ask him
personally to take the necessary steps to make it
possible to acquaint members of the Council with that
report, but, unfortunately, he is no longer here with us.
I hope, however, that his colleagues will transmit our
request - which we are making in this Chamber for
the fourth time 4 to him.

It is our conviction that it is high time that the
traditional accolades that are heaped upon the UNMIK
leadership were replaced by a serious discussion of the
situation in Kosovo, and of the Mission itself and of
ways to remedy the present crisis situation. Holding
such a discussion is a matter of urgency before there is
a new wave of political violence, the full responsibility
for which would fall on the leadership of the
international presences. That responsibility will have to
be shared by the members of the Security Council
which, in considering the problems of Kosovo, have
found it possible to speak solely and exclusively about
the sins of Belgrade and to be entirely silent about the
flagrant breaches of resolution 1244 (1999).

