Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, I would like to start by
thanking you for convening this urgent meeting of the
Security Council at the request of the Arab Group.

For the third time in just a few days, we meet to
try to confront the attempts by Israel to erode the
authority and credibility of this Council.

Members of the Council, with no exception,
know that Israel has refused to commit to the
provisions of the Council's resolutions. These
resolutions clearly call upon Israel to withdraw
immediately from Palestinian towns and territories.
They also call upon Israel to respect the international
humanitarian law, particularly the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War.

If we take a quick look at the responses provided
by the occupying Power, we find an immediate, clear
and unequivocal rejection of the Council's resolutions.
We find that flimsy pretexts are being advanced. Such
pretexts are not acceptable. The Israeli Premier
astounded us this morning with yet more expressions of
disdain and direct contempt for this Council.

I shall not repeat the statement made by the
representative of Palestine a while ago. He explained in
detail the distress of the Palestinian people and their
suffering.

In the light of the gravity of the situation and of
the Palestinian blood being spilled in the streets of the
Jenin refugee camp and in the city of Nablus. among
others, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in
a statement made at the United Nations Second World
Assembly on Ageing this morning in Madrid, said:

"The whole world is demanding that Israel
withdraws - I don't think the whole world,
including the friends of the Israeli people and
Government, can be wrong."

We listened to similar statements by the delegates
who took the floor before me. Those who will speak
after me will probably also repeat this message. We
also listened to the statement by President Bush and to
the interview by Dr. Rice, and we listened to the
statements made by Secretary of State Powell on the
need for an immediate withdrawal.

The Secretary-General went on to say that the
situation was extremely dangerous, that large numbers
of Palestinian citizens were going for days at a time
without medication, food and water, let alone the fact
that humanitarian agencies were not allowed to take
action or to salvage whatever is left to be saved. As
you heard in statements reported in the press and many
other statements, Switzerland has lodged a complaint
that the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the Palestinian Red Crescent were attacked and that
ambulances were prevented from moving or
transporting the wounded, while those who were
wounded were left to die.

The crisis in the occupied Palestinian territories is
getting worse by the minute. The occupying Power
persists in its crimes of State terror against defenceless
and besieged Palestinian civilians. What can be asked
of the Palestinian people when they are under siege,
being killed and under occupation? I think that what
they have had to endure is enough. On television
screens we saw the bodies of Palestinian civilians who
had been killed and thrown in the streets, which recalls
the scenes of the Sabra and Shatila massacre in Beirut,
committed at the hands of the current Israeli Prime
Minister, Sharon, in 1982.

The crimes follow the same scenario now. Will
the Council and the international community allow
Sharon and his terrorist army to commit more
massacres? Would they be left free to not comply with
the Council's resolutions?

With regard to the Blue Line, Lebanon has
declared - and I was informed by the Lebanese
Mission of the facts - that what is taking place in
southern Lebanon is confined to the Shab'a Farms. The
Shab'a Farms are Lebanese territories still under Israeli
occupation; Lebanon has the right to recover its
occupied territories. This was endorsed at all Arab
Summit meetings. The Lebanese believe that the
incidents reported are the result of continued
provocations by the Israelis against the sovereignty of
Lebanon.

Suffice it to say that the gross violations of the
Lebanese air, maritime and land space are the
provocation. There have been more than 1,000
violations of Lebanese air space. Most of those
violations took place at speeds greater than the speed
of sound, thereby terrorizing and intimidating Lebanese
citizens. As a result, some persons had to be
hospitalized due to the ensuing trauma. This afternoon,
Israel used 155 millimetre guns to shell the region of
Kafr Shuba, in liberated Lebanese territory where
Israel is mobilizing its army.

Lebanon confirmed at the highest level that it has
no intention whatever of opening up a new front.
Questions relating to escalation should be addressed to
the Israeli side, which, in the light of its continuous
provocations and territorial, naval and aerial violations,
is the party responsible for escalation. The Lebanese
Government has already ordered its security forces to
detain and try some of the elements operating outside
the law. As I understand it, the attorney-general and the
court of appeals in Lebanon have referred those
elements to a military tribunal, where they will be tried
and sentenced accordingly.

Addressing this question while discussing the
implementation of resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002) is an attempt to divert the Council's attention
and to sidetrack it. Let us be clear: our voices and our
resolutions are in vain while the tragedy of the
Palestinian people continues. The Palestinian people
beseech the Council to rescue them from a campaign of
genocide in which - as the representative of Palestine
has already mentioned - planes and all kinds of
weaponry are being used in a fashion that surpasses the
actions of Nazis.

It is against this backdrop that the Arab Group
submitted its request that the Council convene this
meeting to take the necessary measures to call upon
Israel to respect international humanitarian law, in
particular the Fourth Geneva Convention. The Council
should call upon Israel to put an end to its acts of
aggression against the Palestinian people and its
destruction of Palestinian property, as well as to end its
organized terror and its defiance of international
legitimacy and the resolutions of the Security Council.
Israel must be called upon to withdraw immediately.
The Council is called upon to dispatch a United
Nations international protection force to protect the
Palestinian people, who are being subjected to
annihilation and the crime of genocide. Israel must also
be called upon to stop its destruction of Christian and
Muslim religious sites in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

Everyone should be aware of the fact that the
ongoing occupation is the main cause of the tragedy
unfolding in the region. As we have already pointed
out to the Council, this region will never enjoy security
unless a just and comprehensive peace is achieved and
the root causes of the problem are addressed. This
should be done in accordance with the historic
initiative of the Arab Summit held in Beirut, which
includes provisions for the realization of peace in all its
aspects.

