Mr. Delattre (France) (Spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking the Ambassador
of Uruguay and his team for all the excellent work
they carried out this month. It is no easy task to join
the Council and immediately assume such a heavy
presidency. You, Mr. President, did so brilliantly and
with great competency and professionalism. On behalf
of France, I thank and warmly congratulate you, Sir.

There is a great deal to be said at the beginning of
this year. I will not go back to the Council's important
and difficult mission to Burundi, on which I briefed the
Council earlier today. However, I will say that it should
encourage us to review our methodology in terms of
preparing for such missions, and we must quickly
draw political lessons from those visits, in light of the
decisions, as I said, taken by the African Union at its
Summit.

Today I would like above all to assess the positive
trends and signs of hope that are emerging on various
important issues with the hope that we will see more
hopeful developments in the future. In the Central
African Republic, we welcome the commitment of
the Transitional Authorities and the Central African
people to organizing and participating in the elections
of 30 December, which took place peacefully. The
constructive engagement of Central African political
actors is commendable and should be continued. We
also welcome the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
who worked to provide political, security and logistical
support for the elections.

On 28 January, the Constitutional Court announced
the final results of the first round of presidential
elections. Technical difficulties led to invalidization
of the first round of legislative elections. The objective
should still be to complete the transition in accordance
with the agreed timetable on 31 March. New electionsand
the second round of the presidential election will be
held on 14 February. At the end of this election cycle,
the Central African Republic will have a freely and
democratically elected Government and will be able
to continue its reconciliation and stabilization efforts
with the support of the international community. Let us
remain committed to supporting that momentum.

There has also been good news from Cote d'Ivoire,
where the presidential election held in October last year
demonstrated the progress made by the country in all
areas. cote d'Ivoire demonstrates the extent to which a
peacekeeping mission can assist a country in addressing
and emerging from a crisis. The Council drew on the
lessons learned by deciding the immediate drawdown
of the United Nations Operation in care d'Ivoire
(UNOCI). Ultimately, the termination of UNOCI will
be the best symbol of its success. The strategic review
that the Secretariat will conduct over the next two
months will enable modalities to be defined. A prompt,
effective and well-organized withdrawal of UNOCI will
be the best way to build on gains made, demonstrate our
confidence in the country and its people, and ensure
a strong legacy for C6te d'Ivoire and for international
peace and security.

The promising new momentum in intercommunal
talks in Cyprus, which the Council acknowledged in the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2263 (2016) yesterday,
gives us hope. We must continue to relentlessly support
the efforts and resolve of the two leaders to reunify the
island, in accordance with parameters outlined by the
United Nations and in line with the European Union
acquis.

Last Monday, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2261 (2016), establishing a United Nations
mission to observe and monitor the ceasefire expected
in Colombia in the coming months as part of the peace
process. As previously mentioned, the adoption of the
resolution constitutes a success for the parties as the
newly established mission will be a factor in concluding
the talks currently under way for a ceasefire. It is also
a success for the United Nations and for the Council,
which responded promptly to the appeal made by
Colombia in an unusual context in which a country
turns of its own volition to the Council to request its
assistance in implementing a negotiated settlement.
We must now meet expectations and ensure that the
planning of the mission takes place in a timely manner.
France will continue to work resolutely to that end.

January was also a memorable month for
non-proliferation, which is a harbinger both of hope
and of threats. As to hope, on 16 January the Security
Council received a report from the International Atomic
Energy Agency confirming that Iran was implementing
the initial provisions of the Vienna agreement, thereby
triggering Implementation Day. The strict and good-
faith implementation of the Vienna agreement will
be the only way to guarantee the credibility of the
agreement and to ensure that the resolution of the
Iranian nuclear issue is sustainable. We will continue
to monitor the situation.

With regard to threats, on 6 January that North
Korea conducted its fourth nuclear test in a gross
violation of Security Council resolutions. Such an act
poses a serious threat to regional and international
peace and security. We agreed to respond by holding
emergency consultations on that same day. We hope to
swiftly adopt a strong resolution under Chapter VII that
will substantially strengthen sanctions. Three weeks
after the nuclear test and facing the threat of a ballistic
missile test, it is now time for us to take action.

In Syria, there is a prevailing sense of both hope
and bitterness. Hope was kindled by the adoption of
resolution 2254 (2015) and the prospects for the start of
political negotiations, and bitterness by the conditions
in which the negotiations are taking placing because
there has been no improvement in the humanitarian
situation. In early January, humanitarian workers
described unbearable conditions in Madaya and other
besieged cities in Syria. The Council could not remain
indifferent to such testimony. That is why France
immediately reacted by calling a public meeting of the
Security Council to warn about the plight of civilians in
besieged towns in Syria (see S/PV.7610). We recall and
stress that humanitarian access to civilian populations
is not a favour or concession to be made by the Syrian
regime and other players involved; it is an absolute
requirement. A credible political process requires an
immediate improvement in the situation on the ground
for Syrians.

At the public debate on the Middle East held on
26 January (see S/PV.7612), we stressed the importance
of a swift start to inter-Syrian negotiations, reiterated
the need for rapid and considerable improvement in the
humanitarian situation, and called for the discussions
to focus on the political transition, in accordance with
the terms of the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex). We hope that the Vienna process will meet
those objectives. A political solution alone will put a
lasting end to the suffering of civilians and reduce the
terrorist threat that we all face.

I conclude by warmly thanking the Uruguayan
presidency and wishing Venezuela every success as it
assumes the presidency. My last word will be for our
dear Movses Abelian, who has been appointed to a new
post by the Secretary-General. Movses has embodied
the institutional memory of the Council for many
years, and has given us his precise, professional and
wise counsel seven days a week, 24 hours a day. The
French delegation warmly thanks him and wishes him
every success in his new and important mission with
the General Assembly.

