Mrs. Furman (Israel): We thank Minister Le Drian
of France for convening today's important debate. We
also thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov, the
President of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
and Ms. Mercy Buku for their presentations.

Terrorism financing and money-laundering is
the fuel that fires the engine of terrorism. Therefore,
to combat terrorism effectively, we must cut off
the financial lifeline for terrorism and shut down
its financers.

Our region has witnessed the destabilizing and
destructive role of terrorism financing. Palestinian
terrorism continues to derail any hope or opportunity
for peace. Hamas uses and abuses charitable
organizations and humanitarian aid to fund its terror,
while the Palestinian Authority spends hundreds of
thousands of United States dollars annually to reward
terrorists who have killed innocent Israelis, rather
than use these critical funds to support economic
development and pave the way to a brighter future for
the Palestinian people.

When it comes to the Iranian regime, it would
take an entire day to outline how the number-one State
sponsor of terrorism uses sophisticated methods to
evade sanctions regimes and finance terrorism and
its proxies worldwide. Its leading proxy, Hizbullah, is
known to use and abuse international financial systems
to illicitly fund its stockpiling of advanced weaponry
and construction of terror-attack tunnels that infiltrate
Israel. Many delegations today noted Hizbullah's
abuse of otherwise legitimate businesses, particularly
in the pharmaceutical sector, to finance their terrorist
activities throughout the region.

Israel is taking active and proactive steps to
combat the unrelenting threats of terror that we face
and the flow of funding that sustains them. These
steps include drafting legislation and establishing
institutions, infrastructure and mechanisms carefully
designed to address this alarming phenomenon. In
2016, Israel enacted an innovative and comprehensive
new anti-terrorism law that takes a holistic approach to
fighting terrorism using legal tools. Beyond providing
harsher sentencing for perpetrators of terrorism and
enhanced due-process safeguards, this law introduces
something new: it criminalizes the circles of influence
that provide material and other support to terrorists and
terrorist acts. Therefore, rather than targeting only the
acts of terror themselves, the new law addresses the
very pillars and foundations that support and finance
terrorism. We hope this comprehensive anti-terrorism
law can serve as a model worldwide.

Beyond adopting domestic legislation, Israel has
worked effectively to combat terrorism financing on the
international front as well. Two years ago, Israel gained
observer status with the FATF. In December 2018, the
FATF published a national evaluation report in which
Israel received the highest possible ratings in the areas of
combatting terrorism financing and the effective use of
financial intelligence. The report praised Israel's strong
and extensive anti-terrorism-financing institutions and
positive inter-agency coordination, particularly among
Israel's Money-Laundering and Terror Financing
Prohibition Authority, its security authorities, the
national police, the Tax Authority and the Corporations
Authority. It also highlighted our highly effective use
of financial intelligence, leading to a large number of
successful investigations and prosecutions, as well as
Israel's active and effective confiscation of proceeds of
terrorism financing. As the FATF President noted in his
briefing, Israel recently shared its experience and best
practices in these areas in a recent FATF workshop.

The report also noted that Israel is properly and
wisely approaching the issue of the financing of
terrorism holistically, as it looks not only at acts of
terrorism financing themselves, but also their related
activities, including cross-border smuggling, the abuse
of charities and non-profits, trade-based financing of
terrorism and vulnerable money-transfer mechanisms.
As stated in the report,

"Israel effectively deprives terrorists, terrorist
organizations and terrorist financers of their
assets and instrumentalities related to terrorism
financing activities."

In the face of the Iranian regime's State-sponsored
terrorism worldwide, Israel has enacted comprehensive
and effective counter-proliferation finance-targeted
financial sanctions, which was also noted in the FATF
evaluation. Overall, as the FATF report underlines,
Israel implements targeted financial sanctions without
delay, effectively implementing terrorist designations
under resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 1988
(2011).

Finally, Israel was an active participant at the
high-level International Conference on Combating the
Financing of Da'esh and Al-Qaida, held in Paris last
year on the theme "No money for terror". We look
forward to contributing in future meetings, including
the upcoming meeting in Australia.

As noted by many of my colleagues, positive
cooperation between the public and private sectors
and early communication between national security
authorities and financial institutions is key to effectively
combating this phenomenon. Fostering this cooperation
should be a priority. I would also like to highlight a
number of existing and emerging threats that, in our
view, must be given priority and addressed by the
global community, including the threat of countries and
entities that have the ability to collect funds and provide
them to terrorist organizations; the abuse of charitable
organizations by terrorist organizations; self-financing
terrorist organizations supported by seemingly
legitimate business operations; the smuggling of funds,
goods and valuables through border crossings; and the
abuse of emerging technologies to finance terrorism,
including the use of electronic wallets and virtual assets.

1 am here today to share Israel's knowledge of
counter-terrorism - an expertise we have unfortunately
gained due to decades of terrorism against our people.
We hope to provide the United Nations, counter-
terrorism bodies and fellow peace-seeking nations with
best practices, practical solutions and cutting-edge
technologies, so that together we can overcome this
evil force.

