Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin, Madam President, by thanking your
Excellency and the Government of friendly Indonesia
for convening this important debate. I would also like
to express our gratitude to His Excellency Mr. Antonio
Guterres, Mr. Peter Mauer and Mr. Federico Borello for
their valuable briefings and for their participation in
today's meeting.

I align myself with the statement to be delivered by
the Permanent Representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians
in Armed Conflict.

The year 2019 marks the seventieth anniversary
of the 1949 Geneva Conventions and the twentieth
anniversary of Security Council resolution 1265 (1999)
as well as the inclusion of the protection of civilians
as a standing item on the Council's agenda. However,
the challenges facing the protection of civilians are the
same as they were 20 years ago. The cycle of Violence
will continue to harm millions of innocent civilians in
conflict areas for another 20 years if we do not adopt
serious and urgent measures that reflect the repeated
calls and appeals to Member States, United Nations
officials and international community to address this
phenomenon. We agree with the Secretary-General
when he expressed his deep concern about this issue in
his report on protecting civilians in armed conflict for
this year (S/2019/373).

I would like to focus in my statement on three main
issues: ensuring respect for international humanitarian
law and guaranteeing access to humanitarian
assistance, accountability and how to better implement
the protection of civilians.

First, the atrocities committed against innocent
civilians everywhere in the world are caused by
disregarding and deliberately violating international
humanitarian law. There are still parties to many
conflicts that completely ignore their obligations
under international humanitarian law. They deal with
international law as if it is just ink on paper. We all
see attacks against medical facilities, schools and
humanitarian workers. We also see the prevention
of access to humanitarian assistance and the use of
starvation and sexual violence as a method of warfare.
Therefore, we emphasize that all parties to an agreement
must comply with the obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law. They must also implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions. In that regard, we reiterate our call
to refrain from using the veto when the issue concerns
delivering humanitarian assistance to besieged and
needy civilians during conflict.

Secondly, another factor that perpetuates the
endless cycle of violence against civilians in conflict
is the phenomenon of impunity. Some parties to armed
conflicts continue to commit crimes against civilians
and violate international laws without being deterred
or subjected to accountability. In that regard, Kuwait
supports the use of Security Council tools to guarantee
accountability of the perpetrators of crimes committed
in armed conflicts and bring them to justice, including
through Council sanctions committees and fact-
finding missions.

Thirdly, it is important to know that the report of
the Secretary-General clearly outlines all the necessary
steps and measures that must be taken to improve the
implementation of the mandate related to the protection
of civilians and put an end to the crimes committed
against them. That would be done by ensuring urgent
and concrete progress in implementing the three
recommendations that he mentioned in his previous
report (S/2019/462), namely, developing national policy
frameworks for protection of civilians, enhancing
compliance and respect of the law by non-State armed
groups, and promoting compliance with international
law through accountability. We share Indonesia's
View regarding the importance of focusing on the
involvement of societies and promoting their role in the
protection of civilians.

Lastly, concerning the topic of protecting civilians
in armed conflict, the State of Kuwait has sought to
strengthen the institutional and normative framework
for protecting civilians based on our bitter national
experience from which many of our people are still
suffering. Consequently, we have proposed a draft
resolution on the issue of missing persons in armed
conflict. We thank Mr. Peter Mauer, who highlighted
in his statement today the continued humanitarian
suffering and its negative effects. The Security
Council does not have a reference language pertaining
to the issue of missing persons, which, if addressed
according to clear measures at the beginning of a
conflict, would have a significant impact on the post-
conflict agreement and reconciliation phase as well as
on restoring relations among the parties and building
confidence. The draft resolution also aims to reiterate
the importance of the relevant rules of international
humanitarian law and human rights law on missing
persons in armed conflicts. During its presidency of the
Council next month the State of Kuwait will organize
a meeting to brief members on this topic. We hope that
our draft resolution will be adopted during the meeting.

Even after 20 years have elapsed since the Security
Council adopted the mandate of protecting civilians,
this issue remains more important than ever. We, as
Council members, must intensify our efforts to ensure
that innocent civilians do not pay a price for the conflicts
of which they have unwillingly become a part. We must
shoulder our responsibility and commit ourselves to
seriously working to guarantee peace and reach lasting
political solutions to conflicts, particularly in Africa
and the Middle East. The peoples of the world deserve
more than mere words and continuing condemnations.

