Mr. Kaludjerovic' (Montenegro): Since this is the
first time that I am addressing the Security Council on
behalf of the youngest State Member of the United
Nations, please allow me to reaffirm full Montenegrin
commitment to respect of international law and the
implementation of all our obligations in that regard.

I would like to join previous speakers and thank
Judge F austo Pocar, President of the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and
Ms. Carla Del Ponte, ICTY Chief Prosecutor, for their
comprehensive report and briefings about the
achievements of the Tribunal, particularly the most
recent, as well as about the challenges that lie ahead.
Given that it is vital that the Tribunal's mandate and
completion strategy be carried through, we very much
appreciate and support the efforts that they have made
in that regard. My thanks go also to the newly elected
President, Judge Dennis Byron, for his briefing. I wish
him every success in carrying out his important duties.
I also thank Mr. Jallow, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), for his briefing.

Let me touch briefly on a part of the report that
we have been discussing today, related to international
cooperation in the context of an event that took place
in my country this week. This is not the first time that
the Tribunal has issued a detailed and comprehensive
written report shortly before a very important event -
which attests, above all, to the effective and dynamic
work of the Tribunal. An important precondition for the
fulfilment of the Tribunal's mandate occurred in my
country yesterday, when Vlastimir Djordjevic, an
indictee who had long been a fugitive, was arrested and
extradited to the Tribunal by the Government of
Montenegron. Our authorities handled the case in an
expeditious and professional manner, fulfilling their
internal, regional and international obligations, having
previously cooperated fully with the Tribunal and with
the competent Serbian authorities. This is a clear
confirmation of the determination of the Government
of Montenegro - primarily the Ministry of the Interior
and the National Security Agency - to respect and
carry out their international obligations. We strongly
believe that impunity cannot serve justice and that all
indictees must face the truth and be brought to justice
for the charges raised against them.

I would also like to emphasize that Montenegro
has been continuously engaged in very intensive
cooperation with the Tribunal and the Prosecutor's
Office. That fact has been reiterated several times in
recent years during the consideration of the Tribunal's
reports in the Security Council. I would like to thank
Ms. Carla Del Ponte for giving me the opportunity to
hear that once again today in her introductory remarks.
Yesterday's closing of the first chapter - if I
may call it that - of the Djordjevic case also confirms
that comprehensive cooperation with the Tribunal must
go hand in hand with regional cooperation at all levels.
I assure members that nothing will hinder us in our
determination to foster, within our responsibilities, all
aspects of our cooperation with the Tribunal and all the
parties that contribute to its successful work.

We agree with the concluding comment of the
President of the International Tribunal that

"the success of the International Tribunal is not
exclusively measured by the judgments issued or
the number of trials and appeals completed. The
overall legacy of the International Tribunal will
be the precedent that it has set for the
enforcement of international humanitarian law
and the contribution that it has made to the
establishment of peace and stability in the former
Yugoslavia through the prosecution of those
responsible for the atrocities committed in the
region."

Finally, as this is the last Security Council
meeting at which the Prosecutor of the ICTY will be
submitting a report, I should like, on behalf of my
Government, to thank Ms. Carla Del Ponte for her
enormous contribution, her exceptional dedication and
her tireless efforts aimed at the fulfilment of the
Tribunal's mandate, as well as for the cooperation,
understanding and support that have been given to
Montenegro. I would also like to wish her every
success in her future career.

