The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of March, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to Mr. Arnoldo Manuel Listre, Permanent
Representative of Argentina to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the month
of February. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Listre for the great diplomatic skill with which
he conducted the Council's business last month.

If Council members will allow me, at this point I
would like to convey the following. Yesterday,
Her Excellency Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina of
Bangladesh called my delegation to convey her
congratulations on our assumption of the presidency. She
asked me personally to convey to all the Council members
her greetings, as well as her full support and her
Government's full support in the discharge of our
responsibilities. She has encouraged us to continue our
work to promote international peace and security and a
culture of peace worldwide.

The Foreign Minister of Bangladesh has also conveyed
his greetings to all the Council members.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Election of a member of the International Court of
Justice (S/2000/105, S/2000/106 and Add. 1 and 2 and S/2000/107)

The President: I should like to recall that at its
4075th meeting, on 30 November 1999, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1278 (1999), by which it
decided that the election to fill the vacancy in the
International Court of Justice should take place on 2 March
2000 at a meeting of the Security Council and at a meeting
of the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session.

This afternoon the Security Council and the General
Assembly will proceed independently with the election, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Statute of the
Court, for the purpose of filling the vacancy which occurred
on 29 February 2000 owing to the resignation of Judge
Stephen Schwebel (United States of America).

The list of nominations of the candidates by national
groups of States parties to the International Court of
Justice Statute is contained in document S/2000/ 106 and
addenda 1 and 2.

Document S/2000/ 107 contains the curriculum vitae
of the candidate nominated by national groups of States.

The Security Council also has before it a
memorandum by the Secretary-General, contained in
document S/2000/ 105, describing the present composition
of the Court and setting out the procedure to be followed
in the conduct of the election.

I should like to remind the Council that, under
Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the International
Court of Justice,

"Those candidates who obtain an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly and in
the Security Council shall be considered as elected".

The required majority in the Security Council is eight
votes.

Article 15 of the Statute of the International Court of
Justice provides that

"A member of the Court elected to replace a
member whose term of office has not expired shall
hold office for the remainder of his predecessor's
term."

Accordingly, the member elected to fill the remainder of
the term left vacant by the resignation of Judge Schwebel
will serve until 5 February 2006.

The voting will be held by secret ballot. When we
proceed to the vote, members of the Council will receive
a ballot paper containing the name of the candidate. No
withdrawal will be accepted once the ballot papers have
been distributed. However, it would be possible to
withdraw between ballots. Members of the Council will
be requested to place an "X" in the box next to the name
of the candidate for whom they wish to vote. Votes may
be cast only for a candidate whose name appears on the
ballot paper.

I should like to remind members of paragraph 15 of
the Secretary-Generals memorandum, contained in
document S/2000/105, which specifies that

 

"Each elector may vote for only one candidate."

Any ballot paper containing votes for more than one name
will be considered invalid. When a candidate has obtained
the required majority of votes, I shall communicate the
result to the President of the General Assembly, and I shall
request the Council to remain in session pending the receipt
from the President of the General Assembly of the result of
the voting in the Assembly.

The Council will now proceed to draw lots to select
two delegations to serve as tellers.


The President: The names of the delegations of Mali
and Canada have been drawn. I request each of those
delegations to appoint one member to serve as teller.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Burgess
(Canada) and Mr. Mahamane Maiga (Mali) acted as
tellers.


The President: May I take it that the Council is now
ready to proceed with the election of a member of the
International Court of Justice?

It is so decided.

I request the Conference Officer to distribute the ballot
papers.

Members of the Council should place an "X" in the
box next to the name of the candidate for whom they wish
to vote.


The President: I take it that all members of the
Council have now voted, and I ask the Conference Officer
to collect the ballot papers.

>l< >l< >l=


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. I should like to remind the Council that, as we
agreed during our consultations, the ballots will not be
counted until it has been verified that the ballot papers in
the General Assembly have been collected. The Council
will remain in session pending the receipt of that
information.


The President: I have now been informed that the
ballot papers have been collected in the General
Assembly.
The counting of the ballots in the Security Council
will now begin. The tellers will now count the ballots.

As agreed in our consultations, there will be two
independent countings of the ballots, one by each teller.


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:

Mr. Thomas Buergenthal 15

Mr. Thomas Buergenthal has accordingly received
the required majority of votes in the Security Council.

I shall communicate the result of the vote to the
President of the General Assembly in writing.

I request the Council to remain in session while we
wait for the President of the General Assembly to inform
the Council of the result of the voting in the Assembly.


The President: I should like to inform the members
of the Council that I have just received from the President
of the General Assembly the following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
90th plenary meeting of the General Assembly, held
today for the purpose of electing a member of the
International Court of Justice, the following
candidate obtained an absolute majority of votes in
the General Assembly: Mr. Thomas Buergenthal."

As both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have agreed on the same candidate, the

 

distinguished jun'st Mr. Thomas Buergenthal has been I should also like to thank the tellers For their
elected as a member of the International Court of Justice assistance.

for the remainder of the tenn of office of Judge Schwebel,

that is, until 5 February 2006. The Security Council has thus concluded its business

for this meeting.
I should like to congratulate him and wish him every
success in the high office to which he has been elected. The "heating rose at 6.10 p.m.

