Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): There is a well-known adage that says, "That
which harms you can also help you grow". This saying
makes considerably easier my task of criticizing the
invitation extended to the Executive Director of the so-
called Syrian American Medical Society, particularly
in the light of the praise heaped by the United States
representative on that Society and its work in Syria.
I think the commendation speaks volumes as to the
extent to which the society is linked with United States
intelligence agencies operating actively in my country
and in other countries. That is not an accusation
against the society, which every year fails to obtain
consultative status in the meetings of non-governmental
organizations here in New York. Every year it submits
a request and fails to achieve consultative status for
reasons of which States Members of the Organization
are aware and there is no need to go into further detail.

As mentioned on its website, the organization is
affiliated with the Federal Government of the United
States. Indeed, it is affiliated with an agency called the
United States Agency for International Development
(USAID), for which the person present with us here
worked in Iraq, Afghanistan and then Syria for eight
years before he was transferred to preside over the
Syrian American Medical Society. The important thing
is that the society works for USAID and the latter
introduces itself on its website as an independent agency
of the United States Federal Government with a budget
of more than $27 billion. The person present with us
here who spoke on behalf of a society called the Syrian
American Medical Society is an employee of USAID,
which is an agency ofthe United States Administration,
meaning that he is a non-independent federal employee.
He should therefore not have been invited to speak
before the Council. He is an American, not a Syrian.
He has no right to speak about another country, while
the Syrian American Medical Society or the American
Syrian Medical Society - I do not know what they call
it - is not authorized to work in Syria. That means that
it is an illegal organization that is illegally active on
Syrian territory. There is something important called
legal ignorance, which does not authorize anyone
to ignore the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, resolutions of the Security Council or the
General Assembly or the consensual resolutions of
other important international institutions, which I will
address now.

First, the Geneva Conventions do not allow the
society to be active on the territory of another State
without the consent of the State involved. Secondly, the
system that established the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in 1921 forbids
any medical or non-medical society from being active
on the occupied territory of another State unless
that State approves it. As members know, General
Assembly resolution 46/182 stipulates that no one can
provide humanitarian assistance without the consent
of the authorities of the State concerned. Paragraph
14 of the General Assembly resolution on the pattern
of conferences that we adopt by consensus every year
stipulates that United Nations halls, buildings and
facilities are not allowed to be used against the interests
of a State Member of the United Nations.

There is another important point to mention. The
Executive Director of that organization or society said
that it provided 14 million medical services in Idlib.
All members know that, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and others, the
Al-Nusra Front controls 99 per cent of Idlib. That means
that a terrorist group controls 99 per cent of Idlib where
the Syrian American Medical Society is active. How
could it be that the society is active in places controlled
by a terrorist group? Hence, there is cooperation
between the terrorist group and the society, meaning
that the society provides assistance to a terrorist group
in Idlib rather than providing assistance to civilians
in Idlib.

