Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I should like at the outset, Mr. President, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month. I thank also the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her
briefing, and those speakers who also briefed the
Council at the beginning of this morning's meeting.
I also welcome the presence of Mr. John Asselborn
among us.

We have read with interest the report of the
Secretary-General before us on children and armed
conflict (S/2013/245). Despite the fact that the Special
Representative has, for the first time, addressed in her
report the issue of the crimes and violations committed
by armed terrorist groups, particularly with regard
to recruitment of children, it is regrettable that she
disregarded other incidents reported and documented
by many governmental and non-governmental sources.
Those sources have reaffirmed that Salafist and Wahhabi
fundamentalist groups have recruited children. It took
the Special Representative two years to include those
armed terrorist groups on the list, despite the fact that
they recruit children in the context of the conflict in
Syria.

We would have wished that the Special
Representative had requested in her recommendation on
Syria that the States sponsors of fundamentalist terrorist
groups, which are known to all by now, stop supporting
those groups by financing them and providing to them
arms, munitions, information and intelligence, and that
they lift the unilateral coercive economic measures
that they have imposed on the Syrian people, of which
Syrian children are the primary victims as a result of
the lack of development programmes and financing and
due to the weakness of the national economy.

It is most alarming that the Special Representative
insists on including the Syrian armed forces on the list
and on considering them responsible for the bombing of
schools and hospitals, even for disfiguring children and
committing acts of sexual violence against them.

Allow me to address those claims one by one.

First, with respect to the bombing of schools and
hospitals, let me say that we welcomed the Special
Representative and her delegation in late 2012. She met
with the ministers concerned, particularly the Minister
of Education, who provided her with documented proof
of the extent of the acts of terrorism committed against
educational establishments and schools by armed
terrorist groups. She also made expanded field visits
to schools, hospitals and shelters in Damascus, Homs
and the surrounding areas; however, for some reason,
she chose to disregard what she saw with her own eyes:
that the Syrian Government is using those schools as
shelters for numerous families.

Acts of aggression by armed terrorist groups
continue to be perpetrated against educational
establishments in Syria; this has been documented.
Such acts include forcibly preventing inhabitants from
sending their children to school and bombing schools
and nearby areas, including deliberately, as happened
with an engineering school and other schools in
Damascus.

The health-care infrastructure has also been
targeted by those armed terrorist groups, which have
destroyed, burned and looted more than 35 per cent
of Syrian hospitals. We have provided the Special
Representative with a video recording, with sound,
of terrorists preparing to bomb a hospital and another
recording of the detonation itself. However, there is
no mention of that heinous crime in the report. That
incident alone should have been sufficient to warrant
the inclusion of those terrorist groups on the list of
shame for having bombed schools and hospitals.

Secondly, with respect to the killing and disfiguring
of children, the world has seen the repulsive crimes
perpetrated by terrorist groups against children since
the beginning ofthe crisis. Mohammed Qatta, a 14-year-
old child, was shot to death in Aleppo by elements of
a fundamentalist terrorist brigade of the al-Nusra
Front calling itself the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant. He was whipped and tortured in front of his
parents on charges of blasphemy. In another incident, a
4-year-old child named Faisal was hanged by terrorist
fundamentalist groups after being raped and dragged
for a great distance.

Two days ago, on the Saudi Al-Arabiya satellite
channel, we witnessed the excitement of a Salafist
Wahhabi sheikh from Kuwait, Shafi al-Ajami, who
takes pride in having cut the throats of Syrian children
in Hatla, in Deir Ezzor. Many other heinous crimes
have been committed by the al-Nusra Front that should
have been included on the list of terrorists provided to
the Council.

Thirdly, concerning sexual violence against
children, how is it possible that the crimes committed
by those terrorist armed groups, including rape and
sexual violence, the murder of children, and acts of
violence against girls and women throughout Syria
were not mentioned in the report? How could the taking
of girls and women as spoils of war and sex slaves not
be mentioned? How could that group of thugs of war,
sexual perverts and cannibals who reside in certain
Gulf sheikhdoms be free to issue edicts on satellite
channels making such crimes permissible under the
banner of sexualjihad or "fornicationjihad"?

We denounce the fact that the report fails to make
mention of the suffering of Syrian children under
Israeli occupation in the occupied Syrian Golan. We
have drawn the attention of Ms. Zerrougui to this issue
several times since she took office, emphasizing the
necessity to give it due importance in her reports. She
has not done so, however.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate that the
Syrian Government is committed to protecting its
citizens, particularly children, and that all perpetrators
of acts that violate the safety and security of children
will be held strictly accountable. In addition, the Syrian
Government passed a law this year criminalizing the
involvement of children under 18 in any armed conflict,
punishable by 10 to 20 years of hard labour.

