Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the presence of the Minister of Foreign
Affairs and Trade of the Republic of Korea, His
Excellency Mr. Kim Sung-hwan. We thank him for
having convened this open debate at such an opportune
time and for presiding over it . We regret that our own
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Fernando Carrera
Castro, who wanted to join us here, was unable to do so
due to a last-minute conflict in his schedule.

We would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his very informative statement and for
his ninth report on the matter (S/2012/376). As that
report was published in May 2012, it is essential that
it be updated. We also appreciate the statements by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, and express our thanks to
Mr. Philip Spoerri for his contribution to this debate.

The protection of human life and the protection
of civilian populations are at the core of the United
Nations mandate and the agenda of the Security
Council. However, civilians continue to suffer and are
the victims in every conflict, despite the resolutions of
the Council on the matter, a solid base of international
jurisprudence and the tireless and increasing efforts
of the international community with respect to those
noble intentions.

It is regrettable that, over and over again and in
recent examples such as in the Syrian Arab Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan
and Mali, we are compelled to energetically condemn
premeditated attacks against civilians and the
consequent loss of human life resulting from the use of
indiscriminate or disproportionate force. All parties to
an armed conflict, whether domestic or transnational,
must promote the peaceful resolution of conflicts
and undertake their obligations in accordance with
international humanitarian law.
Many decisions have been adopted after resolution
1265 (1999), which marked the beginning of a new
approach to the protection of civilians in the Council's
discussions. However, in most of the reports on the
subject, as well as in those on the protection of specific
groups such as women and children, we are merely
informed of the immense suffering endured by civilian
populations and the casualties among them, which
invariably surpass military casualties.

In his 2009 report (S/2009/277), the Secretary-
General presented the five basic challenges that the
United Nations in general and the Security Council
more specifically, together with the international
community, must address. Those challenges continue
to be entirely pertinent, because in most cases we have
not yet been able to resolve the problem.

Moreover, as members know, we are now faced with
the fact that conflicts are increasingly of an intra-State
nature, rather than between two States, which makes
intervention by the Council more difficult as these
are, strictly speaking, the internal affairs of sovereign
States, even if those States are not upholding their
primary obligation of protecting their own citizens.
Precisely when such situations arise, especially when
they are of a flagrant nature, the established principle
of non-intervention must be superceded by our common
commitment, and even responsibility, to protect
civilian populations from mass violations and atrocities
inflicted on them by their own Governments.

Guatemala participates actively, through our
troops and under the flag of the United Nations, in
peacekeeping operations that have strong mandates
concerning the protection of civilians, as in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, a simple
examination of the ratio of peacekeepers to civilians
reveals that Blue Helmets cannot guarantee protection
for everyone. The protection of civilians also requires
significant equipment and logistical support, which
are often insufficient or not available to missions.
That gives rise to the broader question of the balance
between mandates and resources.

We will continue to work in close cooperation in
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
on the strategies for the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping missions. We will do so in compliance
with their mandates, international law and full respect
for the primary responsibility of host States to protect
their own civilian populations. However, we remain
concerned about many issues, which I will not mention
in my oral statement but which are listed in the text of
the statement that we have circulated.
Furthermore, we trust that a legally binding treaty
that would establish common international norms
that are as strict as possible on the import, export and
transfer of arms will be adopted at the final United
Nations conference on the arms trade treaty, to be held
in New York in March. The lack of such a universal
instrument has a high toll in terms of human lives.

We recognize that important steps have been
taken in the area of international justice to bring those
responsible for Violations to justice. The Security
Council itself has provided important such examples
by creating the International Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda, respectively, and in referring
the situations in Darfur and Libya to the International
Criminal Court. In that regard, it should be stressed
that the International Criminal Court is an ally of the
Security Council in the fight against impunity for the
worst crimes. We should not fail to take advantage of
its preventive, dissuasive and punitive capacity. We call
on all Member States to ratify the Rome Statute and to
cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court.

I would like to conclude with a brief reference to the
ample arsenal of preventive diplomacy at our disposal.
We would recall that, in 2012, the Secretary-General
presented his five-year plan of action, which included
promoting the agenda of the responsibility to protect.
As I suggested earlier, my delegation fully supports that
priority, which in turn contributes to further shaping
the subject of today's debate in spite of the differing
concepts of the topic, which the Secretary-General
himself has rightly brought to our attention.

The important message regarding the responsibility
to protect is that it is expected of all members of the
international community to observe a pattern of
behaviour relevant to their respective populations.
Notwithstanding, committing genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing or crimes against humanity or
provocative actions that lead to those crimes should be
considered totally prohibited.

States that do not meet that basic commitment must
understand that they will face consequences. Our own
heads of State jointly accepted the concept in 2005; the
least that we can do now, seven years later, is to offer
assurances that this important achievement continues
evolving in its practical and operational application.
We are pleased that the concept has been included in
the draft presidential statement to be adopted today.

In defending the protection of civilians, we send
a message of hope and a signal of our firm collective
commitment. We are prepared to protect the vulnerable
from the scourges caused by conflicts and other
violations of peace and security. If we continue to act
collectively, in time we will be able to fully fulfil our
responsibility to protect our civilian populations.

