The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item, Without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Poakre-
Kono (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

It is so decided.

Also in accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure to His Excellency Mr. Jan Grauls,
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Belgium.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Grauls to take a seat at the Council
table.
2
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/309, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic and on the activities of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Lynn Pascoe and Mr. Jan Grauls. I
now give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.


