Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to thank
the President for the month of April, the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan for convening this important
meeting and take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
essential role played by Jordan towards the peace and
stability of the region. I would also like to thank His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing.

Japan notes with concern that the Middle East peace
process has fallen into a vicious circle ofmistrust. While
negotiations have stalled, the sequence of violence and
provocative rhetoric has only deepened this rift. It is
evident that this situation is not sustainable. As the
international community has manifested time and time
again, a just, durable and comprehensive peace between
Israel and Palestine, based on a two-state solution,
is urgently needed. The window of opportunity is
narrowing. Developments on the ground, including
illegal settlement activities by Israel and violence from
both sides, are making it difficult to resume talks, let
alone reach an agreement. An environment conducive
to the resumption of talks must be recreated.

Accordingly, Japan calls on the new Israeli
Administration to stand by its commitment to a two-
State solution, both in words and deeds. We reiterate
our call on Israel to completely cease settlement
activities, which are illegal under international law
and undermine the prospects of a two-State solution.
Likewise, the withholding of tax revenues, contrary to
the Paris Protocol, has negatively affected the stability
of Palestinian institutions. In this regard, Japan
welcomes the announcement that an agreement has been
reached for the resumption of tax revenue transfers. We
call on both parties to refrain from unilateral measures
that could undermine efforts for the resumption of
peace negotiations. To this end, Prime Minister Abe of
Japan visited Israel and Palestine in January and called
directly on Prime Minister Netanyahu and President
Abbas to resume peace negotiations.

Japan values the critical role that the United States
and the Quartet have played in facilitating the peace
process negotiations. Nonetheless, in light ofthe current
impasse, it is likewise evident that the international
community should also contribute to nurturing an
environment that is conducive to negotiations.

Japan believes that a multilateral approach that
calls for constructive contributions from countries with
the will and capacity to exert positive influence may
be propitious to advancing the peace process. As one
of the principal donors to the region with strong ties to
both sides, Japan stands ready to assume such a role.
Moreover, as my delegation stated at the previous open
debate on this item (see S/PV.7419), we believe that the
security Council can also play a constructive role, as
appropriate and when necessary.

Japan will continue to carry out providing
its distinctive support from a mid-to-long-term
perspective. We are convinced that fostering mutual
trust and creating a sustainable Palestinian economy
will facilitate negotiations and underpin the viability
of a two-State solution. To that end, in January, Prime
Minister Abe announced $100 million in aid, which was
all disbursed within three months. This brings Japan's
assistance to Palestine and the peace process to over
$1.6 billion since 1993.

Through ongoing projects, such as the Corridor for
Peace and Prosperity Initiative and the Conference on
Cooperation among East Asian countries for Palestinian
Development, Japan remains resolute in helping lay
the groundwork towards the realization of two States
living side by side in peace and security. Japan believes
that the day will come in the near future when we can
recognize Palestine as a State, in accordance with a
two-State solution through negotiations.

I would also have liked to speak today on the
situations in Syria and Yemen, however, due to the time
limits, I will leave my comments in the full text that has
been distributed in the Chamber.

In closing, I wish to emphasize that Japan is
conscious of the unique and constructive role it can
play in assisting countries of the region achieve peace
and prosperity. In the light of the difficult situation in
the Middle East, Japan stands ready, more than ever, to
continue our cooperation with the United Nations and
the international community.

