Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey; the countries
of the Stabilisation and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Serbia and Montenegro; and the European Free
Trade Association country, Iceland, member of the
European Economic Area, align themselves with this
statement.

I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to debate
once again this profoundly important issue and I wish
also to extend our appreciation to Under-Secretary-
General Jan Egeland for his informative briefing this
morning, in particular with respect to his comments on
the necessity to ensure sustained humanitarian access
to civilians in need.

The European Union remains fully committed to
enhancing the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
In particular, the European Union welcomes the
attention paid by the Security Council to the situation
of children affected by armed conflict, an issue on
which the European Union has recently adopted
specific policy guidelines.

Regular dialogue on the protection of civilians in
such circumstances is only one element of this process.
As the Secretary-General has reminded us in his recent
report, there is strong evidence that civilians continue
to bear the brunt of armed conflicts, as in the very
different types of conflicts in the Sudan, C6te d'Ivoire,
Iraq and Nepal. And this is clearly not an exhaustive
list.

The European Union fully subscribes to the 10-
point platform on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict presented to the Security Council in December
2003 by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs. It provides us all with a clear and vital
blueprint for future action in this arena. It is imperative
that the commitments contained therein be delivered on
as a matter of urgency. We agree with the view
articulated by the Secretary-General that fundamental
human rights are the basis of an international moral
order which nations must respect, especially in times of
war and fear. We also underscore our agreement with
the Secretary-General's observation that the promotion
and protection of human rights must be central to an
effective strategy to counter terrorism.

In his report, the Secretary-General looks at the
progress that has been made in the protection of
civilians since his last report issued 18 months ago.
This is followed by a careful identification of those
areas where there are continuing shortfalls. In this
regard, the EU remains strongly convinced that the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Times of War represents a
fundamental legal framework within which these
problems need to be addressed.

The EU welcomes the stronger protection focus
in more recent peacekeeping mandates. This is a
tangible display of the importance which the Security
Council attaches to the issue. The swifter deployment
of peacekeeping troops is, in addition, a highly
welcome development. The EU would like to take this
opportunity to commend the initiative taken by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to deploy rapidly a mission in Liberia in
August 2003. For its part, the Union was pleased to be
able to deploy forces to Ituri in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in May 2003, which facilitated
the stabilization of the position on the ground.

The significance of the regional dimension of the
protection of civilians is one that has been increasingly
recognized by the Security Council on such issues as
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement, and the cross-border
movement of refugees, combatants and small arms.
Regional organizations themselves have also
recognized their own key role by taking concrete steps.
In this regard, the Union welcomes in particular the
decision of the African Union to appoint a special
representative for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. ECOWAS and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe have also taken positive
measures. In this connection, we have been pleased to
be in a position to deploy a rapid-reaction force in Ituri
and to participate in the United Nations Mission in
Liberia.

The European Union calls upon all States and
parties to armed conflict to respect and ensure full
compliance with international humanitarian law, as
well as to respect the neutrality, independence and
impartiality of humanitarian operations. The Union is
concerned at the increased risks the United Nations and
associated civilian personnel are facing on the ground.
We reiterate the great importance we attach to the
United Nations Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel and to the expansion
of the scope of the legal protection under the
Convention.

In his report, the Secretary-General states that
efforts to deter war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide, and to break the prevailing culture of
impunity in situations of armed conflict have been
boosted by the establishment of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the jurisprudence of other
international tribunals. We strongly concur with this
assessment. In this regard, we also wish to signal our
strong support for the recent decision by the Secretary-
General to appoint a Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide. The European Union, in addition,
strongly endorses the suggestion made by the
Secretary-General that the Security Council could
consider referrals to the Prosecutor of the ICC for
investigation under article 13 (b) of the Rome Statute,
where the national jurisdiction is unwilling or unable to
act.

While excessive focus on punishment for past
crimes may be counterproductive in a national
reconciliation process, impunity, as the Secretary-
General observes, can be an even more dangerous
recipe for sliding back into conflict. In the same vein,
and as we have observed on a number of occasions in
the past, the EU agrees strongly that, while amnesties
may provide an important measure for dealing with
lesser crimes, they must never be granted for serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. Together with the Secretary-General, we
urge member States that have not yet done so to ratify
or accede to the Rome Statute as well as to the treaties
of international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law, and to take all appropriate measures to
implement fully these treaties within national systems,
including ensuring proper investigation and
prosecution of any violations of the relevant rules.

The EU has long had a particular concern
regarding the sexual exploitation and abuse of women
and children in armed conflict. In spite of efforts to
address this abhorrent practice, reports indicate that it
continues unabated in certain countries. We condemn
the continued recruitment of children and their use as
soldiers in many conflicts around the world. We are
concerned about the impact of armed conflict on all
children affected by it, whether or not they are
combatants. We agree with the assessment of the
Secretary-General that the planning and
implementation of all peace-support operations must
factor in the need to respond to sexual and gender-
based violence. The EU also welcomes the
promulgation in October 2003 of the Secretary-
General's bulletin on special measures for protection
from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse. On a related
issue, the EU would also wish to encourage the
Security Council to support measures aimed at
ensuring that women and children affected by armed
conflict are involved in and benefit equitably from all
DDRR processes

The prolongation of conflict situations due to the
unhindered proliferation of small arms and light
weapons also remains a source of real preoccupation,
in particular given the disproportionate impact that this
proliferation has on innocent civilian lives. Here again,
coordination of efforts on a regional level at least has
the potential to make significant inroads into this
continuing widespread syndrome. As the Secretary-
General has noted, the issue of small arms proliferation
has been taken up in West Africa by the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone, the United Nations Mission in
Liberia and the United Nations Operation in cote
d'Ivoire. But these are relatively modest steps, and the
EU encourages all Member States to work with the
interagency mechanism, the United Nations
Coordinating Action on Small Arms, in addition to
undertaking other necessary measures at the national
level.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
become an increasingly complex challenge. But that
complexity cannot be allowed in any way to diminish
our resolve or impair our collective efforts to
effectively address this horrific state of affairs. The
European Union will continue to play a strong and
active part in this process.

