Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome your presence here today, Sir, to preside
over this open debate. We welcome all the eflorts of
the Malaysian presidency to organize this meeting and
thank you for the concept debate for this discussion
(S/2016/712, annex).

This meeting is taking place at a time of very
difficult international circumstances with respect to
the spread of terrorist groups and non-State actors,
especially in the Middle East, and the ensuing risk of
their obtaining chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear weapons of mass destruction. We must work to
prevent such a disaster at all costs. Over the past 12
months, the world has become even more complex and
dangerous than in the past. Security challenges have
emerged at the international level in a horrifying way.
Terrorist groups have expanded their scope of action.

Chemical weapons have been used by Da'esh and
other terrorist groups in the Middle East, causing
widespread destruction and suffering in Iraq and
possibly in Syria. There is a danger of this threat
spreading to Libya, given the ease with which terrorists
seem to move and travel from Syria and Iraq. We may
one day see Da'esh and other terrorist groups move
from Libya to the Horn of Africa. We note that last
month the Security Council adopted resolution 2298
(2016), concerning the destruction of Libya's chemical
weapons, so as to minimize the danger of such materials
falling into the hands of terrorist groups, especially
Da'esh. However, the mere fact that terrorists possess
the necessary knowledge and are able to travel to Libya
poses a threat to the region and the world at large.

The merging security threats facing the
international community require sustained attention
if we are to prevent terrorist entities from acquiring
and using such materials. We all know that modern
technologies - such as 3-D printing, the dark net,
genetic modification, drones and many other scientific
technologies and developments - are all dual-use in
nature and pose a potential deadly threat to humankind
as a whole. The main concern now is to determine how
to address the danger posed by these materials were
they to fall into the hands of terrorists.

In that respect, 2016 is a pivotal year for the
efforts of the United Nations and, more specifically,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). The Security Council is currently reviewing
all measures adopted since 2004 to assess our current
position and to attempt to create a comprehensive and
effective model for a future free of weapons of mass
destruction, where such weapons would have no chance
of falling into the hands of terrorists. That is why we
believe that the comprehensive review of resolution
1540 (2004), superbly led by Spain, should be based on
two tracks.

First, we need a strategy to strengthen cooperation
with international, regional and subregional
organizations, including in the framework of
technical assistance, the exchange of information and
experiences, and capacity-building. We must of course
remain mindful of the specificities of the mandates of
multiple organizations. Council members know that
one of the most significant obstacles to the effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is the lack
of an implementation mechanism. In that regard,
we call for the establishment of focal points in every
organization to build a global interactive network
in which all actors would play a full role in unifying
content, methods and objectives at all levels.

Secondly, we must cooperate and coordinate at the
national level between Governments and national public
and private organizations. That is ofcritical importance,
especially with respect to exporting States. There is a
need to enhance awareness-raising programmes in
the technical and legal fields and to disseminate best
practices so as to ensure that dangerous materials do
not fall into the hands of terrorists.

In conclusion, I should like to reiterate that
Egypt has spared no effort at the national, Arab,
African and international levels in participating in

the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
the follow-up resolution 1997 (2011), especially in its
role as coordinator of the Working Group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004). We also recall that
the best way to guarantee that terrorists will not acquire
such weapons is to eliminate them from the world. We
therefore call upon the international community to
establish a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in
the Middle East so as to strengthen international peace
and security for the good of all humankind.

