Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President,
and I thank the Secretary-General for his very clear
briefing and for his leadership in responding to the
situation and the crisis in Myanmar. As Minister
Margot Wallstrom said in the General Assembly last
week (see A/72/PV.16), the situation in Myanmar is a
haunting example of where the seeds of conflict have
gone unresolved, with tragic consequences. Once
again, we see the human cost of not investing enough
in prevention.

The crisis in Rakhine state, which has existed
for decades, has dramatically escalated. The situation
is now critical, with devastating humanitarian
consequences, and there are clear implications for
regional stability. Two thirds of the estimated Rohingya
population in Rakhine state is now in Bangladesh. The
level of displacement has led to a crisis described by
High Commissioner for Refugees Filippo Grandi as the
most urgent refugee emergency in the world today.

Those arriving in Bangladesh have given horrific
and heart-breaking accounts of unimaginable violence
and abuse. Reports of sexual and gender-based violence
are gravely worrying. In addition, large numbers of
people, including non-Muslims, have been displaced
within Rakhine. However, the total number of internally
displaced people has not been established. Their level
of need is unknown, owing to the lack of access.

Let me take a moment here to pay tribute to the
Government of Bangladesh for their hospitality and
generosity to the refugees. I also thank the humanitarian
agencies for their swift response. My country has
contributed significantly to efforts to increase the
humanitarian response capacity in Bangladesh, and we
call on others to do the same. The crisis in Rakhine
state is complex and multidimensional. It requires a
comprehensive and sustained response, with support
from the international community. At the same time,
in the light of the immediate needs of those displaced
inside and outside the country, a number of issues now
need to be addressed urgently.

First, we note the statement by the Government of
Myanmar that security operations in Rakhine ceased
on 5 September. However, displacement has continued
since then. The continuing reports of violence are deeply
worrying, including reports of the burning of Rohingya
villages and of violence against civilians. We therefore
call on Myanmar to ensure the immediate suspension
of all military and security operations. All violence
must end. The Government has the responsibility to
ensure the safety and security of all communities
without discrimination.

Secondly, we urge the Government to grant
immediate, full, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access to the United Nations and its partners in all
areas, so that they can reach those in urgent need of
life-saving assistance. The humanitarian actors are
ready to respond. The assistance arrangements in
northern Rakhine organized by the Red Cross Movement
are insufficient to address the massive needs. We note
ongoing discussions with the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) regarding the humanitarian
response, and we also note and welcome the tireless
efforts of the Indonesian Minister for Foreign Affairs.

Ending the violence and ensuring access to all
populations in need of humanitarian assistance is
critical and urgent in order to save lives and prevent
human suffering. However, that alone will not end the
crisis. It is essential that the Government of Myanmar,
with the support of the international community, now
move swiftly to ensure that those who have fled the
country can return to their places of origin in a safe,
voluntary, dignified and sustainable manner. Ensuring
that refugees are registered in line with international
standards will help facilitate that. People who decide
to return must not be placed in camps or camp-like
environments, which risk becoming long-term.

We welcome the Government's commitment to
implement the recommendations set out in the report of
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State within the
shortest time possible, and we urge it to do so without
delay. Those recommendations provide a clear road
map for addressing the root causes of this long-running
crisis, most notably by addressing the situation of
citizenship for the Rohingyas. Full implementation of
the recommendations would deliver development and
benefit all communities in Rakhine. Ending incitement,
defusing intercommunal tension and rebuilding trust
between the communities in Rakhine will be important
in that regard.

Those responsible for human rights abuses and
violations, as well as other crimes, must be brought to
justice. It is important that the facts and circumstances
on the ground be fully established. The Government
must therefore engage with the fact-finding mission of
the Human Rights Council, and we urge the Government
to provide access without delay.

The international community stands ready to
support the Government and people of Myanmar in
their efforts to resolve the crisis in Rakhine state and
to provide urgent humanitarian assistance. In that
regard, we encourage the Government to cooperate
with Bangladesh as well as to continue to engage with
ASEAN. We also urge the Government to cooperate
fully with the United Nations. The Government must
work to counter narratives and rhetoric that seek to
undermine the ability of the United Nations to do its
work. Going forward, the United Nations also has the
capacity and is ready to support the Government as
it implements the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, led by Kofi Annan.

It is now urgent to put an end to violence and to
ensure immediate, full and safe humanitarian access.
Safe and dignified return must be ensured as soon as
the situation allows. At the same time, the decades-
long cycle of violence and displacement suffered by
the Rohingya people must be addressed. The report of
the Advisory Commission provides the way forward.
We urge the Government of Myanmar to take this
opportunity to bring an end to the conflict once and
for all, allowing the country to move forward with
its important development efforts and to continue its
democratic transition with all communities in peace.
It is important too that the Council remain seized and
stand united in finding and helping a peaceful resolution
to this crisis.

