Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Let me begin my
statement by welcoming the fact that Chairman Arafat
recovered his freedom on 1 May. This was a positive
step towards improving the situation. We also express
our appreciation to the Governments of the United
States and the United Kingdom for their efforts in
transferring from Ramallah the prisoners who are
alleged to have been involved in the assassination of
the former Israeli Minister of Tourism and in the arms
shipment affair and in monitoring their confinement in
a Palestinian prison in Jericho.

The Government of Japan, like many in the
international community, welcomed the idea of
dispatching a fact-finding team to develop accurate
information regarding recent events in the Jenin
refugee camp, as proposed in Security Council
resolution 1405 (2002). We also thought that the fact-
finding team, whose composition was announced on 22
April, would produce an accurate and credible report
for the Secretary-General. It is thus deeply regrettable
that, due to the objections raised by the Government of
Israel, the Secretary-General had to express yesterday
his intention to disband the fact-finding team. The
regrettable development in the issue of the fact-finding
team on the Jenin refugee camp has greatly eroded the
authority and credibility of the Security Council, and
we hope that the Council will take a clear position on
this matter.

The Japanese Government is concerned at the
humanitarian conditions that the Palestinian people
continue to face and has therefore decided to extend,
through the United Nations Development Programme,
emergency humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian
people of approximately $3.3 million. In response to
the emergency appeal of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
the Japanese Government has pledged medical and
health assistance of approximately $1.2 million. We are
studying the possibility of extending additional
humanitarian assistance as needed.

In spite of the difficulties, efforts to restore calm
to the region must continue. The Government of Japan
has been urging and continues to urge both the
Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
respond positively to the efforts made by the
international community and to take decisive action to
bring about a ceasefire and to resume the peace
process. Recently, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Japan, Mrs. Kawaguchi, advocated that a multi-layered
engagement of the international community, with
Japan's proactive participation, was necessary in order
to bring the political process smoothly back on track
once a ceasefire has been achieved. She identified three
elements that must be pursued simultaneously.

First, it is necessary to guarantee the
implementation of a ceasefire agreement and to
promote the ongoing political process though an
international conference.

Secondly, it is important to enhance regional
stability and development, which are fruits of peace.
One way of doing this might be to resume the
multilateral tracks of the peace process aimed at
regional cooperation projects.

The third element consists of measures to build a
broad relationship of mutual trust between the two
sides. Japan is prepared to host a forum bringing
together Palestinians and Israelis, representing a broad
range of fields and diverse perspectives for a
discussion on peaceful coexistence between the two
peoples and the vision of a future Palestinian State.

In this connection, we welcome the various ideas
put forward yesterday by the United States Secretary of
State, Mr. Powell, after the "quartet" meeting in
Washington, DC, including holding an international
conference early this summer.

I would like to assure the Council that the
Japanese Government is determined to continue to
promote the peace process in the Middle East by
joining multilateral efforts.

