Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from F rench):
The delegation of France will vote in favour of the draft
resolution on Sierra Leone that is before the Security
Council.

The draft expresses the support of the United Nations
for the efforts of the members of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) to bring about, through
negotiations, the peaceful restoration of constitutional order
and the return of the democratically elected Government.
Those efforts were recently outlined and explained to
members of the Council by Ministers belonging to the
ECOWAS Committee of Five Foreign Ministers. These
regional initiatives, as the Secretary-General noted in his
letter (S/1997/776) to the Council on this subject, are part
of the efforts of the international community in favour of
democracy grounded in the rule of law and respect for
human rights. This endeavour deserves our support.

The member States of ECOWAS have told us that
they have sought, and will continue to seek, to negotiate
with those responsible for the coup d 'e'tat in Sierra Leone.
The perpetrators of the coup have thus far refused to join
negotiations in good faith, and consequently the States of
the region have decided to exert pressure in the form of
economic sanctions. These sanctions, as the Secretary-
General also noted, should be seen as measures intended to
promote a peaceful resolution of the crisis. They should not
worsen the humanitarian situation of the people of Sierra
Leone, already seriously affected by the ravages of the coup
d 'etat. The Ministers of the ECOWAS Committee of Five
have made it clear that they are very mindful of this
requirement. It is important, in this context, that dialogue be
established between their countries and the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat
regarding products and supplies that are exempted from the
regional embargo, as well as the mechanisms for
monitoring the humanitarian situation in Sierra Leone.

The draft resolution the Council is preparing to vote
on provides for the imposition of sanctions. These measures
have the same goal as the regional efforts, that is, the
speedy restoration of democratic government and
constitutional order. The sanctions were defined so as to
limit the humanitarian effects on the population. They cover
only the travel of members of the military junta and their
families, as well as the supply of weapons and petroleum.
There is provision for exemptions in particular for
humanitarian purposes. It will be up to the Committee
established by the resolution to ensure that these
exemptions protect the people of the country from being
seriously affected by the embargo.

The draft resolution authorizes ECOWAS to see to
it that the embargo measures on arms and petroleum
decided upon by the Council are strictly implemented
with at Sierra Leone's borders. This provision reflects the
relationship of trust that has been established between the
United Nations and ECOWAS, a relationship forged by
the successful cooperation in Liberia and reinforced by
the efforts of the ECOWAS Ministers to explain to the
members of the Council the thrust of their actions. This
authorization is therefore exceptional in nature, but
legitimized by the past experience of cooperation between
the United Nations and ECOWAS. We place our trust,
therefore, in the members of ECOWAS properly to
discharge the mission entrusted to them.
The delegation of France hopes that democracy will
soon be restored in Sierra Leone and that the sanctions
decided upon by the Council can soon be lifted. The draft
contains some fairly precise criteria for the lifting of the
sanctions, and provides for a thorough review of the
situation six months after their entry into force. These
provisions make it possible to aim to avoid an indefinite
extension of sanctions which could affect the lives of the
peoples concerned. Periodic decisions by the Council on
the continuation of sanctions would be the best way to
achieve that goal, in the view of France, a View shared by
many Member States of the United Nations.

Before I conclude, my delegation wishes to voice its
concern with regard to the effects of the situation in
Sierra Leone on neighbouring States. These States are
taking in a very large number of refugees, and are doing
so in accordance with traditional African hospitality. They
do it without creating camps; they are generously opening
their towns and their resources to these refugees.
However, I repeat that this is causing serious economic
consequences for neighbouring African States. It is right
that under these conditions the United Nations and its
Member States should wish to give support to these
States, concrete support. The draft makes an appeal in this
respect, addressed to States and international
organizations, as well as to financial institutions. We
expect future reports from the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the resolution to detail the extent to
which this appeal to Member States and international
financial institutions has been heeded. We earnestly hope

 

to be able to confirm whether the concern about countries
affected by the consequences of refugee flows have been
translated into concrete assistance.

Before concluding, I would like, naturally, to express
my congratulations to you, Mr. President, and, in particular,
to thank last month's President for the excellent way in
which the Security Council was able to discharge its
responsibilities during the month of September.

