Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to extend my profound
thanks to Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Timor-
Leste, for his comprehensive and useful briefing this
morning and for the efforts he is exerting along with all
the workers of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET). We wish him all success in
his performance and in the important mission he has
been entrusted with.

We wish to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his report on the United Nations
Mission in East Timor, which is of particular
importance because it is the first report that deals with
the developments in the Democratic Republic of
Timor-Leste in the wake of their independence on 20
May 2002 and the establishment of the Mission.

We would like to express our satisfaction at the
fact that Timor-Leste has joined the United Nations and
other international and regional organizations, and that
it has established diplomatic relations with all the
States members of the Association of South-East Asian
Nations.

The report highlights a number of challenges,
most of which relate to the lack of necessary resources,
the importance of funding and the need for continued
support by donors. We therefore appeal to all the
donors to maintain their support for Timor-Leste's
current rebuilding and development programme and to
assist the Government in its efforts to formulate and
achieve the objectives of the national development
plan.

Syria therefore concurs with the report's assertion
that multilateral aid from donors aimed at achieving
socio-economic prosperity in Timor-Leste is a vital
prerequisite for the long-term stability of that country.

We would like to express our concern about the
slow rate of refugee return since the end of June, and
we agree with the report that a resolution of that
problem is necessary for the stability of the country.

Syria welcomes the general improvements
referred to in the report with regard to the state of
external security and border monitoring and the need to
ensure a stable and secure environment. This has been
made possible by the intensive presence of the military
components of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET) at the borders, as well as by
consultation, cooperation and continued coordination
with the Mission's counterparts in the Indonesian force
in West Timor.

We continue to look forward to agreement on
demarcation and the implementation of joint
obligations, as declared by Timor-Leste and Indonesia,
which would allow UNMISET to downsize its presence
and, finally, to withdraw.

