Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania,
the candidate countries Croatia and Turkey, the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia and Montenegro and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and the European
Free Trade Association countries Iceland and Norway,
members of the European Economic Area, align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes with satisfaction
this first joint briefing by the Chairpersons of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We attach great
importance to open Security Council debates on the
issues of counter-terrorism and the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction - particularly on the
Committees' work in those areas. Such debates help to
strengthen the general acceptance of the Committees
by members of the United Nations family and help to
enhance the Committees' legitimacy in their eyes.

Although the three Committees have different
mandates, the European Union believes that they can
further strengthen their cooperation - particularly at
the expert level - in monitoring the implementation of
their respective Security Council resolutions, in
sharing information and in coordinating visits to
Member States. Contacts should also continue with the
working group established pursuant to resolution 1566
(2004).

We are deeply concerned that a number of
countries are late in meeting their obligation to submit
reports to the three Committees. We strongly urge
those Governments that have not yet done so to finalize
their reports and to request help if necessary. In that
connection, the European Union invites the
Committees to explore in a coordinated manner the
issue of technical assistance and assistance needs
assessment. I should also like to recall the importance
of a broad and sustained dialogue with Member States
and with international, regional and subregional
organizations in order to strengthen counter-terrorism
capacities. The European Union, for its part, is actively
pursuing its relations with third countries - including
through visits and direct dialogue - and is
considering, inter alia, possible technical assistance.

The European Union welcomes the efforts
undertaken to improve the sanctions regime against Al-
Qaida and the Taliban and encourages Member States
to cooperate fully with the 1267 Committee and its
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team,
particularly by providing information and names to add
to the consolidated list. If it is to be credible and
operational, the list must be precise and based on the
proper indicators. At the same time, the European
Union is convinced that there is an urgent need to
review the delisting procedures in order to improve
them.

The European Union unreservedly supports the
fifteenth 90-day work programme of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) (S/2005/266), particularly
with regard to formulating a set of best practices to
help States implement the provisions of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) related to the financing
of terrorism and to other important aspects of the
resolution. We are particularly pleased that the
Committee made its first visit to a Member State -
with the participation of the European Union - in
March and that three more visits are planned in the
near future. We strongly urge all components of the
United Nations system to act swiftly so that the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate can become
fully operational.

Given that terrorists have declared their
willingness to acquire nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons, the European Union underlines the crucial
importance of resolution 1540 (2004). In that context,
we welcome the fact that the 1540 Committee's first
four experts have now been recruited and that the first
reports submitted by Member States are currently being
considered. The European Union supports the
Committee's quarterly work programme and, in
particular, the Committee's interaction with
international, regional and subregional bodies in the
area of non-proliferation with a view to strengthening
the international non-proliferation regime.

Before concluding, I wish to make two more
general observations.

As the Secretary-General rightly points out in his
recent report entitled "In larger freedom", terrorism is
a threat to all the values that the United Nations stands
for, and our strategy to combat that phenomenon must
be comprehensive and multifaceted and encompass the
whole United Nations system.

The European Union fully supports the Secretary-
General's call on Member States to agree, by the end of
the sixtieth session of the General Assembly, on a
comprehensive convention that includes a definition of
terrorism. The recent adoption of the Convention for
the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism
represents an important step in the right direction. The
European Union hopes that it will be signed and
ratified without reservation by as many States as
possible.

The EU is convinced that efforts to combat
terrorism must respect human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Counter-terrorism actions must at all times
be accompanied by the respect of due process and the
rule of law. There can be no trade-off between human
rights and effective security measures. Indeed, respect
for human rights must remain an integral part of any
global counter-terrorism strategy.

The EU also believes that, in order to be effective
in the long run, our response to terrorism must also
address its root causes.

Allow me to conclude by commending the
Chairpersons of the three Committees on their work
and by reiterating that the European Union remains
firmly committed to combating the continued threat of
terrorism through a comprehensive and integrated
approach that involves strengthening both national and
international cooperation, in accordance with the
principles on which the European Union is founded.

