Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): I
wish to thank the Council for this opportunity to brief
it on the latest developments in Yemen. Our beloved
Yemen is ablaze, and the Yemeni population finds itself
in a catastrophic situation. The country is bleeding to
death; its cities are collapsing; and its citizens have
been deprived oftheir most basic rights in this conflict,
which is both political and security-related.

This is not my first briefing to the Council; I had
informed the Council previously that the Secretary-
General had made extensive efforts in Geneva to make
possible a rapprochement between the various parties
to the conflict. Excellent ideas were heard, but they
have not allowed us to put an end to the suffering of the
Yemeni people. The parties to the conflict did not even
meet face to face. Here it is important to note that the
first talks took place more than five months ago.

Just last month, I informed the Council of my
intention to convene consultations in the coming
weeks. However, that initiative was cancelled, and
additional preconditions were set. All of those missed
opportunities only exacerbate the situation of the
people onemen, whose future is today most uncertain.

I should like to reiterate what I said earlier to the
Council: extremist groups are taking advantage of the
situation. At the same time, the international community
judged that the return of the legitimate Government to
Aden augured well for the future. That Government was
to bring peace and security back to the country, inter alia
by restoring basic services for the people. Regrettably,
things did not happen thus. Instead, extremist groups
attacked Government headquarters in Aden, and many
citizens were killed. Additional security measures will
have to be taken to protect civilians. Also, a mosque
in Sana'a was attacked, leading to the deaths of many
worshipers during Eid prayers.

Today we know that in this country, where faith
and religion are of vital importance and where
various communities coexisted peacefully, extremism
prevails and weapons circulate freely, which only
helps extremists. Yemenis are therefore suffering
deeply today. That people, known for their generosity,
hospitality and strong values, are today caught up in a
disastrous humanitarian situation. Civilians are paying
the price of a serious political conflict. Many citizens
have been displaced within their own country in a quest
to find safe haven and the most basic necessities for
survival.

The most recent report of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
indicates that the majority of Yemenis need
humanitarian aid. Some 20 million Yemenis do not
have access to safe drinking water. Hundreds of
thousands - at least 500,000 - of Yemeni children
are severely malnourished, which is one of the many
consequences of this conflict.

Last month there was a wedding party which ended
in a bloody fashion in the city of Taiz, while other cities
have also been subjected to indiscriminate shelling.
Taiz, the city that was once considered Yemen's cultural
capital, has become a battlefront today. Its habitants are
struggling to survive, night and day. Humanitarian aid,
which is supposed to flow freely, is not reaching the
people of Taiz, leading to grave shortages of medicines
and other supplies. Large parts of the city have been left
without safe drinking water, which poses a threat to the
safety and health of the population.

The obstruction of commercial shipping continues
to undermine the lives and livelihoods of Yemenis.
Hospital services have been interrupted in many parts
of the country and, according to OCHA, in September,
there was a grave fuel crisis. Only 1 per cent onemen's
normal monthly fuel requirements were allowed to
enter the Hodeidah region. We hope in the future to be
able to help the Yemenis cope with this crisis.

We salute the efforts of all those who have sought
to help the Yemeni people during this grave crisis,
in particular humanitarian workers and the major
organizations working in extremely difficult conditions.
Moreover, we know that many humanitarian workers
have lost their lives in that context. I salute them for
their sacrifice.

The situation in Yemen is very serious, but I also
want also to speak about certain elements of hope that
suggest that there could be a better future for Yemen.
I recently attended a forum organized by UN-Women
in Larnaca, Cyprus, together with my office. Women
from all over Yemen took part, which gave us an idea of
the political diversity of the country. While the women
differed in their views as to the reasons for the crisis,
there was a genuine consensus on the importance of
national political dialogue.

Women want to contribute to improving the
humanitarian situation by helping humanitarian
assistance reach its intended beneficiaries, particularly
when it comes to food. They also want to help civilians
deal with violence. The various parties to the conflict
must return to the negotiating table to reach a peaceful
solution. These women want to create an alliance for
peace and security, and I will do all I can to help them
by working with them and other women's and civil
society groups to make their voices heard and thereby
bring about an end to the crisis and a return to national
dialogue.

When I last briefed the Council, I informed
members of our intention to hold a meeting with the
various parties to the conflict in Yemen. Sadly, that
initiative did not come to fruition. Obviously, I have
stayed in contact with the Houthis and the Yemeni
Government in order to find a solution to the crisis. But
thus far the two parties have reiterated their intention
to abide by resolution 2216 (2015) and hand over their
weapons.

I have recently made a tour ofthe Middle East where
I met with leaders from Saudi Arabia, whom I briefed
on the latest developments in the country and therefore
on my discussions with the Houthis. In addition, at
the margins of the General Assembly, I spoke with the
Secretary-General of the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC), Mr. Abdul Latif bin Rashid Al Zayani, and
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia,
the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Oman. I held
similar consultations in Russia with senior Government
officials, including Mr. Mikhail Bogdanov, Mr. Putin's
special envoy to North Africa and the Middle East,
and other Russian representatives, who were all very
supportive of our efforts to reach a peaceful political
solution to the conflict in Yemen. I am very grateful for
their support for my efforts.

I have also worked closely in recent weeks
with Gulf Cooperation Council Secretary-General
Mr. Al Zayani in order to bolster the conditions for
national dialogue in Yemen. To that end, I continued
discussions with the various parties in Yemen. Mr. Ban
Ki-moon informed President Hadi Mansour of the
Houthis' acceptance ofresolution 2216 (2015). In a letter
dated 19 October, President Mansour informed Mr. Ban
of his intention to send a delegation to participate in
peace talks in order to negotiate an end to the present
conflict on the basis of the framework set forth by
resolution 2216 (2015).

I am full of hope and I trust that face-to-face
discussions - the first of their kind - will allow us
to bring together the Government and the Houthis
with a view to paving the way for peace in Yemen and
open peaceful political dialogue and leading to a new
transitional stage. My proposals have all be integrated
into resolution 2216 (2015), and we will seek to work
towards a withdrawal of militias from key cities, the
release ofprisoners, the return of heavy weapons seized
from the army, improvements in the humanitarian
situation and the resumption of inclusive political
dialogue. This will allow us to push forward the various
initiatives, especial the GCC Initiative.

All of this will mark a new milestone in the history
of Yemen, and it is our desire that the Yemeni people
have hope restored after all the suffering they have
experienced in the crisis. All parties today are aware
that there can be no military solution to the conflict
and that only peace talks and dialogue will pave the
road to a better future. However, this initiative needs
the Council's support and protection. The various sides
to the conflict remain divergent, and we count on the
Council to help us to encourage the parties to move
forward in order to put an end to the conflict and return
their country to peace.

Finally, I wish to express my hope, gratitude and
faith in the future. We have hope that the consultations
and discussions between Yemenis will bear fruit. I also
want to reiterate our gratitude to the Council for its
support. I trust that the Yemenis will in the end unite
behind a common vision for the country, turn the page
on war and look towards a brighter future.

