Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Welcome you back
to New York, Mr. President. I thank our two briefers, the
Special Envoy and the Under-Secretary-General. Let
me also repeat the thanks of colleagues for everything
their teams do on the ground to help the people of Syria,
who need them more than ever. We are very conscious
this is a very difficult job for them to do.

The conflict is seven and a half years old 4 it is
longer than the Second World War. Over half a million
people have died in Syria, millions have been displaced
and chemical weapons have been used, including
by the Syrian regime. I think we are running out of
superlatives to describe the horrors of this conflict.

We meet every month on Syria in this Chamber, but
this time does feel particularly important. The Turkish
plan for Idlib, which its officials have discussed with
the Russians, is the crux. It needs to be developed and
implemented and, as other speakers have said, Russia in
particular needs to uphold it. We look to Russia to do that
because Russia is one of the five permanent members
of the Security Council, with particular responsibilities
for international peace and security. Russian needs to
exert its influence on the Syrian authorities, otherwise
the crimes that are committed against the Syrian people
are committed in Russia's name. We heard earlier about
the voices of Idlib. There are 3 million voices in Idlib
who will want to know why the Idlib plan cannot be
implemented. There are 18 million voices in Syria who
want the Council to act to protect them.

A lot has been said today, some ofit very familiar or
common to those Council members who have spoken.
I will not repeat some of the assessments, but I would
like to go on record as saying that the United Kingdom
agrees with our American, Dutch, Swedish, Polish and
other partners in their assessments. We wholly agree
with them.

I want to highlight in particular four points: first
of all, I want to agree with what the representative of
France said about the situation on the ground, but also
what he said about the French, Americans and British
taking our responsibilities if chemical weapons are ever
used again. I want to talk about the political process:
we want to see the constitutional committee convened.
We look to the Special Envoy to do that. We believe he
has all the authority he needs to pick the names and we
trust him to do the best he can in the interests of the
people of Syria and in the interest of peace. We look
for a date at to be set and we ask him to report back to
the Council by 31 October. We look to the small group
and the Astana group to make progress on coming
together in support of the United Nations. I agree with
what my Dutch and Swedish colleagues said about
reconstruction money. There are 3 million voices in
Idlib, and 18 million voices in Syria as a whole, who
will want to know why progress cannot be made on the
political track.

Turning to the humanitarian front, we would like to
hear from the Syrian representative why there are still
problems with access and why there are still problems
with safe passage, as mentioned by the Under-Secretary-
General. I note what the representative of Equatorial
Guinea said about scorched earth. It is a truly terrible
situation, but he is right to draw attention to it. We
would like to know what the Syrian regime is doing
to put that right. A large number of speakers talked
about international humanitarian law and the principles
of precaution, discrimination and proportionality. The
United Kingdom absolutely upholds those principles. It
is unbelievable that hospitals are being attacked, and
even more unbelievable given that they are part of a
deconflicted area. Last week, the United Kingdom
announced approximately $40 million for Idlib. We
hope that will help, but I want to go back to what the
Under-Secretary-General asked - is it a reprieve or a
stay of execution? It is a dreadful choice, but it has to
be a reprieve. There are 3 million voices in Idlib and

18 million voices in Syria who will want to know why
this cannot happen.

Turning to the wider issues, as awful and horrific
as the Syrian conflict is, the prospect of a wider,
inter-State war is waiting in the wings. The Syrian
people are not only being attacked by their own
Government, they risk being drawn in and becoming
the victims of a wider conflict. It is not legitimate to
use the territory of Syria to fire missiles at Israel. The
risk of miscalculation and misunderstanding that led to
the downing of a Russian aircraft encapsulates, on a
small scale, the much bigger and even more frightening
risk of a wider miscalculation.

In that regard, I would like to echo other colleagues
who have voiced their condolences to our Russian
colleagues for the loss of their air crew. I repeat,
however, that the risk of miscalculation is incredibly
high. It was the Syrian Arab air force that shot down the
Russian plane, and the proximate cause was the actions
of Iran and Hizbullah on the ground. That ought to
serve as a very powerful warning, not just to the Syrian
authorities but also to the Russians and the Iranians of
the prospect of something much wider and even more
horrible than we have seen thus far in Syria.

Lastly, the Special Envoy referred to Kofi Annan,
and we will have a tribute to Mr. Annan in the United
Nations later this week. This morning, a wreath was
laid to Dag Hammarskjold, who is also one of the iconic
Secretaries-General whom the United Nations has been
fortunate enough to have lead it. We do them no credit
if we allow this conflict to continue. In 2012, I was
present for the historic Geneva II Conference on Syria.
The best legacy we can offer Mr. Annan in response to
all his work is to bring the Syrian conflict to an end and
help the Syrian people.

