Mr. A] Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate at this critical juncture. I
would also like to thank Mr. John Holmes, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his comprehensive
briefing today.

The issue under consideration is of paramount
importance, and this meeting is all the more important
because it is being held at a time when the Palestinian
people in the Gaza Strip are being subjected to one of
the most heinous brutalities ever committed against
civilians in the history of humankind.

Rather than making generalities about today's
important topic, I, like many previous speakers, would
prefer to address one of the most serious examples in
that regard: the untold losses and suffering that the
Zionist regime has inflicted on the defenceless civilian
population in Gaza. We also hope that the current
tragedy in Gaza will be duly reflected in the outcome
of today's Council meeting.

Over the past 19 days, Palestinian civilians have
been deliberately targeted and brutally mass-murdered
by the ruthless Israeli war machine, which is callously
shattering lives and livelihoods in the Gaza Strip. The
abhorrent Israeli carnage and Israel's war crimes in the
Gaza Strip are continuing unabated. The 1.5 million
people of Gaza have been under a crippling siege and a
brutal blockade for more than 18 months now and
continue to be deprived of the most needed medical
supplies and the most basic necessities - including
even bread and drinking water - and are, at the same
time, being massacred in the most horrendous and
brutal ways, with nowhere to run, nowhere to hide and
nothing to eat. Whole families are being eliminated in
cold blood by the Zionist forces, and women and
children, along with other civilians, are being
deliberately targeted and massacred.

The humanitarian aid sent to the people of Gaza
is being turned away by the Israeli regime and
prevented from reaching its destinations, as in the case
of an Iranian relief ship carrying 2,000 tons of basic
medical and food supplies destined for Gaza, which
was intercepted and prevented from continuing on its
way to Gaza by the Israeli regime yesterday. We
condemn that unjustifiable move and hope that the
Security Council will exert pressure on the regime to
cease and desist from such unlawful actions.
Even United Nations workers and the United
Nations premises where innocent civilians take shelter
are not immune from Israeli attacks, as we witnessed in
the recent attack on schools of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, which claimed the lives of more than 40
people and wounded many more civilians, most of
them children. Savage acts, such as forcing women,
small children and other civilians out of their homes
and then massing them all into a small place and
machine-gunning or shelling them, are examples of the
rampant atrocities being repeatedly committed by the
Israeli forces in Gaza. Those revealed so far are really
just the tip of the iceberg, and many other such
atrocities are simply never reported because the
international media are facing an Israeli ban and cannot
cover the heartbreaking tragedies in Gaza.

The international community has no doubt that
the Zionist regime is violating the basic principles of
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights law and defying the most fundamental
values for which the civilized world stands. Israeli
forces are blowing away women and children in Gaza
without a moment of remorse. As a result of those
atrocities, many innocent civilians, including little
children, have died horrible deaths, and the bodies of
many others have not been recovered from the rubble
because the Israeli military is shooting at anyone who
attempts a rescue.

This carnage must be stopped immediately, and
the Israeli war criminals should be brought to justice
for the crimes that they have perpetrated and continue
to perpetrate and for the outrageous and brutal pain and
torment that they have inflicted and continue to inflict
on the innocent people in Gaza.

Despite its commitment to the full and effective
implementation of its resolutions on the protection of
civilians in such circumstances, the Security Council
has thus far taken no effective action to stop this
genocide against Palestinians. The Security Council
was first prevented by some permanent members from
taking any action, and when it took action belatedly,
the resolution it adopted, resolution 1860 (2009), did
not address the expectations of the international
community in, inter alia, forcing the Israeli regime to
stop its atrocities against the Palestinians and withdraw
from Gaza, or even in strongly condemning the Israeli
regime's crimes against humanity and devising a
mechanism for holding Israeli officials accountable for
the war crimes and genocide that they have committed
and continue to perpetrate against the Palestinian
people in general and in the Gaza Strip in particular.
Even that resolution, as imperfect and belated as it is,
is being totally ignored by the Israeli regime, as are
many other previous United Nations resolutions, to
which its response had been contempt and defiance.

We strongly condemn all of these Israeli
violations of international law and urge the Security
Council to force the Israeli regime to put an end to
such practices and to its aggression. The international
community should act swiftly to end impunity and to
bring the Israelis responsible for war crimes, genocide,
crimes against humanity and numerous other serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law to justice. The Council has a vital and urgent
responsibility to discharge in this regard in order to end
these Israeli atrocities and crimes against humanity
immediately.

