Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): It is indeed a pleasure for me to express our
sincere thanks to Ms. Bertini, Executive Director of the
World Food Programme (WFP), for her rich and
valuable briefing, especially as it crowns her great
achievements at the helm of that agency. At the same
time, it is my pleasure to wish her a happy and
successful life following these achievements,
particularly since she is leaving her post with a clear
conscience. I greet her and thank her profusely for
having devoted a very important part of her life to the
service of humanitarian assistance. Is there anything
better than fighting hunger and actively helping to feed
the hungry in all sorts of circumstances throughout the
world? I also offer her my heartfelt gratitude for her
tremendous efforts at the head of her agency to fight
hunger and the consequences of natural disasters and
armed conflict and to ensure stability in post-conflict
situations, in accordance with the Programme's
principles.

We fully appreciate the assistance given by WFP
in the areas of the world that she mentioned in her
briefing, be it in Africa, Asia, the Middle East or
elsewhere, including Latin America, Honduras, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Kosovo, the Sudan and many other
countries to which she referred.

The very principle of refusing to accept the death
by hunger of any human being lies at the heart of
human spirit and humanitarian principles, on the basis
of which Ms. Bertini has worked in countries of every
stripe. I would note in this regard the great services she
rendered to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
at a time when it was suffering. Assistance was
provided to approximately 6 million people there.

Of course, the assistance rendered in Afghanistan,
particularly to pregnant women, children and girls, is
worthy of every appreciation. Most noteworthy is the
essential cooperation with the International Committee
of the Red Cross, particularly in overcoming
difficulties in delivering food assistance.
In this respect, I wish to point to one region that
is going hungry because food assistance cannot reach
its inhabitants. I am referring to the occupied
Palestinian territories. We call on WFP in its generosity
to pay special attention to that problem, because the
people there are beginning to suffer and to call for
assistance to alleviate the hunger that has already
begun to afflict them.

I fully support the reference made by the
Ambassador of France to a hunger map and food
security strategies. This would indeed be an important
gesture and we therefore agree with all the points
raised by Ms. Bertini in her briefing.

In conclusion, we wish her every possible
happiness and all possible success to her successor. We
are sure he will prove worthy of the post.

