Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to start by
thanking Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his comprehensive
and forward-looking update to the Security Council
today. We commend his continuous and tireless efforts
towards reaching a political solution and bringing an
end to the conflict in Syria. I want to echo the regret
other speakers have expressed about his mission coming
to an end, and, naturally, to send him a very strong
message of admiration and gratitude for the work he
has done. Of course, the mission remains ongoing, and,
as always, we stand behind him fully. He has our full
support, including for the way ahead he has outlined
today and the immediacy with which he will pursue it
in coming weeks.

We welcome the fact that Turkey and Russia have
reached an agreement on a ceasefire in Idlib. A military
offensive in Idlib would not only have catastrophic
humanitarian consequences, but it would also have
put at risk a political solution. We now look to the
Astana guarantors to live up to their commitments as
well as their obligations under international law, and
to safeguard the last remaining de-escalation zone in
Syria until a peaceful settlement can be reached.

The ceasefire in Idlib offers an opportunity to
reinvigorate the United Nations-led political process.
This is an opportunity that must be seized. As agreed
by the Council, the first step towards a sustainable
political solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
is the establishment of a constitutional committee. We
must now join efforts, support and insist on the swift
establishment of the committee. The Special Envoy has
full authority to decide on its composition, procedures
and time frame, as well as our support.

It is critical that the constitutional committee is
credible, balanced and representative of the Syrian
people and reflects the diversity of the country.
It needs to include Syrians from different ethnic,
religious and geographical backgrounds in order
to meet those criteria. Furthermore, women's full,
effective and substantive participation is important
for the legitimacy of the committee. We support the
Special Envoy's determination expressed here today
to ensure that a minimum of 30 per cent of committee
and subcommittee members are women, including
the subcommittee that will draft the constitutional
reform. Women's meaningful participation is - as
we all know - necessary for sustainable peace and
development in Syria - as elsewhere.

In line with the express support of the Council for
the swift establishment of the constitutional committee,
we encourage the Special Envoy to continue his efforts
to set up the committee as quickly as possible. We
therefore call on the Syrian parties, in particular the
Syrian Government, to engage constructively with the
Special Envoy and to contribute to the United Nations-led
process as well as within the committees' proceedings
once convened. We also expect all members of the
Council and other relevant actors to move from words to
action and actively support the efforts of the Envoy and
his mandate to set up and decide on the composition of
the committee. We note the envisaged visit to Damascus
next week and welcome Mr. De Mistura's offer to
update the Council on progress immediately after the
visit has been completed. Needless to say, the content
and assessment of that report will be very important.

The Syrian people have endured unspeakable
suffering for too long. The agreement on Idlib has
delivered some modest but concrete and much-needed
relief. The agreement can and should be used to
reinvigorate the United Nations-led political process.
Only the United Nations has the legitimacy and the
credibility for a viable and enduring political solution
in line with resolution 2254 (2015). As others have
said, Syria has reached a fork in the road. As Council
members we must shoulder our responsibility and send a
strong and unified message in support ofUnited Nations
efforts. We must also step up our joint efforts towards
the road that leads to a credible political solution.

