Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Nakamitsu and Ambassador Ziauvinen for their briefings. The Charter of the United Nations begins with the words "We, the peoples of the United Nations, determined to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war". Just one and a half weeks after its signing came the first - and, we hope, the last - use of nuclear weapons, in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. That marked the beginning of the nuclear arms race, the consequences of which are still being felt. It took almost 25 years to address that challenge in the form of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), of which we will celebrate the fiftieth anniversary this year, in just a few days from now. In the half-century of its existence, the NPT has established itself as one of the cornerstones of the international world order and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. The indefinite extension of the NPT, achieved back in 1995, is evidence of its profound importance and the fact that the Treaty meets the interests of all States parties, nuclear and non-nuclear States alike. Recently, we have witnessed the breakdown of a number of internationally recognized mechanisms in the area of non-proliferation and arms control. The root cause, as we see it, are the attempts of one State to dominate the world and impose its rules on the world community, to the detriment of the interests of other States and international law. All multilateral agreements and mechanisms that prevent such domination are declared outdated and ineffective. The starting point here can be _ considered Washington's withdrawal in 2002 from __ the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, one of the most important of those agreements. Last year, the United States, under a spurious pretext, tore up the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF). Almost immediately thereafter, flight tests of previously banned United States systems began. Our proposals to impose a moratorium on the deployment of short- and medium-range ballistic missile systems, including the development of a mechanism for their verification, have not only been ignored by the United States and its allies, but even undermined. Such actions confirm that the real reasons for the collapse of the INF Treaty have nothing to do with Russia's position and actions.We are also very concerned about the lack of clarity with regard to the future of the New START Treaty. The extension of the Treaty would be a reasonable step that would make it possible to prevent the further deterioration of the situation in the area of strategic stability; avoid a full collapse of the monitoring and restrictive mechanisms in the nuclear and missile spheres; and gain time to discuss approaches to controlling new weapons and military technologies. Appeals to Russia to extend the New START Treaty are misguided. President Putin has proposed that the United States extend the Treaty without any preconditions. We are waiting for an answer. At the time, the nuclear deal with Iran was a major success in the area of non-proliferation. Five years ago, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on resolving the Iranian nuclear issue was signed and unanimously endorsed in resolution 2231 (2015). That was an example of effectively overcoming a crisis that almost turned into a hot conflict. A breakthrough was achieved once the parties involved showed a genuine readiness to listen to each other and to take mutual interests into account. However, today we see the collapse of that singular achievement in multilateral diplomacy owing to the complete rejection by the United States of its international legal obligations under the Charter of the United Nations. Against the background of the United States officially refusing to ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear- Test-Ban Treaty and deploying its nuclear weapons on the territory of some of its NATO allies, in its new doctrinal approaches Washington is_ significantly lowering the threshold for the use of nuclear weapons. At the same time, NATO member States continue the practice of so-called joint nuclear missions, which include elements of nuclear planning and training in using nuclear weapons involving representatives of non-nuclear States. That is a direct violation of article I of the NPT by NATO nuclear-weapon States and article II by non-nuclear-weapon States. The culmination of that series of targeted actions was when the United States and its European allies conducted exercises this month to simulate the use of nuclear weapons on the territory of the Russian Federation. In the interests of reducing the unnecessarily heightened tension and preserving the possibility for further strategic dialogue, a year and a half ago we proposed that Washington at least affirm, or preferably strengthen, the Gorbachev-Reagan equation that there TA9 can be no winners in a nuclear war and that such a war should never be started. We still have not received an answer. We understand the concerns of a number of non-nuclear States that are increasing their demands to expedite the nuclear disarmament process. We have always considered the issue as one of the priorities of our foreign policy. However, all aspects of international security and strategic stability must clearly be taken into account. The military actions undertaken by the United States and NATO in recent years, as well as Washington's threats against a number of States, including Russia, only take us further from the goal of creating a world free of nuclear weapons. Ongoing identification of the prerequisites that would further advance nuclear disarmament is needed. Above all, that involves improving the strategic situation in certain regions and in the world as a whole. That is possible only by taking into account the full range of factors that have an impact on strategic stability and international security. Those factors include, in particular, the unlimited deployment of the United States global missile defence system, the development of high-precision strategic non-nuclear weapons, the possibility of deploying strike weapons in outer space, undermining the body of international treaties and agreements on security, stability and arms control, and attempts to weaken the defence capabilities of other States through the illegal means of unilateral sanctions, circumventing the Security Council. It is unlikely that an international security environment conducive to progress towards nuclear disarmament can be achieved without addressing those issues. The establishment of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery in the Middle East, as provided for in the resolution adopted at the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference resolution, has always been a crucial issue within the NPT. We trust that the conferences on the establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, the first of which was held in November 2019, will ultimately lead to the desired result, namely, the development and signing by all Middle East countries of a legally binding agreement on the establishment of such a zone. For our part, we have fully cooperated and will continue to cooperate in that regard. It is important that the other members of thePermanent Five and, most importantly, all countries in the Middle East join those efforts. We view the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards as a key element of the non-proliferation regime. Their purpose is to prevent the diversion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy to the creation of nuclear weapons. We are committed to continuing to assist the [AEA in strengthening the safeguards system. At the same time, it is crucial to preserve the impartial, depoliticized and technically sound nature of the NPT verification mechanism. An issue on which the States parties to the NPT appear to agree is the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. It is now necessary to bring together all States parties to the Treaty, both nuclear and non-nuclear, in order to reduce tensions. It is important that the holding of the 2020 Review Conference should contribute to strengthening, not weakening, the nuclear non-proliferation regime, That means it should be held in the most non-confrontational manner possible. At a minimum, States parties must emphasize their common commitment to the Treaty and reaffirm the obligations they undertook in the course of earlier review cycles. Russia is interested in preserving and improving the nuclear non-proliferation regime and is ready to cooperate closely with all participants to ensure the success of the 2020 Review Conference.
