It is an honour to be addressing the Security Council today on behalf of the High Representative of the European Union (EU) for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Josep Borrell Fontenelles, in his capacity as Coordinator of the Joint Commission of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). My first expression of gratitude and thanks goes to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and to the Secretariat for its determination and professionalism in preparing the tenth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Security Council resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2020/1177). I also want to thank Ambassador Philippe Kridelka of Belgium, who is nearing the end of his tenure as Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231(2015), for the excellent cooperation. I look forward to working closely with the next Facilitator. As this year comes to end, I recognize the tremendous challenges multilateral diplomacy has faced over recent months. The obvious example is how the JCPOA has continued to be tested. Overall, nuclear proliferation remains a global threat with potentially worldwide consequences. It is in our collective interest, but it is also our responsibility as members of the international community, to address those challenges jointly. Ensuring the full implementation of existing robust agreements, such as the JCPOA, should be part of our joint efforts. As the Coordinator of the Joint Commission of the JCPOA, I am pleased to note that the Iran nuclear deal, now five years of age, has withstood the pressure over recent years. The remaining participants have demonstrated their conviction and steadfast willingness to work diplomatically to preserve the deal. That determination to preserve the JCPOA and ensure its full and effective implementation by all sides was reinforced again at the Joint Commission meeting on 16 December and yesterday at the informal meeting of JCPOA participants at ministerial level, which I chaired. Such determination proves the importance and value of the JCPOA. It is solid evidence of the need to continue multilateral diplomacy and sustain and support multilateral agreements and institutions. The JCPOA is a key component of the global non-proliferation architecture, which helps reduce regional and global security risks. It has removed the prospect of a nuclear-armed Iran. It has done so in a verifiable way, as the agreement provides for an unprecedented amount of access and monitoring by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) under Iran's comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and the Additional Protocol thereto. It is crucial that the cooperation with the [AEA remain intact. Thanks to the Additional Protocol, the IAEA has access to both declared and undeclared sites in Iran and has installed 24/7 online monitoring systems in key facilities. It is important to remember that the Additional Protocol is implemented by Iran as part of its JCPOA commitments. Losing the JCPOA would also mean losing the Additional Protocol, the access rights granted to the IAEA and, accordingly, the additional unique transparency measures provided in the JCPOA. Let me stress the EU's deep appreciation for the work and professionalism of the IAEA. Its impartial and technical work is of the utmost importance and is a cornerstone of the credibility of the JCPOA. There is no positive alternative to the JCPOA, which is the fruit of more than 12 years of negotiation, endorsed at the highest level by the international community and enshrined in resolution 2231 (2015). However, the agreement has clearly come under enormous pressure. The EU deeply regrets the decision taken by the United States in May 2018 to withdraw from the JCPOA. The subsequent reimposition of previously lifted unilateral United States sanctions and the decision to discontinue granting nuclear waivers have hampered the full implementation of the deal. The full implementation of the agreement by all sides is crucial for all JCPOA participants and the international community to reap the benefits of the agreement. It is against that background that I recognize that Iran continued to fully comply with the nuclear-related provisions for three and a half years, including for 14 months after the United States withdrew from the JCPOA and reimposed unilateral sanctions. However, it is deeply worrisome that Iran continues to decrease its nuclear-related JCPOA commitments. We remain particularly concerned about Iran's continued accumulation of low-enriched uranium in excess of the JCPOA stockpile- and enrichment-level thresholds, its continued research and development with advanced centrifuges and their ongoing transfer underground and the enrichment activities at Fordow. Those activities are inconsistent with the nuclear- related provisions of the JCPOA. We call on Iran to reverse those activities and return to the full implementation of its commitments. In addition, I have also noted that a new law has been adopted in Iran allowing for and supporting further steps towards an increase to 20 per cent enrichment soon, as well as additional measures. That is very worrisome. I appreciate the indications of the Iranian leadership that Iran is ready to return to full JCPOA implementation. I strongly encourage that sufficient space be ensured for diplomacy in order to be able get the JCPOA back on the track of full implementation in the near future. The work of the procurement channel remains important as an independent and transparent Security Council mechanism. I am pleased to note that new proposals have been transmitted to the Security Council for decision and endorsement. The tenth report of the Joint Commission to the Security Council on the status of the Procurement Working Group's s decisions and on any implementation issues (see S/2020/1164) provides evidence of the channel as an important confidence-building measure that gives assurances to Member States and private-sector actors that transfers of goods and services for civil nuclear purposes are fully in line with resolution 2231 (2015). At the same time, I am also pleased to note that EU-Iran cooperation in the civil nuclear field under annex III continues, despite the challenges of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Alongside the obligations under the nuclear-related commitments for the Islamic Republic of Iran, the obligations to lift sanctions remain central to the JCPOA. The EU lifted all its nuclear-related sanctions upon the conclusion of the deal in 2015. The EU remains fully committed to supporting efforts to normalize economic and trade relations. In that light, the Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges retains significant political and economic potential to facilitate legitimate trade with Iran, consistent with international law and European regulations, as well as to support the needs of the Iranian population. Allow me to say a word in that context regarding the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, which has affected the entire world. However, the situation in Iran has been particularly devastating for the Iranian population. That has been partly aggravated by the fact that the Islamic Republic of Iran has faced significant difficulties in procuring essential medical and protective equipment and medicines. Earlier this year, I took note of the United States announcement and its position regarding the statement of the so-called "snapback mechanism" under resolution 2231 (2015). As Coordinator, to me it has been evident that the United States ceased its participation in the JCPOA on 8 May 2018, and did not subsequently attend any of the activities related to the JCPOA. The United States cannot therefore be considered a JCPOA participant State and may not initiate the process of reinstating United Nations sanctions under resolution 2231 (2015). I also note that the position of the majority of the members of the Council regards the United States attempt to initiate the process of reinstating United Nations sanctions under resolution 2231 (2015) as having no legal basis. Resolution 2231 (2015) remains fully in force - including the sanctions-lifting commitments under the JCPOA. In that context, the EU is grateful to the Secretariat for its balanced and factual approach in monitoring the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). Such work requires continued support and adequate resources. It is evident to the European Union that the JCPOA needs to be fully and effectively implemented by all and that ongoing implementation challenges, including on nuclear non-proliferation and sanctions-lifting commitments, need to be addressed. I am pleased that yesterday's ministerial meeting confirmed the unity of all participants to continue on that path. I am also very encouraged that all participants acknowledged the prospect of the return of the United States to the JCPOA and expressed their readiness to positively address that in a joint effort. That leaves me with some confidence that we will be able to preserve and reinvigorate this achievement of multilateral diplomacy, which makes an important contribution to security and stability in the region.
