The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Singapore.

Let me first thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-
Marie Guehenno and Dr. Peter Piot for their
informative remarks. They have reminded us that the
HIV/AIDS pandemic is a subject that requires urgent
action by the international community.

When this subject was first raised in the Security
Council one year ago, 33 million people were affected
by the HIV/AIDS virus. Today, the latest figures
released by the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) show an increase of 3 million,
or a total of 36 million people infected. These are
startling statistics. I do not think that it is an
exaggeration to describe the HIV/AIDS pandemic as
the black death of the new millennium. It is clear that
despite our best efforts, more needs to be done.

I therefore applaud the foresight of Ambassador
Holbrooke and his pioneering efforts in bringing the
HIV/AIDS issue before the Security Council. By
raising the political signature of this issue and by
encouraging concrete measures to address the problem
through resolution 1308 (2000), the Council has sent a
clear and unequivocal demonstration of its commitment
to the crusade against HIV/AIDS.

After resolution 1308 (2000) was adopted in July
last year, some were disappointed that its provisions
were voluntary in nature. But we should not
underestimate its historic importance. This was the first
time the Security Council recognized a health issue as
a threat to international peace and security. We are here
therefore today to build on this achievement.

There is strong empirical evidence to suggest a
nexus between the proliferation of armed conflict and
the spread of HIV/AIDS. Populations ravaged and
displaced by war are the most vulnerable, as they do
not have access to adequate medical treatment. It is
precisely in such conditions that peacekeepers can
make a difference. With the correct training in
education and prevention of HIV/AIDS, peacekeepers
can act as positive agents through playing an advocacy
role in conflict areas. In this regard, we welcome the
announcement of the memorandum of understanding
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) and UNAIDS to strengthen their cooperation.
We also thank DPKO and support their efforts in
ensuring that effective pre-deployment orientation and
training on HIV/AIDS is given to all United Nations
peacekeepers.
A global epidemic requires global solutions.
HIV/AIDS does not distinguish between race, creed or
nationality. It cannot be dealt with in isolation. The
multisectoral approach practised by UNAIDS is the
right way forward. We commend the untiring efforts
and leadership demonstrated by UNAIDS on this issue.
Ultimately, however, the onus falls on national
Governments to establish effective strategies to deal
with the HIV/AIDS crisis. In the preface of its report
on HIV/AIDS, UNAIDS rightly points out that

"While international political, financial and
technical support are important, lowering the
incidence and mitigating the epidemic's impact
must be a nationally driven agenda."

The fruits of an effective national strategy are
plain for all to see. Successes enjoyed by Uganda and
Thailand are well documented. Key lessons we can
draw include a need for strong political commitment
from the highest levels and taking a broad-based
approach to implementing preventive measures. It is
essential that such best practices are disseminated
widely to all countries so that a global rollback of the
HIV/AIDS pandemic is made possible.

Singapore is fortunate to have a low incidence of
HIV/AIDS infection. Nonetheless, we have made
prevention and treatment of the disease a high priority
through a comprehensive national AIDS control
programme. For example, HIV/AIDS education is
given to every student, as well as to all national
servicemen who serve in the uniformed services.
Stringent measures are undertaken to safeguard the
national blood supply. HIV/AIDS patients are given
access to subsidized medical treatment and are
counselled regularly. The Government also works
closely with community groups to promote further
training and research activities, to raise awareness of
HIV/AIDS and to prevent discrimination against
patients and families. At an international level, our
health authorities cooperate with the World Health
Organization to provide it with regular updates on the
HIV/AIDS situation in Singapore.

Prevention, while crucial, is only one side of the
coin. Equally important is the proper care and
treatment of the 36 million people afflicted with the
virus. Access to health care should not be separated
from prevention. It is not right that victims in
developing countries are denied the same level of
health care made available to those from the developed
world. When we consider that over 90 per cent of those
suffering from HIV/AIDS reside in the developing
world, the availability of affordable drugs and
treatment must be made a top priority.

We are all aware of the deleterious effects of an
HIV/AIDS epidemic on a country's economic capacity.
Just as peace and stability in developing countries are
threatened by this epidemic, their economic
development and potential are also likewise crippled.
While the Security Council can play a significant
catalytic role in the fight against HIV/AIDS, the
multidimensional effects of the epidemic can be
represented only by UNAIDS. We therefore view
today's debate as only one part of our wider struggle
against the proliferation of the disease.

I resume my function as President of the Security
Council.

I call on Mr. Guehenno to respond to any
comments raised.

