Mr. Doss: I am very pleased to be able to join the
Council today as it begins its consideration of the
Secretary-General's fourth special report on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2008/728). This is a critical time for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The fighting that has erupted in
the eastern part of the country, along with its major
humanitarian consequences, reminds us that overall
peace and stability in the country cannot be attained
without resolving the root causes of conflict in its
troubled eastern regions.

Over 250,000 people have been directly affected
by the resumed hostilities. Overall, a quarter of the
people of North Kivu are currently displaced. It was
the lack of will and capacity to implement the
numerous inter-Congolese and regional agreements
reached that led to the resumption of major hostilities
at the end of October.

We call on all parties to respect the agreements
reached and return to the political process established
by the Nairobi and Goma frameworks. We welcome in
this regard the intensive international, regional and
bilateral political efforts in the past few weeks to
resolve the current crisis.

I am pleased to report that, as a result of Special
Envoy Obasanjo's first round of talks, a ceasefire has
been established and the Congres national pour la
defense du peuple (CNDP) and other armed groups
have pulled back in order to create a zone of separation
between the fighting forces in the northern part of the
southern half of North Kivu. After consultations with
the Secretary-General in New York this week,
08-62035
President Obasanjo will return to the region on Friday
to resume his efforts for the parties and neighbouring
States. President Obasanjo's mediation mission is also
expected to address the continuing problem of the
presence of Rwandan armed groups comprised of
members of the former armed forces of Rwanda and
Interahamwe and the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda in the eastern Democratic
Republic, as well as to follow up on the Nairobi
communique.

Recent events have had a profound effect on the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and the way it
implements its mandate. Already overstretched, the
Mission has had to assume full responsibility for the
protection of the major population centres in North
Kivu and to support the delivery of humanitarian
assistance.

A major reconfiguration effort has been under
way to reinforce MONUC's presence in North Kivu,
including from within the province itself. We are
therefore very grateful that the Council has authorized
the additional resources that I had requested in early
October. These reinforcements will provide us with
some time and space for the political and diplomatic
initiatives to go forward. At the same time, we should
be very aware that these additional troops will not be
on the ground before a couple of months at the very
earliest - and probably it may take longer - despite
the efforts that are currently under way to mobilize and
deploy those reinforcements as soon as possible.

That is why we have and continue to support the
calls for the deployment of a multinational force as a
bridging measure until MONUC is fully reinforced. We
should also be mindful that the MONUC's presence
should not replace the national authorities and security
forces in their responsibility to protect civilians and to
protect the territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

We are particularly concerned at and deplore the
recent attacks on civilians and unlawful killings of
individuals in areas that have been overrun by conflict.
We have warned that these actions constitute war
crimes and will be pursued.

We look forward to an in-depth discussion with
the Council members on the future role of MONUC,
how it can adapt its mandate to the new realities, and
how it can be more effective, especially in helping the
08-62035
Congolese people, consolidating peace and creating a
better future for the country.

