Mr. Bedjaoui (Algeria) (spoke in French): The
Council has before it the report of the United Nations
International Independent Investigation Commission
established pursuant to resolution 1595 (2005) on the
assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri.

I would like first of all to pay tribute to
Mr. Detlev Mehlis and to the members of the
Commission for their efforts to shed light on the
heinous assassination of Rafik Hariri and thereby
enable the Lebanese people to move beyond their
terrible ordeal so that the work of rebuilding by
consolidating the bases of democracy - of which he
was one of the most eminent architects - can
continue.

I am convinced that Lebanon will be able once
again - as it has always been able to do when faced
with various challenges throughout its troubled
history - to summon the necessary resources to enable
it to move beyond current difficulties to regain its
place in the community of nations and open up real
prospects for economic recovery and development,
thereby contributing to the promotion of stability and
security in that key region of the Middle East.

In that regard, I would like to reaffirm the
unswerving commitment of Algeria to Lebanon's unity,
independence and sovereignty, all of which have been
attained at great cost. We would also like to express
our earnest hope that the act of absolute evil that led to
our meeting today will be the last in a long series of
misdeeds that have sorely tried the region and led to a
culture of injustice and impunity.

The Arab State member of the Council that I have
the honour of representing - which is also privileged
to hold the chairmanship of the Summit of the League
of Arab States - would like to state, loudly and
clearly, that the cowardly assassination of the late
Rafik Hariri must not under any circumstances go
unpunished.

This solemn meeting of the Security Council
must reflect the aspirations of the Lebanese people to
ensure the triumph of justice in order to punish those
who planned and carried out that horrible terrorist
crime, and their accomplices, with respect for the rule
of law and human rights. That is why it is important
that the quest for the truth, which the Council
unanimously supports, has the clear stamp of a fair,
objective legal process and be absolutely precise and
impartial.

According to the Commission itself, the inquiry
is not yet complete. Clearly, the report is not yet final.
That is why the Security Council must at this stage
ensure - as it has done - the necessary prudence
when reviewing the evidence and initial circumstantial
findings or leads, taking care that the presumption of
guilt does not replace the presumption of innocence.

The Security Council must be mindful of the
Commission's credibility and respectful of its
professionalism by avoiding hasty or premature
substantive decisions. Its most important duty at this
procedural stage is to increase the resources of the
Inquiry Commission so that it can carry out its
mandate. In that specific context, it rightly called on
Syria to cooperate fully and honestly with the Inquiry
Commission.

The Council's urgent invitation has already been
heeded. In this regard, we welcome the reaffirmation
by Syria at the highest level of State of its willingness
to cooperate fully with the Commission. The adoption
of the resolution under Chapter VII was sufficient to
ensure the full cooperation of Syria.

Similarly, we have consistently believed that the
resolution should focus on ways to help the Inquiry
Commission to complete its work and not go beyond
that judicial framework, in particular by prematurely
brandishing the threat of sanctions. It would have been
just as inappropriate and illogical for the resolution to
have called on Syria to cease all support for terrorist
actions. Such issues, which would disrupt the internal
consistency of the resolution, could be dealt with in a
completely different context than the one with which
we are dealing today.

Many of our concerns were taken into account by
the sponsors of the resolution just adopted, for which I
am very grateful. I would, however, like to outline our
position on the resolution, which has been unanimously
adopted and which we welcome.
First, political elements that have no direct or
indirect connection with the inquiry and that
incriminate Syria prematurely and in the absence of
compelling evidence, thereby disrupting the internal
consistency of the resolution have, fortunately, been
avoided.

Secondly, the threat of sanctions against Syria
under Article 41 of the Charter has been removed.
Such provisions would have been both premature and
superfluous, since the resolution was adopted in the
context of Chapter VII of the Charter and is, therefore,
in and of itself already binding.

Thirdly, the fact remains that the Council has
given the Inquiry Commission excessive power in
terms of the letter and spirit of resolution 1595 (2005),
since, as already recognized, the Commission has the
ability to submit directly to the Council the names of
suspects with a View to imposing sanctions on them or
even of deciding on the venue and modalities for the
interrogation of Syrian or other officials.

In this matter, the Security Council had a
valuable opportunity to end its association, in the
collective consciousness of the Arab people, with the
hasty adoption of decisions that have immeasurable
negative consequences when it comes to preparing a
case involving an Arab party, in contrast to its inertia
when it comes to using its authority to support an
undeniably just Arab cause.

At the same time, it is with the same vigour that
the collective Arab consciousness, already wounded by
so much upheaval in the Middle East, has
spontaneously risen up against yet another abscess on
the body of an Arab nation already overburdened by so
much conflict and frustration.

At this stage, it is of the utmost importance -
regardless of what reading one gives the report before
the Council - that Syria, a State Member of the
United Nations, be considered a part of the solution
and not a part of the problem. Let us therefore accept
the promise to cooperate with the Investigation
Commission that Syria's head of State has just made.
Let us place our trust in the moral rigour,
professionalism and impartiality of the Commission,
thereby demonstrating to the entire international
community that the Security Council has firmly placed
itself in the service of justice and law. Let us also
thereby cultivate in the hearts of all people, especially
in the Middle East, which has too often been subjected
to indiscriminate Violence, the hope and promise of
equal justice for all without political motivation. Let us
ensure that the blood selflessly shed by Rafik Hariri
provides a life force for Lebanon as it serves as an
example of harmony and unity, as well as for the
Middle East of peace, justice and security that the
deceased so cherished and dreamed of. It is only in that
way that Rafik Hariri's memory will truly be honoured.

