The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.

At the outset, South Africa wishes to congratulate
Mr. Meza-Cuadra and wish him well in his high-level
assignment to lead his country's diplomatic efforts.
Knowing him, we are certain that he will succeed in
this assignment.

Let me also welcome and congratulate Ms. Helen
La Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the new Head of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), following her
recent appointment. We assure her of our support.

I should also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his briefing and detailed factual chart he
shared with the Council this morning summarizing the
situation in Haiti.

Today is a historic moment for the Government
and the people of Haiti, as this marks the first time
in 15 years that Haiti will not have a United Nations
peacekeeping operation presence. We wish to commend
the tireless efforts of the personnel of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti.

We would also like to commend the efforts of the
Haitian authorities, civil society, local and international
partners and the United Nations country team for their
efforts in helping Haiti navigate a difficult path.

Nonetheless, South Africa remains concerned
by the recent political developments, which have
heightened tensions in Haiti. The ongoing political
discord has given lawlessness a lifeline, which needs
to be contained if BINUH is to succeed. We call on
Haitian stakeholders to attend to the issue of forming
a Government and formalizing the appointment of
the Prime Minister as a matter of urgency. South
Africa believes these are critical steps in assuring the
international community, particularly donors, that
the Haitian stakeholders are genuinely committed to
returning their country to constitutional normalcy and
sustainable development.

It was during this month of October that Haiti
was to hold elections to the Chamber of Deputies and
the Senate. As things stand, the current mandate of
those two components of the legislature will expire on
13 January 2020. That does not leave much time before
the deadline, and what lies beyond it may trouble us
even more if the right steps are not taken to ensure
adherence to democratic principles. We appreciate the
fact that the United Nations has already made resources
available to assist in that regard and encourage the
Haitian political stakeholders to seize this opportunity.

We welcome the efforts by President Jovenel
Moise to reach out to various stakeholders in Haiti,
including the opposition and civil society, in order to
engage in dialogue to discuss the challenges facing
Haiti, including the finalization of the appointment
of the Prime Minister, the importance of addressing
corruption and the challenging economic and social
climate. In our view, all the parties, including the
Government, opposition groups, civil society and
the non-governmental organizations in Haiti should
continue to engage fully in inclusive dialogue to seek a
peaceful solution to the current challenges.
Addressing the root causes of the situation in
Haiti will also continue to be critical to supporting
the country's efforts to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. That includes addressing impunity
in the context of human rights violations and corruption
by strengthening judicial and State institutions,
including the capacity of the Haitian National Police to
respond to challenges on the ground. Reform of Haiti's
justice system in Haiti will be instrumental in building
trust among all of the people and we agree with the
assessment of the Secretary-General in his recent report
in this regard (S/2019/805). We look forward to the
work of BINUH, the United Nations country team and
international partners in supporting the implementation
of reforms to address the multidimensional challenges
facing Haitian society.

Let me conclude by stating that the current approach
of BINUH and its benchmarks represent a critical
opportunity to advance peace and security, including
by enshrining human rights and fostering sustainable
development in Haiti, which should be supported.
For those benchmarks to succeed, however, political
will and commitment from all Haitian stakeholders is
required. We should remind all that Haiti was the first
black Republic in modern history. Having been free for
more than 200 years, Haiti should now welcome and
embrace the new political mission. Haitians must close
ranks, make the necessary compromises and carve a
new pathway towards a stable, democratic, peaceful
and prosperous country.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.

