Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to congratulate friendly Belgium on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month and for selecting today's important topic. We also express our appreciation for today's comprehensive concept note (S/2020/98, annex). And we thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Belgium, His Excellency Mr. Philippe Goffin, for presiding over this meeting, and thank all the briefers for their valuable presentations. Given the complexities of conflicts and their pernicious effects on post-conflict societies, transitional justice is a key priority for achieving stability and a sustainable peace. The post-conflict experiences of countries have shown that sustaining peace and stability requires a successful process of transformation, based on an integrated and coherent approach that includes establishing respect for human rights, strengthening the rule of law, eradicating poverty, building accountable institutions and achieving national reconciliation through comprehensive dialogue and mediation, as well as ensuring access to the judiciary and transitional justice, accountability and good governance. The fragility that results from conflicts, in particular from human rights violations, makes transitional justice a key priority for establishing a sustainable peace in countries struggling with internal and political strife. In that regard, achieving transitional justice requires ending and documenting human rights violations, holding those responsible accountable, ensuring justice and reparation for the victims and launching rehabilitation and reintegration programmes. We must also ensure non-repetition of those violations, institutional reform and_ reconciliation among all segments of societies in order to promote recovery and guarantee a successful transformation process that builds inclusive societies based on the rule of law. Therefore, achieving transitional justice will deter perpetrators from repeating flagrant violations of human rights and will speed up the political transition and national reconciliation towards sustainable peace. The challenge of maintaining peace requires addressing the root causes of crises and conflicts while including all segments of society, in particular women and young people, in policymaking and decision-making processes. We stress the importance of providing young people with employment opportunities as part of transitional justice. Marginalizing them and ignoring their issues and their future will push them towards radicalization and help extremist organizations take advantage of that marginalization and non-participation in planning for their future. The State of Qatar has supported all international efforts aimed at achieving peace, stability, conflict prevention and conflict resolution in a peaceful manner. We have launched several initiatives in that regard. The State of Qatar has played an active role in solving several conflicts through our mediation. We have continued our efforts to ensure respect and promotion for human rights. The State of Qatar has actively supported legal mechanisms with a view to achieving transitional justice, preventing mass atrocities and realizing sustainable peace in order to ensure the maintenance of international peace and security. In that regard, we recall the adoption of General Assembly resolution 71/248, of 21 December 2016, to establish the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. In conclusion, in the light of the State of Qatar's commitment to the protection of civilians, we play an active role in promoting the principle of the responsibility to protect. Together with Denmark and Costa Rica, this year we are co-chairing the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect for the third consecutive year. In keeping with our policy of respecting international law, the State of Qatar continues its efforts to reach political settlements to crises based on the rule of law and human rights. We will spare noeffort to support sincere efforts to achieve the goals of international law on which today's meeting is focused.
