Mr. Gertze (Namibia): As this is my first address
since presenting credentials to Mr. Antonio Guterres
yesterday, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to address the Council, while at the
same time congratulating Sweden and you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency and wishing you and the new
non-permanent members of the Security Council all
the best during this tenure. Let us make this year the
year for peace, as the Secretary-General reminded us.
In congratulating Mr. Guterres on his appointment as
our new Secretary-General, may I take this opportunity
to thank him for putting peace and conflict prevention
as the priority coordinates on the compass for our work
this year.

My delegation fully aligns itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Venezuela on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Council will recall that for many years
Namibia was a discussion point of the Security Council.
Following our independence in 1990, we are now
proud to say that Namibia is a child of international
solidarity midwifed by the United Nations. We have
gone through long and intense negotiations between the
warring parties, and those, as well as our decision now
to implement a policy of national reconciliation, have
been at the heart of our stability for the past 26 years.
Our efforts at conflict prevention have revolved around
our policy of national reconciliation and ensuring the
rights of all Namibian citizens regardless of identity and
despite our awareness of the deep divisions in society.
We have not forgotten the policies of deliberate
oppression and disempowerment that resulted from
colonialism and apartheid. However, we have chosen to
celebrate our independence, embrace our freedom, and
treasure peace and harmony to solidify a prosperous
future for our children. If there is anything that we
have learned through the Namibian experience, it is
that unity and diversity are crucial to sustaining peace.
To nurture this unity, open and honest dialogue in all
societies is indispensable.

On 8 June 2014, Pope Francis said:

"Peacemaking calls for courage, much more
so than warfare. It calls for the courage [...] to
say yes to respect for agreements and no to acts
of provocation".

Conflict prevention means committing to peace
and making the deep changes needed to maintain
peace, even when uncomfortable. Here at the United
Nations, we must begin to make such deep and possibly
uncomfortable changes for peace. Our structures at the
regional, continental and global levels must be revisited
and improved upon. Since the concept note (S/2017/6, annex) for this meeting observes that the tools for peace
and for conflict prevention are available in the United
Nations Charter, our core political solution must begin
here, at the United Nations. We must ensure that the
benefits of democratic practice become normalized
in a restructured Security Council and a revitalized
General Assembly.

The 1995 Beijing Platform for Action declared that
the full participation of women in decision-making,
conflict prevention and resolution, and all other peace
initiatives, is essential to the realization of lasting
peace. My delegation is proud that Namibia sent the
very first all-female police contingent to Darfur, and
we aim to maintain that method of operation.

Namibia fully associates itself with the African
Union and its African Peace and Security Architecture
and the related road map focused on conflict prevention,
conflict management and peacebuilding, which are all
fundamental to silencing the guns by 2020. However,
it also requires commitment to implementing the
Sustainable Development Goals, including the threat
posed by climate change to development.
Nuclear disarmament is central to conflict
prevention. But to ensure its practicality, we must begin
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear technology,
linking safety to the use of nuclear energy and sharing
technology. Our future generations depend upon it.

Finally, allow me to remind the Security Council
that Namibia continues to call for the recognition
and implementation of the inalienable right to self-
determination of the Palestinian people. In the same
vein, I remind this House that the case of Western
Sahara remains outstanding; that this is an issue which
must be part of our discussions on conflict prevention;
and that we must ensure that United Nations resolutions
on that occupied territory are implemented forthwith.

