Mr. Maduro Moros (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would like to
congratulate Greece on its assumption of the Security
Council presidency in September and on its work in
this body as a non-permanent member. We would also
like to thank the Chairmen of the Committees
established under resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004) for the valuable information that they
have given us. Venezuela will continue to cooperate, as
it has done until now, with the work of those
Committees.

One of the fundamental aims of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism is to adopt
effective measures to prevent and eliminate terrorism
in all of its forms and manifestations. No State that
commits terrorist acts or protects the perpetrators of
such acts should be exempt from those measures, no
matter how powerful it may be.

In that struggle, we cannot accept double
standards or selectivity. Clarity and determination are
crucial. A true struggle against terrorism - and this is
our contribution - should be accompanied by a
comprehensive strategy. In other words, it cannot omit
to give due attention to such important questions for
our peoples as the eradication of hunger, poverty,
hardship, aggression, foreign occupation,
discrimination in all of its forms, religious intolerance
and respect among peoples, among other matters.

On behalf of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, we reaffirm once again our categorical
condemnation of all acts of terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, in particular State terrorism.
Likewise, we would like to state clearly our firm
position that we cannot equate terrorism with the
legitimate resistance of peoples against foreign
occupation or invasion.
In its firm determination to fight terrorism, the
Bolivarian Republic has ratified several regional,
bilateral and multilateral conventions on the matter,
and strictly complies with the resolutions adopted
within the framework of the United Nations, including
those of the Security Council.

We have submitted reports to the Counter-
Terrorism Committee in accordance with Security
Council resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1455 (2003). We
have also presented reports on Venezuela's progress in
the fight against this scourge before the Inter-American
Committee on Terrorism. Also, Venezuela has
submitted reports to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

At the domestic level, Venezuela continues to
develop a broad set of standards to fight terrorism and
has created a national authority in this area. As can be
observed, this is a very diligent, responsible and
consistent attitude on the part of the Government of
Venezuela in the fight against terrorism.

With the same firmness and determination with
which we fight terrorism, we would like to express our
condemnation and rejection of those who use the fight
against terrorism as a justification for acts of force
against countries or peoples with a View to political,
economic control or control of strategic natural
resources. Such acts also result in the loss of innocent
lives and a diminishing of lifestyles, thus generating a
vicious circle where violence leads to more violence,
and terror leads to more terror, as is noted in the report
just recently declassified in the United States of
America.

It is unjustifiable that, through so-called
collateral effects of military actions, efforts are made
to intimidate the civilian population of a country in
order to persuade it to submit to a foreign invasion.
The action of massive destruction produced by missiles
and smart-bombs with high explosive charge, directed
indiscriminately against a people, deserves to be
described purely and simply as State terrorism.

The Security Council has determined in various
resolutions that it is unacceptable to support in any
way entities or individuals who participate in terrorist
acts or who provide safe haven to people who commit
such acts. Any action of that type would be in flagrant
violation of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).
That resolution explains clearly in its operative part
that no State may offer safe haven to those who
commit terrorist acts; it also stipulates that claims of
political motivation may not be recognized as grounds
for refusing requests for the extradition of terrorists.
However, there are many examples of non-compliance
with those Security Council provisions.

The international community is fully aware -
because it has been clearly and constantly denounced
by our country, as well as by other countries, countries
of the international community - that the Government
of the United States of America is offering protection
to one of the most notorious terrorists of the Western
Hemisphere - the terrorist Luis Posada Carriles, who
is sought by the Venezuelan courts for his participation
and direct responsibility in the destruction by
explosives of a civilian airliner carrying 73 passengers.
We have instituted extradition proceedings against that
terrorist, in accordance with the bilateral treaty that we
have signed with our counterpart, the United States of
America, followed by astonishing delays, because this
monstrous case has been treated as a banal case of
migration.

On 6 October, in the coming days, it will be 30
years since that horrible crime was committed, just a
few weeks before the attempted assassination of the
Ambassador of Chile in front of the White House, the
former Foreign Minister of Salvador Allende whom we
will always remember, Orlando Letelier, victim of
those same operators who in their time financed and
trained, supported and protected the most notorious
international terrorists.

Another case that deserves mention in this
Chamber is that on 15 March 2004, in accordance with
the convention on extradition with the United States of
America, Venezuela made an official request for the
extradition of citizens Jose Antonio Pulido and German
Varela Lopez, accused by the Venezuelan courts of
having planted explosive devices in the diplomatic
headquarters of brother countries in Caracas in
February 2003.

We condemn the fact that the current Government
of the United States has not responded to the request
for extradition made by the Venezuelan courts. What is
even worse is that on 28 April 2006, those Venezuelan
citizens accused of terrorist acts, who admitted to
terrorist actions against the Embassy of Spain and the
Colombian Consulate, for which they were convicted
by the Venezuelan justice system, were granted
freedom of movement within United States territory.
To conclude, I would like to state that, without
any doubt, our Government is committed, along with
the other Governments in this Chamber, to the true
struggle against terrorism and that we will never justify
any act of that nature, whatever its motive. All
countries have an obligation to act together to fight
terrorism. International cooperation is the only
solution. Venezuela will continue to contribute, doing
everything in its power and ability to liberate humanity
from this scourge.

