Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to express our appreciation for the excellent briefing by
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process.

The delegation of Egypt supports the statements
to be delivered by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and by representative of Djibouti on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. I wish to
add some additional points.

First, Egypt supports the recent efforts by the
United States aimed at resuming peace negotiations,
following a number of visits by the Secretary of
State to the region. Those efforts recently led to the
announcement that direct talks between the two parties
would resume shortly. We hope those efforts will
result in real progress soon, before we reach a point
of no return regarding the two-State solution. We also
reaffirm that United States mediation efforts are not
enough by themselves. The Israeli side must also show
the political necessary for the negotiations to succeed.
They must choose between peace and settlements, and
choose peace rather than settlements. Egypt also looks
forward to reviving the road map of the Quartet once
peace negotiations have resumed.

Secondly, Egypt supports Palestine's position that
negotiations should start on the basis ofthe 1967 borders
and a stop to settlement activities. It emphasizes that
demands made by Palestine are not preconditions; they
only reflect a legitimate call for the implementation of
the relevant United Nations resolutions.

Thirdly, Egypt condemns the continued Israeli
attacks on Palestinians in the occupied territories,
the persistent violence by Israeli settlers against
unarmed Palestinians and the destruction of Palestinian
property. It calls for the immediate release of thousands
of Palestinian prisoners being held in Israeli detention
centres and for an end to the violations to which they
are subjected.

Fourthly, Egypt condemns the illegal Israeli
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories, especially in East Jerusalem and surrounding
areas. It calls on the international community to take
firm measures to stop those illegal acts, which most
recently include Israel's plan to expel the population
of eight Palestinian villages in southern Hebron under
the pretext that they fall within the scope of a military
training area, as well as the approval by the Israeli
Knesset of a law on the organized resettlement of
Bedouins in the Negev. In that connection, Egypt recalls
that, in March 2012, the Commission on the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination determined that the draft law
would legalize racist practices against Arab citizens
in Israel in order to settle the Arab population on the
smallest land area.

We also call for a halt to the approval by Israeli
authorities of a public park south of Jerusalem. One
fifth of that park is to be built on Palestinian land - an
innovative form of land confiscation.

Egypt commends the recent decision of the
European Union to exclude the settlements from
any future agreement with Israel. It clearly indicates
non-recognition of Israeli sovereignty over the
Arab territories occupied since 1967. Egypt views
this decisions as a step in the right direction, a step
towards the two-State solution, and a step to resist
the intensification of settlements. We hope that it will
convince Israel to stop building settlements, instead of
restricting the activities of the European Union in the
West Bank in response.

Fifth, Egypt rejects the illegal Israeli blockade
imposed on the Gaza Strip, as well as the restrictions
imposed on the Palestinian Authority. They have led
to the destruction of the Palestinian economy and the
deterioration ofthe living conditions ofthe Palestinians.

Sixth, the Egyptian security forces are addressing
the security threats in Sinai, in accordance with the
provisions of the peace accords.

Seventh, Egypt reaffirms situation in the region
should not distract us from the developments related
to the question of Palestine, or from the need to stop
the settlement activities and establish the independent
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Nevertheless, we also call for an immediate end to
the violence in Syria, urgent assistance to the Syrian
refugees, and the provision of the necessary support to
the countries hosting them. We reaffirm the importance
ofpreserving the unity and territorial integrity of Syria,
while maintaining the cohesion of Syrian society.

The current situation in Syria in no way justifies
the continued occupation of the Syrian Golan. We call
for the implementation of Security Council resolutions
related to the occupied Syrian Golan, including the
Israeli withdrawal from the Syrian territories. We
are deeply concerned by the increasing breaches of
Lebanese airspace by the Israeli air force, in violation
of Lebanon's sovereignty and in contravention of the
United Nations Charter, international law, and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Egypt once again calls on the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibilities by taking the necessary
measures for the immediate cessation of the illegal
Israeli settlements activities and ensuring a final
solution, especially since the question of Palestine has
been and still is the main reason behind the instability
in the Middle East region which threatens international
peace and security.

