Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes today's briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. We thank Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
excellent briefing.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the signing on 17 September
by the Russian Federation and Turkey of the agreement
establishing a demilitarized zone in the governorate
of Idlib. This agreement prevented the much feared
confrontation between the warring parties, thus
avoiding the unprecedented humanitarian disaster that
would have resulted. Cote d'Ivoire therefore urges all
parties to resolutely support the implementation of
the provisions of this agreement, in particular those
relating to the withdrawal of heavy weapons and armed
combatants from the demilitarized zone.

Indeed, the situation in Syria remains fragile,
particularly in the governorate of Idlib, where the risk
of renewed fighting cannot be ruled out. My country
therefore calls on the actors in the Syrian crisis to
exercise restraint and take the necessary measures to
ensure safe, unhindered and sustainable access for
humanitarian assistance to Syrian populations in need,
both in Idlib and throughout the country. Cote d'Ivoire
reminds the protagonists of the conflict in Syria of their
responsibilities under international humanitarian law
and the relevant provisions of resolution 2417 (2018).
It also welcomes the continued multifaceted assistance
of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes to
populations living in areas affected by armed clashes.

My country would like to welcome the continuation
of cross-border humanitarian assistance. It also calls
for a renewal of the modalities set out in resolution
2165 (2014) and subsequent resolutions, so as to provide
cross-border assistance, which is essential in view of
the risks of a deterioration of the humanitarian situation
in Idlib province.

My delegation remains convinced that a lasting
solution to the Syrian crisis can only be found through
a political process based on an inclusive dialogue
among all stakeholders. In this regard, it welcomes
the initiatives taken in the context of the Geneva and
Astana processes and the recent quadripartite summit
in Istanbul, all aimed at a cessation of hostilities and
the return of lasting peace and stability in Syria. My
country believes that there can be no lasting peace in
Syria without accountability for the serious human
rights violations in that country. It therefore urges
all parties, including the States, civil society and
United Nations agencies, to cooperate fully with the
international, impartial and independent investigative
assistance mechanism to ensure that armed persons or
groups responsible for war crimes are held accountable
before the competent international courts.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire wishes to reiterate
that a lasting solution to the current crisis in Syria
requires an inclusive political process as well as the
implementation of the conclusions of the Geneva
communique of 30 June 2012 and the provisions of the
Sochi Declaration of 30 January 2018.

