Mr. Denktas (Turkey): I wish to start by thanking
your country's presidency, Madam, for organizing this
very important open debate and the valuable and, in
the case of Ms. Kamara, touching contributions by
the briefers.

I will go straight to our point. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/509) paints a grim picture.
The situation of children continues to be adversely
and disproportionately affected by armed conflicts
around the world. Daunting violations of the six
defined categories 4 the six serious violations against
children - continue to impose an immense impact on
children. We are deeply troubled, particularly by the
statistics provided for 2018. It is impossible to ignore
the suffering and hopelessness in the eyes of Syrian,
Palestinian, Rohingya and other children around the
world. With regard to Syria, obviously, the crisis in
that country has waged its highest toll on children. The
statistics in the Secretary General's report, as well as
images coming from Idlib, bear witness to the gravity
of the situation.

In addition to the crimes of Al-Assad's brutal
regime in the form of indiscriminate air strikes, barrel
bombs, chemical weapons and artillery shelling,
and the recently repeated deliberate targeting of
civilians and civilian infrastructure in Idlib, there
are other menaces facing children in Syria. Those
include the well-documented crimes of the terrorist
organization the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK) and its
Syrian brand 4 the Democratic Union Party (PYD)
and the Kurdish People's Protection Units (YPG/ YPJ) 4 against young girls and boys over the years.
We must make no mistake. The PYD and the YPG/YPJ
employ the same tactics as other terrorist organizations
operating in Syria, such as Da'esh, Al-Qaida, Al-Nusra
and other affiliated groups. As such, they deserve no
less condemnation than any of those groups.

The Secretary-General's latest report provides
damning insights into the horrific treatment of children
at the hands of the PKK in areas under its control. As
highlighted in the report, the YPG/YPJ recruited the
highest number of children in Syria last year. It also
topped the list in the deprivation of children of their
liberty. Our national estimates put the number of
children kidnapped and forcefully separated from their
families by the PKK at 700. The majority of them are
either of Kurdish origin or from other groups, such
as Arameans, as pointed out by the World Council
of Arameans.

Intimidating dissidents, demographic engineering,
forced conscription, the oppression of local populations
and looting and the confiscation of property in areas
under its de facto control are some of the other crimes
committed by the PYD and the YPG/YPJ. They
target schools, convert them into ammunition depots
and deprive children of their fundamental right to
education. Everyone will see, or must have seen, in
the Secretary General's report that more than half the
schools listed for military use in Syria are used by the
YPG/YPJ. Those numbers speak for themselves. Other
reports of the Secretary-General and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs underline
that the so-called Kurdish self-Administration in Syria
banned Arabic in more than 250 schools. Approximately
60,000 students are prevented from attending school in
the areas controlled by the YPG/YPJ.

While we appreciate the documentation of the
PKK,PYD and YPG/YPJ crimes that are relevant to the
subject matter of this open debate, we must stress the
need to demonstrate a unified front against terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations. We will not condone
any act that could be exploited by terrorists in their
search for recognition and legitimacy. That is why we
condemned the signing of an action plan with a well-
known PKK terrorist, for whom INTERPOL issued a
red notice.
Cherry-picking is simply not an option. The PYD-
YPG/YPJ-PKK is a terrorist organization with the blood
of more than 40,000 of my fellow citizens on its hands.
It should be treated as such. Its existence and its actions
cannot and should not be given any legitimization for
any reason.

Furthermore, concerning some of the statements
made earlier today, I should underline that we do
not accept and cannot remain idle with regard to a
terrorist organization being praised for committing
to limit its level of criminality. That approach and
the method of strategic communication need to be
urgently reconsidered.

My Government fully shares and supports the
agenda of the United Nations in addressing the situation
of children in armed conflict. To that end, we show
the utmost care and take all the precautions required
under international humanitarian law. We will continue
to work closely and in complete transparency with
the Special Representative's Office in support of her
efforts and to make sure all the information they collect
is correct and complete. We also do everything within
our means to alleviate the suffering of children running
from armed conflict.

Of the 2.6 million Syrians that fled to Turkey for
obvious reasons, 1.7 million are children under the
age of 18. More than 444.000 Syrian babies have been
born in Turkey since the conflict began eight years ago.
We have mobilized our resources to provide proper
and dignified living conditions for Syrian children
who are under temporary protection in Turkey, from
education - as it is important given the fact that
they will be the ones to eventually rebuild their own
country 4 to free health care.

The best way of keeping children from harm's way
is prevention in the first place. With that understanding,
we will also continue to support the Secretary-General's
focus on prevention and the protection of children. We
commend the Polish presidency for convening this
important open debate, and the Secretary-General for
his report. My country will continue to do everything
it can to prevent and end all violations against children.

