Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretaries-General
Le Roy and Amos for their informative briefings on
developments in Haiti. We also listened with interest to
the statement by Mr. Cazeau, Haiti's Deputy Permanent
Representative to the United Nations.

The situation in Haiti remains difficult. The
devastating earthquake was followed by an outbreak of
cholera and the political crisis that erupted following
the holding of the presidential and parliamentary
elections. The international community is providing
humanitarian assistance of unprecedented scale and
solidarity to the community of Port-au-Prince.

The Russian Federation has disbursed $8 million
for the reconstruction of Haiti through the intermediary
of various international organizations, first and
foremost the United Nations system. At the same time,
not all donor pledges have actually reached Haiti. We
share the Secretary-General's concern regarding the
fact that Haiti's reconstruction is progressing very
slowly. Over 1 million Haitians are still housed in tent
camps.

The main responsibility for the reconstruction of
Haiti is borne by the people of that country. The
Haitian Government must play a leading role in
coordinating humanitarian and reconstruction activity.
To resolve the problems facing Haiti, Port-au-Prince
must be helped above all in strengthening the
structures of State authority, thus enabling Haitians to
resolve the issues of reconstruction and national
development themselves.

The parliamentary and presidential elections held
on 28 November 2010 were a serious challenge to
Haiti. This new elections-related area of tension must
be prevented from complicating international
reconstruction efforts in the country. We urge all
political forces in Haiti to demonstrate calm and
restraint and to resolve contentious issues exclusively
through legal mechanisms.

We welcome the efforts of the Organization of
American States and the United Nations to resolve the
situation. We believe that the Haitian Government,
which bears the primary responsibility for the situation
in the country, will take all necessary steps to
successfully complete the elections process in line with

ll-21162
its domestic legislation and democratic standards, with
the assistance of the international community,
including regional organizations.

We express our support for the activities of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. We are
grateful to the Mission leader and staff for their work
in trying conditions.

We welcome the comprehensive support being
provided to Haiti by regional States. We note the
efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti,
Bill Clinton, aimed at mobilizing donor support for the
country. Given the scale of the problems afflicting
Haiti, the international community must continue its
comprehensive support to the Government of that
country in order to fully restore Haiti's national
potential.

