Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
today's briefers, and especially the United Nations
teams on the ground in Yemen, for their tireless efforts
in exceptionally difficult conditions.

Since December, the Council has urged the
parties to demonstrate their commitment to a political
settlement by redeploying from Al-Hudaydah in
line with the terms of the Stockholm Agreement.
While we should not minimize the importance of the
Al-Hudaydah ceasefire, which is narrowly holding,
continued violence risks jeopardizing the Stockholm
Agreement. But the ceasefire is not an end in and of
itself. Now is the time to seize on the momentum of
the ceasefire and on the agreement on the concept of
operations for the first phase of the withdrawal. We
need to move to further talks to end the conflict.

The Yemeni Government has been working with the
United Nations Special Envoy for more than a month to
identify redeployment terms that it can accept. We thank
President Hadi Mansour and the Yemeni Government
for their support for the Redeployment Coordination
Committee. We appreciate the fact that the Houthis
have finally agreed to the phase one withdrawal concept
of operations, and we will be watching closely to see
if they make good on that agreement. The Yemeni
Government has demonstrated a clear commitment to
the United Nations-led process. It is now time for the
Houthis to show the international community that they
too are serious about the United Nations process and the
agreements that they themselves reached in Stockholm.

For the past three months we have also expressed
our strong concerns about continued postponement of
the World Food Programme's mission to rehabilitate
and reopen the Red Sea Mills. But today, as we heard
from Mark Lowcock and a number of other speakers,
the Mills are still closed and the food stocks within may
be rotting. At this point, only the Houthis are blocking
access to them, and they alone will be to blame if the
food spoils.

Our support for Martin Griffiths and Lieutenant
General Lollesgaard remains steadfast. They, their
staffs and the international humanitarian community
are doing what they can to help the parties reach a
resolution to the conflict and save Yemeni lives. We
applaud the Yemeni Government for joining them in
that effort, and we call on the Houthis to do the same
without further delay.

