Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to start where my colleague of Belgium ended, by referring to the common position of the European Union, which will be expressed later in our discussion. As the Ambassador of Germany, I would like to echo the remarks made by the Ambassador of the United States about the Holocaust and the fact that we are commemorating the liberation of Auschwitz. In that context, it is very important for us never to ease up on the fight against anti-Semitism. With regard to the remarks made by my colleague of Israel, I would like to echo what he said about respect for the Iranian people and about the conduct of Iranian policy, in relation to respect for human rights and foreign policy, in support of terrorist movements in the region. One point I would like to highlight, which is also very important in the context of our debate on the Middle East, is our appeal to Iran to finally recognize Israel and its right to exist. I would like to pick up where the Observer of Palestine ended and remind the Security Council about the debate held a week ago (S/PV.8699). The Council issued a presidential statement (S/PRST/2020/1) in which we expressed our respect for international law and stated that international order must be based on international law. We must respect that statement and implement it. As I have said before in this organ, international law is not a la carte. We are all therefore called upon to implement the resolutions adopted by the Security Council. That is binding international law. Among those there are several resolutions on the Middle East. They are all summarized in the most recent resolution adopted on the matter - resolution 2334 (2016). According to that resolution and previous ones, settlements are illegal under international law. Annexations, which have been announced and are now part of the Israeli election campaign, are a violation of international law. That is also true of changes to the status of Jerusalem. That, too, is a violation of international law. One sometimes forgets that resolution 2334 (2016) is a very balanced resolution, which condemns all acts of terror, violence against civilians, incitement, provocative actions and inflammatory rhetoric. Germany condemns all attacks on Israel. The firing of rockets from Gaza is not acceptable. Germany is steadfast in its commitment to Israel's right to self- defence and its proportionate response to attacks. I would like to make a few final points. We very much are in favour of elections in the Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. It is very important that the Palestinian Government be democratically based. I echo what Ms. Mueller said with regard to the terrible humanitarian situation. In that respect, I would again like to confirm our commitment to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We believe UNRWA is crucial for regional stability and the provision of humanitarian assistance to schools, health systems and hospitals. To date, no one has explained to me what other agency Palestinians could turn to in order to go to school or to the hospital, if not to UNRWA.
