Mr. El-Ad: It is very difficult, if not impossible, to
fully convey the indignity, the outrage and the pain of a
people denied the benefit of human rights for more than
50 years. Here in this Chamber, it is hard to articulate
the flesh-and-blood meaning of the exposed lives
Palestinians endure under occupation. But no matter
how hard it is to describe, the real hardship is that of
facing such an intolerable existence day in and day out,
trying to live, raise a family and develop a community
under those conditions.

It has been almost two years to the day since I last
had the honour of speaking before the Council - two
more years of occupation, two years in which the
routine of the first 49 years of occupation continued.
Since I last spoke here, 317 Palestinians have been
killed by Israeli security forces and 13 Israelis have
been killed by Palestinians. Israel has demolished 294
Palestinian homes and has continued making arrests on
a daily basis, including of minors. Israeli settlers have
vandalized and uprooted thousands of olive trees and
grapevines. Israeli security forces have continued to
regularly enter Palestinian houses, sometimes coming
in the dead of the night to wake children, register
their names and take their pictures. Palestinians have
lost countless hours waiting at checkpoints with no
explanation. And so, the routine of the occupation
marches on.

All of that is often referred to as the status quo.
Yet, there is nothing static about that reality. It is a
calculated and deliberate process of slowly splitting
up an entire people, while fragmenting their land and
disrupting their lives, separating Gaza from the West
Bank, breaking up the West Bank into small enclaves
and walling off East Jerusalem from the rest of the West
Bank. Eventually, what remains are isolated bits that are
easier to oppress - a family slated for eviction in the
East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Silwan; a community,
such as Urif, south of Nablus, trying against all odds to
hold on to its land and farm it in the face of Israel's
long arm of unchecked settler violence; and all of Area
A of the West Bank, conveniently said to be under full
Palestinian control, but, in fact, essentially comprising
large bantustans, slowly but surely being hemmed
in by an increasing number of new or expanding
Israeli settlements.
None of that is random. All of it is policy-driven.
Two of the most recent and most conspicuous examples
are Israel's conduct in the recent protests in Gaza and
its plans for Khan Al-Ahmar, a Palestinian shepherding
community. Some 200 people live in Khan Al-Ahmar,
just a few kilometres east of Jerusalem, in an area
where Israel has long endeavoured to minimize the
Palestinian presence and expand settlements. Israel
plans to raze the entire community, claiming that all
its structures were built illegally. The Government
further claims that it has generously offered to relocate
the community, even going so far as to guarantee that
it would foot the bill for the relocation site. Israel also
contends that its actions are legitimate. The High Court
of Justice had given its seal of approval, had it not? But
such claims are nothing short of distortions, carefully
constructed by eager attorneys building on the unsound
and unjust foundations of hollow legal formalisms.

First, there is no argument that the homes were built
without permission from the Israeli authorities. But that
is the case not because Palestinians are inherently law-
breakers, as some in Israel suggest; rather it is because
they have no other alternative. It is almost impossible
for Palestinians to obtain building permits from the
Israeli authorities because the Israeli-established
planning regime in the West Bank is meant by design
to serve settlers and dispossess Palestinians.

Secondly, the Government failed to mention that the
two relocation sites that it so generously offered leave
something to be desired. One is beside a garbage dump
and the other is next to a wastewater treatment facility.
Moreover, relocation would completely undermine the
community's ability to make a living.

Lastly, in its ruling, the High Court completely
ignored the reality of the planning regime in the West
Bank. The fact that the High Court approved the
Government's decision does not make the demolition
just or even legal. It only makes the justices complicit
by proving that the action is nothing short of the war
crime of the forcible transfer of protected people in an
occupied territory.

With a population of nearly 2 million, the Gaza Strip
has essentially become an open-air prison. Its inmates
have been staging protests for the past six months,
after suffering for more than a decade under an Israeli-
imposed blockade that has led to economic collapse,
soaring unemployment rates, polluted drinking water,
dwindling power supplies and, ultimately, deep despair.
Since 30 March, more than 5,000 Palestinians have
been injured by live Israeli gunfire and more than 170
have been killed, including at least 31 minors. The
youngest were just little boys. Majdi Al-Satari, Yasser
Abu Al-Naja and Nasser Musabeh were just 11 years
old when they were killed.

As with Khan Al-Ahmar, Israel's High Court of
Justice found Israeli policies vis-a-vis the Gaza Strip to
be legal on a range of issues, from authorizing various
aspects of the blockade to recently approving rules
of engagement that allow Israeli snipers to continue
firing from a distance at demonstrators inside Gaza.
The only problem with all of that is that none of it is
legal or moral or even remotely acceptable. Yet, as long
as that methodical, relentless process does not trigger
international outrage and international action, Israel
can successfully continue to carry off that contradiction
in terms - oppressing millions, while somehow still
being considered a democracy. That, in a nutshell, is the
pattern that the occupation follows. Israeli institutions, in
which Palestinians have no representation, move pieces
of paper along a well-choreographed disassembly line.
How do we legalize the demolition of that community?
How do we whitewash yet another killing? How do we
take over that plot of Palestinian land?

With more than 50 years of experience, we have
had plenty of time to perfect that well-oiled farce. We
are now quite the experts at constructing a facade of
legality, which has been very successful in allowing
us not to have to deal with any real international
consequences. None of those actions has anything to
do with security, as Israel tries to argue. However, they
affect the amorphous construct called the Middle East
peace process. If one looks beyond the blinders of the
process, it is clear to see how its supposedly yet to be
negotiated outcome is, in reality, being dictated day in
and day out by unilateral Israeli actions.

The only thing being processed here is Palestine.
Consider the following historical analogies. Voter
suppression was a cornerstone of the American
south, under Jim Crow laws. But we have done one
better - delivering no less than voter obliteration.
As the occupied Palestinians remain non-citizens, not
only can they not vote but they have absolutely no
representation in the Israeli institutions that govern
their lives. I will take a look at the discriminatory
planning mechanisms and the separate legal systems in
the occupied territories. They are reminiscent of South
Africa's grand apartheid. Granted, neither analogy is
a perfect fit but history does not offer us precision.
It offers us a moral compass, which points towards
rejecting Israel's oppression of Palestinians with the
same unwavering conviction with which humankind's
conscience rejected those other grand injustices.

Israel, however, appears to be following a different
compass. While doing so, it is also busy removing
any obstacles that might keep it from its objective.
Ongoing efforts to legislate against Israeli human
rights organizations now go hand in hand with the
routine in which opposition to the occupation is
being equated with treason. The Israeli Government's
statements ahead of today's Council meeting are just
one more unfortunate example of the spirit of the times.
Therefore, I say to Prime Minister Netanyahu that he
will never silence us or the hundreds of thousands of
Israelis who reject a present founded on supremacy
and oppression and stand for a future built on equality,
freedom and human rights. I am not a traitor, nor am I
a hero. The heroes are the Palestinians who endure the
occupation with courage and perseverance, wake up in
the middle of the night to find soldiers barging into their
homes, know that if a loved one is killed, impunity is
all but guaranteed to the perpetrators and stay on their
land, knowing that it is only a matter of time before the
bulldozers arrive.

I am one of a team of some 40 committed Israelis
and Palestinians. We do not focus on how many is the
right number of States to achieve a solution. Instead,
we focus on the realization of human rights. That is
why we reject the occupation. We reject it because
the current reality is wholly and utterly incompatible
with what is right and what is just. It is a reality
wholly and utterly incompatible with a life of freedom
and dignity for all 13 million people - Israelis and
Palestinians alike - living between the Jordan River
and the Mediterranean Sea. And that is the future we
strive for. Even if it now seems far off, and receding
ever further away, we can make that future a reality.
Assertive international action can make it happen. It is
the only viable non-violent option. The world must let
Israel know that it will no longer stand idly by and that
it will take action against the continued dismantling of
the Palestinian people.

The rules-based international order will not defend
itself, and the successful fragmentation of Palestine is
detrimental to Palestinians and Israelis alike, as well
as to international law and the values enshrined in it. It
is the role of the Security Council and the delegations
seated in this Chamber to oversee precisely that. The
stakes are high. The Security Council must take action.
In fact, it has already decided to do so, even ifin a very
limited fashion. However, it is a matter of record that
the Secretary-General has so far had little to report to
the Council on the implementation of paragraph 5 of
resolution 2334 (2016).

Before closing, I would like to take us all back to
Khan Al-Ahmar. The need for action there is acute and
urgent. As Israel tests the international community's
resolve to see how far and how fast it can proceed,
what might happen any day now in Khan Al-Ahmar
will determine the fate of Palestinian communities
all over the West Bank. So far, Israeli preparations to
demolish Khan Al-Ahmar continue unabated. High-
level international statements have had no impact - not
even the united voice, as expressed on 20 September,
of the five current European members of the Council,
joined by former member Italy and future members
Belgium and Germany. They have my sincerest thanks
and deep appreciation for those statements. Without
their efforts, I doubt if Khan Al-Ahmar would still be
standing today.

Yet, Israel has already answered their call by
continuing with preparations for the demolition. Just a
few days ago, the Minister ofDefence described actions
that are nothing short of a forcible transfer as "moving
a small group of people within a several-kilometre
radius". He called on the Council to stop its "flagrant
interference" in Israel's plans, as if the forcible
transfer of Khan Al-Ahmar, a strategic step in Israel's
dismantling project, is somehow an internal and
domestic matter. The members of the Security Council
have spoken, and they have received Israel's answer.
Action must now follow.

