The President (spoke in French): Pursuant to the
invitation extended by the Council, I invite His
Excellency Mr. Ali Othman Taha, First Vice-President
of the Sudan, to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Ali Othman Taha.

Pursuant to the invitation extended by the
Council, I invite His Excellency Mr. John Garang de
Mabior, Chairman of the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement/Army, to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 39 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. John Garang de
Mabior.

Pursuant to the invitation extended by the
Council, I invite His Excellency Mr. Baba Gana
Kingibe, Special Representative of the Chairperson of
the Commission of the African Union in the Sudan, to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Baba Gana Kingibe.

The Security Council will now resume its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members have before them the following
documents: report of the Secretary-General on the
Sudan pursuant to paragraphs 6, 13 and 16 of Security
Council resolution 1556 (2004), paragraph 15 of
Security Council resolution 1564 (2004) and paragraph
17 of Security Council resolution 1574 (2004), dated
4February 2005, document S/2005/68; report of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan submitted pursuant to
Security Council resolutions 1547 (2004) and 1574
(2004), document S/2005/57; and photocopies of a
letter dated 31 January 2005 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the English-language version of
the report of the International Commission of Inquiry
on Darfur, which will be issued under the symbol
8/2005/60.

I shall now make a statement on behalf of the
members of the Security Council.

We are honoured to recognize the presence of the
Secretary-General at this important public meeting on
the situation in the Sudan. Your presence among us,
Mr. Secretary-General, demonstrates once again your
sincere commitment to achieving a settlement of the
conflict in the Sudan. I should add that this meeting is
occurring on your initiative, and we thank you for that.

On behalf of the Security Council, I thank our
guests, First Vice-President Ali Othman Taha and
Mr. John Garang, for having accepted our invitation to
come to New York for a direct and open discussion as
key actors in the complex situation prevailing in the
Republic of the Sudan at this critical stage of its
development. I warmly welcome them.

I also welcome Ambassador Baba Gana Kingibe,
the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union in the Sudan.

I further welcome the presence among us of
Mr. Jan Pronk, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Sudan.

At the outset I would like to stress the
commitment of the Council to the sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity of the Sudan. No
effort should be spared to help the Sudanese people
regain their unity.

The 9 January signing of the north-south
Comprehensive Peace Agreement was indeed a historic
moment for the Sudan. Vice-President Taha and
Mr. Garang, we highly appreciate your invaluable role
in the achievement of that Agreement. We congratulate
all parties that contributed to the successful completion
of the Naivasha negotiation process, in particular the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
for its constructive mediation. The Council believes
that every effort should be made to maintain the
present momentum and to implement the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement so as to achieve
genuine national reconciliation. We welcome the
speedy ratification of the Agreement by the Sudanese
National Assembly.

This is a moment of great opportunity. All the
people of the Sudan should take advantage of this
opportunity to set the country on the path towards a
firm and lasting peace. It is of the utmost importance
that all the parties be determined to implement the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement in good faith. We
stress the need for all parties to act in such a way as to
promote genuine national ownership of the peace
process.

The Security Council welcomes the sense of
ownership demonstrated by the Sudanese parties in the
achievement of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
The Council expects them to demonstrate the same
sense of ownership in its implementation.

For its part, the Security Council is fully aware of
the great responsibility that the international
community must assume in helping the Sudanese
parties to remain on their chosen path. The Council is
determined to take appropriate measures to encourage
the international community to support and consolidate
the peace process and to enable it to play its role.

The Council has already called for reconstruction
and development assistance, in particular by endorsing
the initiative of the Government of Norway to convene
a donors conference in Oslo to address the issue of the
mobilization of resources to this end, provided that the
parties fulfil all of their commitments.

In the same spirit, Council members are starting
work on a draft resolution with a view to thoroughly
addressing all aspects of the situation in the Sudan, in
particular to determining ways and means of
establishing a United Nations peace support operation
to help implement the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. The peacekeeping operation, to be
established under Chapter VI of the Charter, would be
an integrated mission with a wide range of components
designed to meet the current needs of the Sudan. It
would play a vital role in helping to promote national
reconciliation.

The Security Council remains deeply concerned
about the situation in Darfur. Every effort must be
made to optimize the positive impact that we expect
the north-south Peace Agreement to have on the
conflict in Darfur. We urge all the parties to work
towards a comprehensive and lasting political
settlement and, in particular, rapidly to adopt a
declaration of principles, in order to put an end to the
ongoing conflict as quickly as possible.
The Council expresses its disapproval with regard
to the ceasefire violations and the continuing acts of
violence in Darfur, particularly those reported in recent
weeks. It reaffirms the commitments undertaken by the
parties to the N'djamena Ceasefire Agreement of
8April and the Abuja Protocols of 9 November. The
continuing violations of these binding agreements
seriously call into question the parties' commitment to
finding a peaceful solution to the crisis.

The continuing attacks on civilians, the targeting
of humanitarian workers and the attacks against
African Union observers are absolutely unacceptable.
It is essential to put an end to such attacks and ensure
that they do not recur. We urge the Sudanese
authorities at all levels, as well as all the rebels, to
fully comply with the demands set forth in Security
Council resolutions 1556 (2004), 1564 (2004) and
1574 (2004).

Council members are appalled by the serious
crimes committed in Darfur in violation of
international law, described in the report of the
International Commission of Inquiry. We call on all the
parties to put an immediate end to the violence and to
attacks against civilians. The Council condemns
unreservedly the serious violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
committed in Darfur. The Council is determined to
tackle impunity and to bring the perpetrators of those
crimes to justice.

The Security Council again underscores the vital
role that human rights monitors play in Darfur. We are
firmly convinced that measures must be taken to
rapidly increase the number of monitors and to
establish a system for documenting and addressing
abuses. Given the range of United Nations agencies
involved in protection activities, the Council believes
that the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General must direct and coordinate such activities in a
vigorous manner.

The Council unreservedly endorses the
constructive and crucial role that the African Union
continues to play in the efforts of the international
community to put an end to the terrible conflict in
Darfur. The African Union mission in Darfur must
confront very difficult circumstances to ensure its
military protection and observer role on the ground. Its
ongoing participation and commitment, as well as the
political role that it is playing in facilitating the
negotiations in Abuja, are of the utmost importance.
We continue to offer the African Union our fullest
support in that regard.

The members of the Security Council support the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the United
Nations mission under consideration cooperate with the
African Union, support its efforts and promote and
support efforts to resolve the ongoing conflicts in the
Sudan, especially in Darfur, in close collaboration with
the African Union. The mission must strengthen the
comprehensive role that the African Union is playing
in the Sudan.

We encourage international donors to further
support the African Union's efforts, as appropriate. The
Council stands ready to support arrangements which
might allow the United Nations mission to provide the
logistical and administrative support that the African
Union may require. The Council hopes the United
Nations operation and the African Union mission in
Darfur will liaise closely with each other. Both parties
should contribute to the establishment of a strong,
cooperative relationship.

I would like to thank Mr. Kingibe, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the Commission
of the African Union in the Sudan, and his team for
their commitment and offer them our encouragement.
We urge them to do their utmost to optimize
coordination with the United Nations mission on the
ground.

The Council calls on all the parties to cooperate
fully with the African Union mission with a view to
ensuring its freedom of movement and safety in all
areas of Darfur.

In the absence of political progress, the situation
in Darfur can only further deteriorate. Such a further
deterioration would be in no one's interest, as it could
jeopardize the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement and put the future of the country at
great risk. We urge all the parties to resume the Abuja
talks in good faith.

The Council welcomes the decision of the
Government of the Sudan to appoint Vice-President
Taha as leader of its negotiating team in Abuja. We
urge Vice-President Taha to assume that new
responsibility with the same determination that he
demonstrated during the north-south negotiations. We
also call on Mr. Garang to use all of his influence in
Darfur to ensure speedy progress in the Abuja talks.

I give the floor to the First Vice-President of the
Sudan, His Excellency Mr. Ali Othman Taha.
