The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Colombia, Egypt,
Indonesia, Israel, Japan, New Zealand, Pakistan, Portugal,
the Republic of Korea, Singapore and the Sudan, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In accordance with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Wensley
(Australia), Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria), Mr. Kouliev
(Azerbaijan), Mr. Buallay (Bahrain), Mr. Valdivieso
(Colombia), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Wibisono
(Indonesia), Mr. Lancry (Israel), Mr. Kobayashi
(Japan), Mr. Powles (New Zealand), Mr. Babar
(Pakistan), Mr. Monteiro (Portugal), Mr. Suh Dae-
won (Republic of Korea), Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore)
and Mr. Erwa (Sudan) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, and in the
absence of objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jakob Kellenberger,
President of the International Committee of the Red Cross.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Kellenberger to take a seat at the Council
table.

If I hear no objection I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation to the Permanent
Observer of Switzerland to the United Nations to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the Permanent
Observer of Switzerland to the United Nations took
the seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
is meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, document
S/1999/957. Members of the Council also have before
them a draft resolution prepared in the course of the
Council's prior consultations, which will be issued as
document 8/2000/335.

If I may be allowed, before inviting the Secretary-
General to speak, I will just acknowledge the very good
attendance at today's meeting. I would in particular
acknowledge the presence of 220 students from a model
United Nations Assembly, many of whom are Canadians.
We welcome these young United Nations delegates who
are joining us at today's session, and we are glad to see
you here.

I now call on the Secretary-General.


