Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I thank Ms. DiCarlo and Ms. Muller for their briefings. France calls for the urgent resumption of a credible peace process, at a time when the deterioration of the situation on the ground is a major source ofinstability. That is especially the case in Gaza, where the humanitarian situation is disastrous, as recalled by Ms. Muller, and in Jerusalem, where demolitions, expropriations and attacks on the status quo of holy sites are on the rise. The parameters for a settlement to the conflict are well known: borders based on the 4 June 1967 lines, with agreed land swaps negotiated by the parties; a fair, equitable and agreed-upon solution to the refugee problem; Jerusalem as the capital of the two States; and security arrangements that allow the two States to live side by side in peace and security. On that basis, agreed upon by the international community, negotiations between the two parties must resume without further delay in order to ensure the implementation of sucha solution. It would be unrealistic and dangerous - above all for Israel - to believe that a solution that breaches those agreed parameters would be capable of delivering lasting stability to the region. That is why France continues, and will continue, to defend the two-State solution, and therefore the establishment of a sovereign, viable and democratic Palestinian State, not only because it is a just position that complies with international law and the decisions of the Security Council, but also because it is realistic. In that regard, it is futile to think that it is possible to meet the aspirations of one people at the expense of another, and that political expectations can be met by exclusively economic incentives. Any policy that has the effect of jeopardizing the two-State solution must be denounced. That is why I wish to reaffirm France's grave concern over the accelerated settlement activities on the ground and the slide towards an annexation mindset. On several occasions, I have had an opportunity to reiterate France's position on settlements, which contravene international law. That position remains unchanged, pursuant to Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016), which cannot be subjected to a la carte interpretation. The European Union also shares that position. We have also condemned the calls by Israeli officials for the annexation of all or part of the West Bank. Any annexation of territory constitutes a serious violation of international law, as the Secretary-General recalled in September, and cannot go unanswered. In that context, we call on the Israeli authorities to renounce any plan that is liable to create faits accomplis on the ground that would undermine the two-State solution. Lastly, I would like to relay France's call for the holding of Palestinian elections in the West Bank, Gaza and East Jerusalem in the near future. Such elections are an indispensable step towards inter-Palestinian reconciliation, which is necessary for the democratic strengthening of Palestinian institutions. They also represent a legitimate expectation of the Palestinian people, 14 years after the last elections were held, as well as anecessary step along the path towards negotiations and peace. In this context, we encourage the Palestinian leadership to pursue its efforts with a view towards the holding of plural and inclusive elections. It is important that the Palestinian authorities promptly issue a presidential decree setting the date for the elections and that, for their part, the Israeli authorities allow the proper conduct of elections in East Jerusalem. Together with its European Union partners, France stands ready to fully play its part in supporting the Palestinian authorities in the holding of the elections. That is the purpose of the work that we have begun. France calls on the entire international community to take action so that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East can pursue its vital work. In this regard, we are concerned about the increasing number of obstacles the Agency is facing as it carries out its mission in East Jerusalem. I should like to conclude by pointing out that President Macron will have the opportunity to discuss these issues with both sides during his visit to Israel and the Palestinian territories on 22 and 23 January.
