Mrs. Kocyigit Grba (Turkey): I thank you, Madam, for organizing this important open debate and facilitating a broad discussion on an issue that has global implications for peace and security. Transitional justice is a crucial element of reconciliation and sustaining peace, as it strives to take into account the root causes of conflict, recognize the dignity of victims, redress past injustices and contribute to prevention efforts. Transitional justice not only brings closure to past injustices, but also helps societies move forward towards a more peaceful future. It is essentially a society's attempt to come to terms with a legacy of large-scale past crimes, in order to ensure accountability, serve justice and achieve reconciliation. As such, transitional justice processes deserve due attention in a comprehensive manner. In order to succeed, we believe that reconciliation needs to be the centre of gravity in transitional justice. Establishing a basis to address the underlying causes of violence and marginalization is the most meaningful way to foster durable resolutions to conflicts. In doing so, we should keep in mind that a variety of approaches are applicable depending on the country-specific context and that there cannot be a one-size-fits-all solution to the issue. As a Starting point, establishing accountable and transparent State institutions is vital in restoring public confidence in justice. Effective governance and justice systems founded on respect for the rule of law and the protection of human rights is crucial in terms of consolidating peace and promoting reconciliation. Raising public awareness on access to justice is equally important in order to include the most vulnerable segments of society in transitional justice processes. While doing so, it is crucial to establish solid safeguards to protect the victims. Criminal justice is another vital component of transitional justice. Holding those who are responsible for large-scale atrocities and systematic violations of human rights contributes to the process of achieving justice for victims. Prosecuting those individuals contributes to upholding respect for the rule of law and establishing an accurate historical record while serving as a deterrent to potential criminals. Transitional justice can contribute to achieving the broader objectives of conflict prevention, peacebuilding and reconciliation. Since it delves into the most painful experiences of communities, transitional justiceprocesses are inevitably difficult. They require a reliable factual basis, an open approach and empathy. Understanding the underlying grievances that lead to conflict by taking into account the voices of women, young people and marginalized groups is crucial. All of that requires a context-specific approach and recognition that it is not a static process. The sustained commitment and support of the United Nations and the international community must accompany those efforts, as needed. Turkey stands ready to contribute to national, regional and multilateral efforts in the pursuit of achieving sustainable peace and security through transitional justice processes.
