Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate China on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of June,
and we wish Ambassador Li Baodong and his
team much success in their work. Allow me also to
thank Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for his briefing and
for presenting the fifteenth report of the Court to the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

While Azerbaijan is not a signatory to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, we do
strongly believe that the protection of civilians and
respect for international human rights and humanitarian
law are among the responsibilities of the international
community. All of those elements doubtlessly constitute
important pillars of international accountability and
carry their own weight. We note the efforts of the
International Criminal Court to investigate all those
who are responsible for crimes in Darfur.

It is also important to ensure that the ICC Prosecutor
acts strictly within the mandate of resolution 15 93 (2005).
Effective measures for preventing serious human rights
violations in the Sudan, including the establishment of
a proper national judicial system, are indispensable for
enforcing the rule of law in the country. In that sense,
the international community's assistance to Sudan is
much needed.

The implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur and an all-inclusive Darfur-based
internal dialogue are of the utmost importance for
bringing durable peace to the region. We welcome
the steps taken so far, especially the establishment
of regional autonomy in Darfur and of the National
Human Rights Commission, as well as the appointment
of a prosecutor for a special court for Darfur, with
jurisdiction to investigate all human rights violations
committed since 2003.

We are concerned about the activities of non-State
armed groups, which are the main obstacles to the peace
process. In that respect, the recent news about clashes
between the Sudanese army and rebel groups is deeply
alarming. It is important that the non-signatory parties
join the peace process without preconditions. We also
deplore the criminality and banditry in Darfur, which are
the most significant threats to civilians and humanitarian
workers.

In conclusion, we note with approval some positive
developments in the overall security environment in the
region and we hope to see further improvements in that
regard.

