Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your wise leadership of the
Security Council for this month, and to wish you
continued success. I also thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
for his valuable briefing and for all his tireless efforts
over the past four years to find a way out of this crisis.
I regret that he has been unable to arrive at a political
settlement, due to the obstinacy of the Syrian regime.
I hope that Mr. De Mistura will find what he and
the international community are seeking during the
remaining period of his mission.

My country supports all international and regional
efforts to end the current crisis in Syria. We believe that
the solution to the Syrian crisis will not be achieved
through military operations or chemical weapons,
which have wrought the worst forms of destruction
upon the Syrian country and people The only solution
to the Syrian crisis is political, based on resolution 2254
(2015). My country believes that through its obstinate,
procrastinating and belittling attitude, the Syrian
regime has obstructed the efforts of international actors
to achieve progress through meaningful negotiations. It
has hindered the Geneva negotiations, the previous eight
rounds of which failed to achieve any tangible progress
with regard to restoring Syria to its former status.

My country is part of the small group on Syria,
which was established to support the efforts of Special
Envoy De Mistura to find a political solution to the
crisis. In that regard, we stress the need to step up the
establishment of the constitutional committee so that
it can begin drafting a new Syrian constitution, and
we call on all Syrians inside the country and abroad to
elect a Government under the supervision of the United
Nations in a credible and inclusive manner. My country
reiterates the small group's call for the constitutional
committee to begin its work as soon as possible, within
the next several weeks. We call on the Syrian regime
and all other parties to prioritize the interests of the
Syrian people and refrain from hindering in any way
the Special Envoy's efforts to form the constitutional
committee so that Syria can be saved from its
catastrophic crisis.

This is the eighth year of the Syrian crisis, and my
country is deeply concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the country. The Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia urges the international community to
address that reality with greater responsibility. Since
the beginning of the crisis, the Kingdom has been
intensely focused on the human dimension of the crisis
and provided every form of support to the Syrian
people. For example, my country is hosting more than
2 million Syrians and providing them with employment
opportunities, health care and education. It has also
provided those who wish to do so with the possibility
of moving to other locations. Currently, more than
140,000 male and female Syrian students are attending
Saudi universities and schools and being provided with
the same benefits as Saudi students.

My country has sought diligently to consolidate the
Syrian opposition under the auspices of both Riyadh
conferences so that the opposition and the regime can
negotiate to ensure the security, stability and unity
of Syria and prevent destructive foreign intervention.
Moreover, my country has worked with its sister
States of the United Arab Emirates, the Kingdom of
Bahrain, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the
Arabic Republic of Egypt. We are working together to
consolidate an Arab role in finding a solution to the
Syrian crisis and provide support for the Syrian people
by all possible and available means.

My country rejects any interference in Syria by
the Iranian regime, regardless of the form it takes.
We reject Iran's support for the Syrian authorities
in operations that have led to uprooting people from
their homes and demographic change, as well as for
the genocide and sectarian mass murder that are being
carried out against the Syrian people. We must end those
destructive actions, the serious consequences of which
have destroyed infrastructure and led to the killing and
displacement of many Syrians. The Government of
my country believes that the only effective action that
Iran can take in the Syrian crisis is to leave Syria and
withdraw its Revolutionary Guard and security militias
immediately, thereby leaving Syria for the Syrians.

In conclusion, the world must realize that the time
has come to change the tragic reality in Syria. The
international community must work seriously and with
resolve to advance the political process. That would
enable us to save what can be saved and pull Syria
from the rubble under which it is buried. The cause
of that distress is the arrogant and immoral behaviour
exhibited by that pathetic regime under the guise of
combating terrorism. The regime intentionally ignores
the fact that it created a breeding ground for terrorism to
spread throughout the country and allowed the greatest
sponsor of terrorism, Iran, to enter Syrian territory.

