Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to thank Special Representative David Shearer
for his briefing, which was, as usual, very enlightening.
It was particularly helpful that the Assistant Secretary-
General for Human Rights, Andrew Gilmour, was
able to brief us today on the human rights situation in
South Sudan, which, as we know, lies at the heart of the
conflict. I wish also to welcome in particular Ms. Lydia
Minagano and thank her for her testimony from the
ground and for her commitment to peace. Her statement
recalled the central role of the women of South Sudan
in the building of a lasting peace.

I will focus on three points: the peace process, the
humanitarian and human rights situation, and the role of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
The Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan is a historic opportunity to
put an end to the conflict in South Sudan, and France
deplores the fact that the pre-transition period was
extended by six months. It is imperative that this be the
last postponement. Whatever happens, a Government
of national unity must be formed in November. We
encourage President Kiir and Rick Machar to work
together to find a compromise on the thorniest issues,
including security arrangements and the demarcation
of internal borders.

In order for the peace process to succeed, in
addition to direct dialogue between the two main
actors, a number of other conditions must be met.
First, the parties must sincerely commit to reaching
an agreement. We welcome the fact that the Catholic,
Anglican and Presbyterian churches have taken a very
useful initiative in this respect that is aimed at reminding
the South Sudanese authorities of their responsibilities.

The second condition is for the international
community to support this process. Here I should
like to stress the key role of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and welcome the
work of its Special Envoy for South Sudan, Mr. Ismail
Wais. The African Union and the United Nations must
likewise support IGAD's efforts. It is also important
for non-signatory armed groups to rejoin the peace
process, and here I refer in particular to the National
Salvation Front.

Finally, the quota for women provided for in the
agreement must be respected. Women must be able
to participate actively and meaningfully in the peace
process at all levels and on all issues.

The second key point I wish to make concerns the
humanitarian aspect. The conflict in South Sudan is
continuing to cause terrible suffering for the people of
that country, in particular women and children. More
than half of the population is suffering from food
insecurity, and one third of South Sudanese remain
displaced or refugees. The increase in the number of
voluntary returns is encouraging, but we deplore the
fact that at the same time intercommunal violence is
causing fresh displacements. Although the ceasefire
is generally respected, intercommunal and sexual
violence have not decreased. The Commission on
Human Rights in South Sudan mandated by the Human
Rights Council indicated in its most recent report that
these acts of violence and the grave violations of human
rights accompanying them could, given their nature
and their level, potentially constitute war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

The report notes restrictions on the freedoms of
expression and movement in South Sudan as well as
an increase in arbitrary detentions, the use of torture
and forced disappearances. France therefore urges all
parties to engage urgently in an in-depth dialogue with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict.

We likewise call on all parties to establish and
operationalize without delay the Hybrid Court for
South Sudan with the support of the African Union.
The perpetrators of these violations cannot remain
unpunished. The prosecution of those responsible and
reparations for victims are essential to fulfilling the
conditions for a lasting peace. The Security Council
also has a role to play and must make use of sanctions in
order to punish and bring pressure to bear on those who
commit such crimes. That is an important instrument
of dissuasion.

France is equally concerned by the numerous
grave violations against children, and we call on all
parties that have already made commitments in this
area to implement them, in particular in the areas of
prevention, recruitment, demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration. We call on the other parties to sign
a plan of action and implement it. Here an ongoing
dialogue must be maintained with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba.

We must also do everything in our power to meet
the growing humanitarian needs, and the parties
must ensure safe and unimpeded humanitarian access
throughout the country's territory. This, of course,
includes protecting humanitarian workers, which is an
obligation on which we cannot falter. It is also crucial to
continue hammering home the fact that the perpetrators
of the crimes committed during this conflict must be
brought to justice. There can be no impunity.

Thirdly, in this context UNMISS must fully
implement its mandate. Protecting civilians, in
particular women and children, must remain its top
priority. We encourage the Mission to facilitate the
return of displaced persons, as long as the returns
are safe, voluntary, dignified and well-informed. We
encourage UNMISS to support the peace process
through the new provisions of its mandate, which
allow for the provision of technical assistance to
pre-transitional bodies and of help to the parties to
assist them in making progress in implementing the
Revitalized Agreement. We fully support the Special
Representative in his good offices and encourage him
to continue working closely with IGAD to that end. It
would also be very useful for the Mission to continue
providing support to the mobile courts and to develop
that initiative. It is essential to bring justice closer to
perpetrators if we wish to effectively combat impunity.

To conclude, I should like, on behalf of France,
to most sincerely thank the United Nations teams and
humanitarian workers who, in often difficult conditions,
perform vital work for the people of South Sudan.

