Mr. Yaakob (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine.

Malaysia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Turkey, on behalf
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, and by the
Permanent Representative of Venezuela, on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

The situation in Palestine remains dire. Prospects
for the peaceful resolution of the longest man-made
conflict remains dim. This is due to the continued
defiance and violations of Israel, the occupying Power,
of various relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016). We therefore demand
that Israel stop all violations and illegal actions in the
occupied Palestinian territories, and to fully comply
with all its obligations, as prescribed by the relevant
resolutions and international law and norms.

It is the responsibility of all Member States to
not take decisions or create conditions that would
negatively effect efforts towards finding a just and
peaceful solution to the conflict. It is in this context
that Malaysia reiterates its deep concern over the
decision of the United States to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital of Israel and to relocate its Embassy from
Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. The decision undermines efforts
to find a comprehensive, just and durable solution to
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. It has caused dismay
and frustration to a majority of Member States, in
particular in the Muslim world, and to those who wish
to see peace, stability and security in the region.

More importantly, the decision violates and
undermines the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, such as resolution 478 (1980) and resolution
2334 (2016). Those resolutions provide the foundation
for the peace process that affirmed the city of
Jerusalem as a final-status issue that must be resolved
through bilateral negotiations between Palestine and
Israel in the framework of the two-State solution.
The recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel
would only embolden Israel, the occupying Power, to
continue with its oppressive and repressive policies in
the occupied Palestinian territory, causing immense
suffering to the Palestinian people. We are concerned
that this dire situation will only feed into the agenda
of extremists.

Malaysia is very concerned over the dwindling
financial support for the work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) in providing assistance, protection
and advocacy for Palestinian refugees. We therefore
call on all Member States to fortify their support for
UNRWA so as to ensure that the basic needs of the
Palestinian refugees are met, including educational
access to almost half a million boys and girls in 700
UNRWA schools; emergency food assistance and other
support, as well as primary health care, including
prenatal care; and other life-saving services. On its
part, Malaysia will continue to provide assistance,
within its means, to UNRWA.

Malaysia sincerely hopes that all Members of the
United Nations can make a helpful contribution to
breaking the impasse in the Middle East peace process,
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions, as
well as international law and norms. Malaysia continues
to believe that a two-State solution, with Palestinians
and Israelis living side by side in peace, based on the
pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital
of Palestine, is the only viable resolution to this long-
standing conflict.

