Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me pay tribute to the Force Commander of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and
to express my condolences to his family and loved ones.

I warmly thank Ambassador Joy ngu and all the
Nigerian team for their work. You managed perfectly
the agenda during an intensive month in the heart of
a New York summer, with pragmatism, talent and a
spirit of availability. I also wish to pay tribute to your
mindfulness for summaries and explanations of the
work done. You placed the issue of peacekeeping at
the heart of your programme, thus preparing for the
collective thinking that we owe the Organization for its
seventieth anniversary. In particular, I will remember
the excellent debate (see S/PV.7505) organized on
regional organizations and contemporary challenges
to global security. The recommendations of the report
(see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, as the
Secretary-General stated, encourage us to strengthen
partnerships, with the strict application of Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, with regional
organizations, in particular the Union African and the
European Union.

The month of August also saw its own positive
developments. Certainly, we cannot rest on our laurels,
but I want to highlight several issues.

To begin with, the Council was able to reach
unanimity on the Syrian dossier with the adoption
of resolution 2235 (2015), which establishes an
investigative mission to attribute responsibility for
the use of chlorine as a chemical weapon in Syria,
which shows that there will be no impunity in the face
of such serious crimes. That hope was extended and
bolstered by the adoption of a presidential statement
(S/PRST/20lS/15) on 17 August in support of the
political process relaunched by Staffan de Mistura.
Now we have that framework in place; henceforth we
must not forget the situation of civilian populations
who have paid too high a price in this conflict. From
18 August, air raids that struck Douma indiscriminately,
with about a 100 deaths and numerous injured, remind
us what the Syrian authorities are doing to their own
population. As we wait for a political transition to be
set up, the international community must remember
that, first and foremost, States have the responsibility
of providing security for their populations. France will
continue to work tirelessly to ensure the protection of
civilian populations against the most deadly attacks, in
particular indiscriminate bombings by the regime using
barrels bombs, and to ensure that a political solution,
which everyone very much wants, will be set up. One
does not go without the other.

I also want to speak about another development,
Madam, that took place under your presidency, namely,
the signing of the peace agreement on South Sudan.
The presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/16) adopted
on August 29 invites the parties to honour their
commitments in full. That important moment, while
the security and humanitarian situation continued
to deteriorate, shows, if it was needed, in connection
with Nigeria's general debate, the key mediating role
of regional organizations and of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development in the crisis in South Sudan.

Peacekeeping, which has been the thread running
through your presidency, Madam, involves the renewal
of the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Through resolution 2236 (2015), we renewed
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, which plays a key role in Lebanon to preserve
the ceasefire. The presidential statement of 29 August
on the South Sudan (S/PRST/2015/16) confirms the
desire of the Council to adapt the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan to implement
the recently signed agreement.

I want to take this opportunity to acknowledge
the courageous action of the soldiers and personnel
involved in peacekeeping. We saw this, for example,
with the efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali to restore calm
on the ground during serious armed clashes in the Kidal
region, in violation of the agreements signed on 15 May
and 20 June in Mali. They cannot see their reputation
tarnished by abuses carried out by some of them. This
month of August saw the list of allegations of sexual
abuse in the Central African Republic expand. The
Council was able to express its emotion and anger, and
support the decisive action of the Secretary-General
to implement the zero-tolerance policy. I want to
assure Council members once again of the wholesale
determination of France to shed light on the allegations
concerning French soldiers. We want to lend our
full support to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, in that
painful but crucial time for the political transition in
the Central African Republic.

My statement would not paint a realistic picture if
I did not talk about the tense situations that civilians
suffer from first and foremost. First of all, Burundi has
been caught up in a spiral ofviolence since the elections.
From now on only one thing is needed - the resumption
of dialogue. However, it is lagging behind, at a risk for
the worse and of regional contagion. Let us get back
once again to the role of regional organizations in crisis
prevention and management. That will be crucial. The
East African Community is in the front line, but the
African Union and the United Nations must give their
support. Inaction does not equal stability, and we must
do everything we can collectively and individually
to bring the parties together to find agreement and
a consensus-based solution. In Burundi as in other
theatres of political and security crises, the inclusive
nature of dialogue will be a key to a solution.

The appeal we are making also concerns Guinea-
Bissau. The Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
have noted an increase in tensions, steeped in obstacles
for the country and its population, that might undermine
the significant achievements that the country has
attained since 2012. The unity of the Council and the
international community sends a strong message to
the authorities of Guinea-Bissau to urge them to opt
for dialogue over confrontation, with the support,
once again, of regional organizations, in particular the
Economic Community of West African States.

In Yemen, Stephen O'Brien returned from his
trip with a report and very alarming figures on
the humanitarian situation in the country. France
recalls that resolution 2216 (2015) urges all parties
to fully respect international humanitarian law and
international human rights law that applies. We reiterate
our appeal to implement an unconditional humanitarian
pause, if necessary with a monitoring mechanism, and
an immediate resumption, without preconditions, of a
truly inclusive inter-Yemeni dialogue, under the aegis
of the Special Envoy.

Finally, on Libya, the Council has been sufficiently
patient, and it is time for dialogue to happen very
soon with the formation of a Government of national
consensus. Otherwise, the threat of terrorism will
continue to expand, and we will not be able to bring
a sustained response to the migration challenges that
affect the country. We are bringing our full support
to the Special Envoy Bernardino Leon in this decisive
moment, and we stand ready to bring our full force to
bear to dissuade those who are intransigent and refuse
to sign an agreement.

We must not forget that this month has been
overshadowed by terrible bombings and terrorist
attacks in several countries, including yours, Madam
President, because of Boko Haram, but also in Saudi
Arabia because of Daesh. Unfortunately, the list is
too long. Our determination to combat the scourges
of terrorism and radicalism is full-fledged. More than
ever, the unity of the Council is crucial to block the
fanatics. Following up from the ministerial debate of
27 March (see S/PV.7419), on 8 September France will
organize a conference in Paris on the preservation of
diversity and pluralism in the Middle East. We are
convinced that we cannot protect populations from the
ethnic and religious violence that Daesh has made its
trademark, unless States are based on the coexistence
among the different groups within their communities.

On the eve of the opening of the seventieth session
of the General Assembly of the United Nations, we
note that enormous challenges face us, and the unity
and mobilization of the Council for peacekeeping are
more than ever crucial. August, thanks to you, Madam
President, really did a kick-off under the emblem of
mobilization and hope.

In conclusion, I want to warmly thank the Nigerian
presidency again, and wish Russia every success. Of
course Russia can count on our full support.

