Mr. Mantovani (Italy): Allow me to first
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
our work in August and to express our heartfelt thanks
to the Vietnamese delegation for its excellent work and
stewardship of the Council in the intense month of
July.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe; the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United States, Ambassador Wolff; and the Permanent
Representative of Iraq, Ambassador Al Bayati, for their
thorough and informative remarks.

Italy welcomes the improvements in the security
situation in Iraq and greatly appreciates the progress
made by the Iraqi authorities and the Iraqi Security
Forces to counter terrorism and unlawful armed groups
in a framework of growing self-reliance and ownership
by those authorities and with increasing cooperation
from local communities. Further improvements in the
security framework are indispensable to promoting
economic and social growth.

It is therefore our hope that the objective of
completing the transfer of responsibility for security to
Iraq - which has already taken place in 10 out of 18
governorates - will soon be achieved in all
governorates. Increasing the reliability of the Iraqi
Security Forces is one of the objectives to which Italy
attaches the utmost importance and to which it
contributes concretely through its participation in the
NATO training mission.

As stated by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2008/495), the security and political gains of the
past months have to be sustained through meaningful
political dialogue and national reconciliation. All
expressions of democracy in the country should be
included in the political process so as to enable the
consolidated political dialogue to make a strong
contribution to improving security conditions. We also
appreciate any measure aimed at countering
sectarianism or attempts to discriminate against ethnic
and religious minorities.

To consolidate the progress made thus far, we
also appreciate the efforts to offset the potentially
negative effects of the question of Kirkuk and other
contested areas. We fully support the United Nations
initiative for an agreed political solution articulated
through a gradual approach, starting with the
administrative reform of the less problematic areas. We
also encourage all Iraqi political forces to do their
utmost to reach an agreement on an electoral law so as
to be able to hold provincial elections within the year.

We are also most appreciative of the recent
allocations decided on by the Iraqi Government to
alleviate the conditions of refugees in Syria and Jordan
and of internally displaced persons, as well as
initiatives to foster their re-entry and reinsertion into
the country. That is an issue that deserves all our
attention.

Finally, allow me to state once again Italy's belief
in the central role that the United Nations - through
the brave and committed efforts of Special
Representative De Mistura and all national and
international staff of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) - can play in helping
Iraqis, in accordance with the broad mandate provided
by resolution 1770 (2004). We are therefore honoured
and proud to be one of the sponsors of the draft
resolution that, on the basis of a request by the Iraqi
Government, will renew UNAMI's mandate for one
more year.

