The coronavirus disease pandemic poses a challenge to everyone, generating a crisis of manifold and ravaging effects not only on health, but also on the economy, trade and our societies at large. It has emerged amid a situation characterized by the overwhelming economic and social inequality among and within nations, with unprecedented migration and refugee flows, causing xenophobia and racial discrimination to surface again, and at a time when the impressive breakthroughs in science and technology, particularly in the area of health, are increasingly concentrated in the pharmaceutical business and the commercialization of medicine, instead of being directed towards ensuring the well-being and healthy life of the majority of people. The pandemic does not respect borders or distinguish between ideologies or levels of development. The response should therefore also be global and shared, overcoming political differences. It is not possible to accurately predict the extent of the pandemic's consequences. The great number of infected people and the considerable number of human lives lost reveal its ravaging impact on an increasingly interconnected world, which, nevertheless, has not been able to make good use of that interconnection in a spirit of solidarity and which is paying today the price for its inability to remedy the serious disparities among societies and nations. Indubitably, the pandemic poses a threat to the sustainable development of peoples owing to its severe impact on the economy, trade and our societies in general. It calls into question the possibility of moving towards the fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We know that we are on a path to a deep international economic downturn or depression and that the countries of the South will be the most affected by its repercussions. We are all experiencing the global economic downturn, and some of us are bearing the additional burden of criminal economic coercive measures, in violation of international law and the Charter of the United Nations. In the case of Cuba, the Government of the United States has tightened the protracted and genocidal economic, commercial and financial blockade with new measures designed to further hamper our national efforts aimed at tackling the pandemic and addressing the country's recovery. Solidarity and cooperation are scarce. These are values that cannot be replaced by the pursuit of profit, a motivation that is the almost-exclusive domain of those who, by worshipping the market, forget about the value of human life. When the events that have kept humankind on pins and needles in recent months are reviewed, it is essential to mention the costly flaws of the neoliberal policies that have led to the reduction in management and capacities of States, excessive privatization, and the casting into oblivion of the majority of people. This pandemic has revealed the fragility of a fractured world built around exclusion. While global military expenditure exceeds $1.9 trillion, out of which more than 38 per cent, some $732 billion, is what the United States will have spent in 2020, the pandemic exacerbates the urgent problems of a planet plagued by profound inequalities, where 600 million people live in extreme poverty and where almost half the population has no access to basic health services. In the midst of this complex situation, the United States is pursuing a foreign policy aimed at stirring up and promoting conflicts, divisions, chauvinism and supremacist and racist positions. Further, it is attacking multilateralism and unfairly discredits the role of international organizations, in particular the World Health Organization. The constant aggressions against certain countries are real threats to international peace and security. Attempts to reimpose the neocolonial past on Our America, including the public declaration of the validity of the Monroe Doctrine, contravene the Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace. We support the urgent call of the Secretary-General "to put an end to the sickness of war and fight the disease that is ravaging our world: the coronavirus pandemic". All wars, including unconventional warfare, must cease. The need to work together to address the challenges is confirmed. Together we must produce the responses needed. We must complement each other, providing the resources at our disposal, however limited they may be. We cannot afford exclusions of any kind. It is the responsibility of the General Assembly to assume the pivotal role in the coordination of international efforts to tackle the pandemic and its consequences. The Security Council's interference in matters outside its competence must cease, particularly with respect to those that fall within the mandates of the Assembly and of other specialized agencies of the United Nations system, particularly, the World Health Organization. Any temptation to subordinate science to market forces must be resisted. At the juncture represented by this pandemic, it becomes necessary to provide universal access to any vaccine or medication that can be produced. It is indispensable to share respective experiences, enhance communication and identify those practices that have yielded results in other parts of the world. Our country is willing to share its expertise with all those who need it. Despite the difficult situation, Cuba has been striving to meet requests for medical assistance from many countries. To date, there are 38 medical brigades in 31 countries and territories, comprising more than 3,000 health professionals. We are motivated by supportive and cooperative values, including the premise of sharing what we have, even if it is scarce. More than 400,000 Cuban professionals have fulfilled missions in 164 countries in Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, the Middle East and Asia. Cuban medical cooperation has more than half a century of experience and enjoys a high level of prestige at the international level. Nevertheless, instead of engaging themselves in promoting cooperation and encouraging a global response to the pandemic, senior officials of the United States Department of State and anti-Cuban United States Senators dedicate their time to promoting legislative initiatives designed to threaten Governments that, in making a sovereign decision in the light of the tragedy of the pandemic, choose to request medical assistance from Cuba. However, the actions of the United States Government against Cuban medical cooperation will not stop our humanistic vocation. These American actions join the failed, inhumane and criminal actions that the United States Government has undertaken against the Cuban people and which affect the already deteriorated credibility of that Government by criminalizing and persecuting international solidarity for political and electoral reasons and by using false pretexts. The reality we face requires putting solidarity and the will to act before inaction and selfishness. Humankind demands an effective solution. Together we can achieve it. In this situation, it is the duty of all States, and particularly the members of the Security Council, to defend multilateralism and the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, including respect for the sovereign equality of States and their political independence, unity and territorial integrity, the peaceful settlement of disputes, and refraining from the use or threat of use of force in international relations.
