Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Chairs of the three Committees - the
Permanent Representatives of Austria, Turkey and
Mexico, Ambassadors Mayr-Harting, Apakan and
Heller - for their comprehensive briefings and efforts
with other Council members in promoting international
cooperation on counter-terrorism. Allow me to make
the following points.

First, with regard to the sanctions Committee
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban, established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999), we welcome the completion
of the review process in accordance with resolution
1822 (2008). It was a very serious effort that led to
indispensable amendments, and it should be continued
in order to clear the names of those who are dead or are
no longer associated with Al-Qaida or the Taliban.

We also welcome the steps taken to promote
transparency and respect for human rights laws, in
accordance with resolution 1904 (2009), in particular
the appointment of the Ombudsperson and the
amendment to the Committee's system of work. We
welcome further the reforms needed to avoid use of the
Committee for goals for which it was not established.
We would like to recall that in order for the Committee
to enjoy full legitimacy, it must function in accordance
with international law, the United Nations Charter and
other instruments and rules of human rights, even of a
preventive nature.

Second, with regard to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), we encourage the thematic discussions and
studies aimed at countering terrorism, as well as the
workshops that the Committee and its Executive
Directorate have conducted. We hope this will lead to
further implementation of the requirements of
resolution 1373 (2001), particularly in the area of the
exchange of expertise. We appreciate the efforts made
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate to provide the necessary technical
assistance and build the capacity of Member States,
particularly developing countries, in the areas of
legislation and institutions, and to continue its
cooperation and constructive engagement with States
and regional and national organizations, in accordance
with resolution 1373 (2001).

With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), Lebanon stresses
the importance of its ongoing cooperation with the
Members of the United Nations, particularly since
cooperation is the best way to prevent all these
weapons - be they nuclear, chemical or biological -
from falling into the hands of non-State actors.

At the regional level, we stress the importance of
the efforts of the League of Arab States to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
access to them by terrorists. We also emphasize the
importance of declaring the Middle East a region free
of weapons of mass destruction.

The 1540 Committee has made tireless efforts to
respond to requests for and offers of assistance and to
increase its transparency and contacts with Member
States. Ongoing coordination between the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1373 (2001) is of the utmost importance, particularly
since they are also linked to resolution 1540 (2004) and
its provisions. We believe that resolution 1540 (2004)
has become a fundamental cornerstone of the
non-proliferation regime and that further cooperation
and partnership between the Committee and related
international organizations - including the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the World
Customs Organization, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and others - is also critical.
We stress the importance of the proposal made in
the 2009 comprehensive review to commend Member
States that are not members of the Security Council but
have contributed greatly, through the hosting of
workshops, to raising awareness and the exchange of
expertise and confidence-building with neighbouring
countries. In that regard, we extend our thanks to
Croatia, Viet Nam, Peru and Brazil for all their efforts.

In conclusion, we recall that Lebanon, which has
suffered from terrorism in all its aspects, believes that
terrorist acts are extremely dangerous and widespread
in many parts of the world in spite of the resolutions
adopted and measures taken against them by the United
Nations. We believe that commitment to combating
terrorism at its roots by removing all the factors
fuelling it - particularly hotbeds of tension, double
standards in applying international resolutions,
poverty, foreign occupation and human rights
violations - is of the greatest importance.

