Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): The
three months since our last update to the Security
Council bear witness to major accomplishments in Iraq.
The transitional administrative law is nearing
completion and will govern Iraq during the period of
transition to full democracy, when a duly elected
government under a permanent constitution comes into
being. Iraqis are working with each other and the
international community to map their own way forward
politically. The number of Iraqis contributing to the
security effort has virtually doubled and is increasing
every day. Saddam Hussein is in custody and will
undergo due process for crimes committed against the
Iraqi people and humanity.

In sum, after decades of oppression, we see the
Iraqi people asserting their own vision for Iraq by
assuming greater responsibility for security, by
managing their natural resources for the benefit of all
and by taking the first steps towards representative
democracy.

Against the backdrop of those successes, difficult
and significant challenges remain. Former regime
loyalists, foreign fighters and hardened international
terrorists continue to plague the Iraqi people with
attacks at police stations, at Eid Al-Adha gatherings
and at schools. Those forces have also directed their
deadly efforts against anyone who tries to help the
Iraqi people - Coalition partners, non-governmental
organizations and, yes, the United Nations itself. The
campaign of terror and destruction also targets critical
infrastructure throughout Iraq. But together, the Iraqi
people and those helping them will triumph in the
effort to open a new chapter in their proud history, a
chapter defined by the emergence of a democratic,
pluralistic Iraq.

The international community understands what is
at stake in this struggle. Many nations have stepped
forward to assist in the rebirth of Iraq, with
humanitarian and economic assistance, debt relief,
diplomatic support, expert assistance and training to
the Iraqi ministries and contributions to the
multinational force. In the coming months, the
international community must support the Iraqi people
to confront the challenges ahead.

As President Bush has stressed, the United
Nations has a vital role to play in Iraq both before and
after 1 July 2004. The efforts of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Brahimi and the members of the United Nations
team deployed to Iraq as part of the fact-finding mission
vividly demonstrate the vital role of the United Nations.

The Iraqi people, the United Nations and the
Coalition all support the transfer of sovereignty by 30
June 2004, as well as direct national elections as soon
as practical thereafter. According to polls three weeks
after the 15 November agreement, some 77 per cent of
Iraqi people were aware of and supported the 30 June
target date - a powerful and persuasive reason to
support the most rapid possible transfer of sovereignty.

Between now and 30 June, there is much to be
done. We welcome the active engagement of the United
Nations in helping the Iraqis define their own future
and transition to a democratic, pluralistic society at
peace with its neighbours.

Let me address the security situation first. United
States forces captured Saddam Hussein in a small
underground bunker near the city of Tikrit on 13
December 2003. He had extensive information with
him about the network of former regime loyalists in
Iraq, which has led to the disruption of its activities
and the detention of its members. Since Saddam's
arrest, the number of attacks against multinational
force troops has decreased. However, the attacks on
both Iraqi security forces and civilians have increased
in the past two months.

In spite of this, the determination of the Iraqi
people to assume primary responsibility for their own
security remains undeterred, and the courage and
bravery of the Iraqi people has not waned. On the
morning Saddam's capture was announced, there was a
record spike in the number of Iraqis signing up to serve
in the Civil Defence Corps, especially in the Tikrit area.

In November, I provided a comprehensive
description of the various Iraqi security forces,
specifically the Iraqi Civil Defence Corps, the
Facilities Protection Service, the new Iraq armed
forces, border security and the police force. In the past
three months, the Iraqi Civil Defence Corps has more
than doubled in size. It performs a range of duties
including fixed site security, route convoy security,
patrols, cordons, the establishment of checkpoints and
other tasks under multinational force command
arrangements.

As of 13 February, more than 25,000 Iraqi civil
defence corps personnel have been hired and trained,
and 3,600 are currently undergoing training. The
facilities protection service, charged with protecting
Iraq's strategic infrastructure, Government buildings
and cultural and educational assets, has also more than
doubled since November. As of 15 February, there are
more than 70,000 guards on duty.

The number of Iraqi armed forces personnel has
also more than doubled. As of 14 February, more than
3,500 personnel had been recruited. Nearly 2,000 are
operational, and more than 1,700 are in training. The
number of Iraqi border police and immigration and
customs inspectors has also almost doubled, from
12,000 to approximately 23,000. Finally, the Iraqi
police force has also continued to grow, to
approximately 75,000 personnel - about 10,000 more
than in November.

On 29 January, the first 466 of the 35,000 officers
to be trained in Jordan graduated from the
multinational training programme for police recruits.
Germany has agreed to provide police experts in
forensics to train approximately 150 Iraqi police in the
United Arab Emirates. Additionally, the Coalition
Provisional Authority is also making progress in
developing special capabilities within the Iraqi police
force, including in counter-terrorism and in basic
criminal investigation.

The Iraqis themselves are at the forefront of the
effort to stabilize Iraq, but troops deployed from 35
countries participating in the multinational force are
also bravely supporting the Iraqi people.

The Government of Japan has made a historic
decision to deploy 1,000 Japanese Self-Defence Forces
personnel in and around Iraq. The Republic of Korea,
also a force contributor, has committed to deploying
additional soldiers in the coming weeks, bringing the
total of their deployment to some 3,000 personnel.
Other countries have taken political decisions that
will soon make their offers of forces a reality on the
ground. New and renewed contributions, in accordance
with resolutions 1483 (2003) and 1511 (2003) and
bilateral agreements, represent the international
community's commitment to improving the future of
Iraq. We continue to urge the international community
to provide additional manpower and resources to
further assist the efforts of the multinational force.

I would like now to say a few brief words about
the issue of governance. A solid local government
system in Iraq is the foundation upon which a
democratic national government can be built. Effective
local governance encourages citizen participation,
fosters dialogue among competing groups, and delivers
essential services based on community priorities. With
our support, Iraqis have held numerous and well-
attended town meetings to discuss Iraq's transition to
democracy. The Coalition Provisional Authority
continues to support a transparent process of
consultations and elections for the Iraqi people to
choose representatives who reflect the make-up and
character of their communities.

The broad framework of the political process will
be underpinned by the work under way within the Iraqi
Governing Council to draft a Transitional Administrative
Law, the basis for the Iraqi transitional Government
until a permanent Constitution is ratified. That
important document will define basic tenets for Iraq's
transitional Government and fundamental protections
for civil, religious and political liberties for every Iraqi.

On 30 December, the Governing Council
requested that the Secretary-General dispatch a United
Nations team to Iraq to assess the feasibility of direct
elections within the 30 June time-frame, and, if not,
what alternatives could be recommended.

That request was followed by productive
discussions in New York among the representatives of
the Governing Council, the Coalition Provisional
Authority and the United Nations on 19 January. The
Secretary-General subsequently dispatched a fact-
finding mission to Iraq. The Coalition Provisional
Authority provided security and other support to ensure
their successful visit. The United Nations team has
returned from Baghdad, and we welcome their just-
issued report providing detailed recommendations on
what is required to conduct elections in Iraq. The report
made clear that free and fair elections could not be held
by 30 June, the date by which all agree that the transfer
of sovereignty should take place.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report,
resolving the question of the timing of elections
provides an opportunity for Iraqis and the Coalition
Provisional Authority to engage in a dialogue on the
mechanism through which sovereignty will be
transferred on 30 June. The mechanism for governing
Iraq between the transfer of sovereignty and the
national elections remains to be worked out. The Iraqi
people, the Governing Council, the Coalition
Provisional Authority and the United Nations will work
to reach agreement on a transition mechanism that will
have the broad-based support of the Iraqi people.

We look forward to further consideration of the
team's report and to the continued engagement of the
United Nations in the political process ahead.

On the oil-for-food programme, I am pleased to
report that, in accordance with resolution 1483 (2003),
the programme terminated on 21 November 2003, and
that the transition went smoothly.

The United Nations World Food Programme is
currently assisting the Coalition Provisional Authority
and the Iraqi Ministry of Trade with procurement and
logistics assistance necessary to keep the public
distribution system supplied with food-basket goods.
Shipments of food and other humanitarian supplies are
managed by the newly established Coordination
Centre, jointly staffed by Iraqi and Coalition officials.
The Centre's role is to ensure the steady, secure and
managed flow of remaining oil-for-food goods and
newly procured goods. The Ministry of Trade will take
complete control of procurement on 1 April and will
assume full responsibility for all aspects of the
programme on 1 July.

On the disarmament of Iraq, the Iraq Survey
Group continues its work to search for and eliminate
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), prohibited
missile-delivery systems and related infrastructure.

In January, Charles Duelfer, formerly Deputy
Executive Chairman of the United Nations Special
Commission on Iraq (UNSCOM), assumed leadership
of the Survey Group, replacing Mr. David Kay, whose
efforts are greatly appreciated. Mr. Kay has reported
that the Survey Group had been unable to confirm
some pre-war intelligence assessments by the United
States and other nations about Iraq's weapons
stockpiles. Additional work remains before the
question of Iraq's stockpiles can be fully and
completely addressed.

Mr. Kay also reported that the Survey Group had
discovered clear evidence that Saddam's regime hid
ongoing WMD programme activities from UNMOVIC,
and concluded that Iraq was in violation of previous
Security Council resolutions. It is clear that Saddam
Hussein's regime was intent on deceiving, and
continued to deceive, the international community. To
meet the tasks ahead, the Iraq Survey Group maintains
a sizeable number of specialists dedicated to following
three disarmament activities: interviewing individuals
connected with Iraq's WMD programmes; obtaining
and analysing documents, computer hard drives and
other materials; and assessing and exploiting potential
WMD-related sites.

Some Iraqis clearly are cooperating in this effort.
However, fear of reprisal may be inhibiting cooperation
by others. Some officials with close ties to Saddam's
regime seem determined to avoid cooperating in any
way. In addition, document analysis has been
obstructed by the methodical destruction of documents
and computers, in the immediate post-conflict period,
at some Iraqi facilities. The Iraq Survey Group will
continue its important work.

For those of us in the international community
who are actively involved in Iraq's transition, progress
is not always as rapid as we would have hoped. But
despite this sober assessment, this is a time of hope for
Iraq. Even in the three months since our last update,
much has been accomplished, and, despite efforts at
sabotage, steady progress is visible. Iraq's neighbours
and regional partners have a unique opportunity to play
a constructive role in this transition. And all those in
the international community with the resources to
contribute should come forward to help the Iraqi people.

