Mr. Fulci (Italy): Italy will vote in favour of the draft
resolution. We now view the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)
for three months as being of considerable advantage.

On one hand, three months is long enough to allow
verification of whether or not the Liberian factions are
complying with the Accra Agreement, signed on 21
December 1994 - in particular, the provisions relating to
the cease-fire and the establishment of the Council of State.
Unfortunately, as has been mentioned by other members of
the Council, the parties were unable last night to reach
agreement on the composition of the Council of State,
which has therefore not been installed. Thus, the schedule
agreed upon in Accra has been delayed.

On the other hand, the extension is short enough to
issue a clear warning, a clear signal, to the parties that the
time has come for them to demonstrate - and to
demonstrate by deeds, not by words only - their
willingness to ensure peace in their country. Too many
times they have failed to abide by agreements they signed.
Too often the factions have resumed fighting, making it
impossible for the international relief organizations to
deliver much-needed humanitarian assistance, prolonging
the suffering of the civilian population and plunging its
country into an ever-worsening humanitarian and economic
crisis. The parties should therefore, without delay, resume
their negotiations.

Today's draft resolution also calls for tightening of the
application of the arms embargo. In this sense, let a clear
message go out to the countries concerned: no peace will be
reached until the arms flow across the Liberian borders is
interrupted.

The case of Liberia seems emblematic of the
collaboration that there should be between the United
Nations and the regional organizations in the area of
conflict prevention and the maintenance of peace. Africa's
regional organizations recently showed their willingness
to play a concrete role in the maintenance of peace and
security in their respective geopolitical areas and are
equipping themselves with mechanisms for conflict
prevention and management and the settlement of
disputes.

Italy, but not only Italy, understands and welcomes
the growing aspiration of the African countries to play a
more effective role, despite the fact that there are still
some inadequacies in the structure that is available to
them - a structure that we hope will soon be reinforced.

The draft resolution that is before the Council today
also acknowledges the crucial role played by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), particularly by the Community's current
Chairman, President Rawlings of Ghana, whose
diplomatic efforts in the negotiation process that led to
the recent developments in Liberia deserve full
recognition. We strongly hope that these efforts, including
a summit of the ECOWAS States, will continue, thus
improving the prospects for a lasting solution to the
conflict.

We ask the Ambassador of Liberia, who is sitting at
the Security Council table today, to transmit this message
of hope and encouragement to his country and his people.

Let me conclude by reiterating my country's
willingness to support the African countries' bid for a
more direct role in conflict prevention and management
on their continent and to strive for more effective
coordination between them and the United Nations. Italy
hopes very much that the conflict in Liberia will very
soon come to an end and that peace and prosperity will
be restored in that country.

