Mexico thanks France for convening this open debate and recognizes the work of Belgium as Chair of the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict. We also thank the Secretary-General for his report on the issue (S/2020/525). This open debate is taking place as part of the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which established the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict, and the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. We welcome the recent accessions of the Gambia and Myanmar to the Optional Protocol and call on all States that have yet to do so to consider ratifying that instrument. We recognize that, since the establishment of the mechanism, significant progress has been made in releasing minors from armed groups and adopting action plans and specific recommendations, as well as that the Working Group has conducted field visits. Those achievements are the result of the effective work of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, who has also placed special emphasis on the urgent need to finance sustainable and comprehensive reintegration programmes with a gender focus. During its most recent participation in the Security Council, Mexico chaired the Working Group on Children in Armed Conflict and led the Working Group's first field visit to a country on its agenda, namely, Nepal. The well-being of children remains of the highest priority for Mexico; accordingly, during our next term as an elected member of the Council, we will continue to promote initiatives that prevent their suffering. We welcome the presidential statement, adopted in February, which incorporates the protection of minors across relevant activities in the areas of conflict prevention and sustainable peace (S/PRST/2020/3), as well as the practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict. The Secretary-General's recent report describes the challenges in implementing the children and armed conflict agenda. The recording of over 25,000 serious violations against children in 19 situations is particularly dramatic. The number of recorded violations against children - murder, mutilation, recruitment and use of child soldiers, kidnapping and sexual violence, which disproportionately affects girls, continues to be used as a weapon of war and, because it is taboo, discourages victims from speaking out - is abhorrent. The fact that nearly 7,500 children, including some as young as 6 years old, have been recruited and used by armed groups warrants unequivocal condemnation. Moreover, justice mechanisms must be strengthened so that such crimes do not go unpunished. Victim assistance mechanisms must also be strengthened so that they may cope with the serious physical and emotional toll of those atrocities. Mexico is concerned at the growing number of incidents of denial of humanitarian assistance, particularly by non-State actors, where minors have been affected, and at the persistent attacks on schools and hospitals by the various parties to conflict. All such actions constitute serious violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law, which are unacceptable and abominable and must not remain unpunished. Regarding our hemisphere, as indicated in the Secretary-General's report, we acknowledge the decrease in cases of recruitment in Colombia, as well as the policies adopted towards the end of 2019 by that country's Presidential Council for Human Rights to prevent the recruitment and use of children and sexual violence against children. However, we note with concern that some armed groups, such as the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional and dissident groups of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, continue to recruit children. This must stop immediately. In the light of the coronavirus disease pandemic, there is a need to pay greater attention to the impact of the pandemic on child solder reintegration programmes, which have been suspended, partly because of a lack of access to health services. It is vital to provide the necessary psychosocial support needed by children who are removed from the ranks of armed groups. Those are essential services that should not be interrupted. Universal health coverage cannot leave behind children affected by armed conflict. In Mexico's view, it is fundamental that human beings, especially children, are put at the centre of our policies. The needs and aspirations of youth have a common denominator: education. Unfortunately, that right remains one of the main casualties of armed conflict. The United Nations should redouble its efforts to ensure that education, as both a prevention and reintegration tool, can be accessed. Therefore, we call for the relevant parties to: implement and observe international humanitarian law and human rights law, especially child protection laws, and strengthen accountability for all violations of serious violations against children; promote measures to ensure safe, timely and unhindered humanitarian access with a view to facilitating humanitarian assistance and child protection services; enhance support to the monitoring and reporting mechanism on grave violations of children's rights in situations of armed conflict, which is necessary in order to continue ascertaining that the applicable legal framework is used effectively on the ground - we underscore the efforts to document cases of release, recruitment and reintegration, while recognizing that improvements are needed in the areas of training, disaggregated data and statistics; and strengthen peacekeeping mandates through child protection advisers and support reintegration programmes with a gender focus that also envisage mental health and psychosocial support. Without comprehensive programmes, stigmatization can have serious consequences on the development of children, including their recruitment. As a member of the Security Council for the period 2021-2022, Mexico will spare no effort to continue moving forward this priority agenda.
