Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I would like to thank United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Mladenov, for his tireless efforts to promote peace, as well as Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for their valuable interventions yesterday. This quarterly debate falls just days before International Holocaust Remembrance Day. Canada's Governor-General will be in Jerusalem this week to join leaders from around the world in the fifth World Holocaust Forum at Yad Vashem and to mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz-Birkenau. Canada remembers the 6 million Jewish victims of the Holocaust and the millions of others persecuted and killed by the Nazi regime. As we look forward, it is always important to recall the past, particularly in the context of a global rise in anti-Semitism and hatred of all kinds. As the Secretary- General said yesterday, never again means telling the story of the Holocaust again and again. Alongside all Member States, Canada closely follows developments in the Middle East, including the deliberations of the Council. Before I begin, I would be remiss if I did not mention the tragedy of Ukrainian Airlines Flight PS-752, which killed 176 people, including 57 Canadians. Canada offers its condolences to all the families of the victims and all the countries whose citizens perished in the tragedy. All of Canada mourns the loss of those bright individuals. As our Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs have said, Canada will not rest until the families of that terrible tragedy get the closure, accountability, transparency and justice from Iran that they deserve. We are working with other grieving nations to ensure a thorough and credible investigation, followed by full accountability, including compensation. Iran has taken responsibility for the tragedy, which we appreciate and which brings consequences. We will continue to judge Iran by its actions. (spoke in French) The tragedy occurred at a time of heightened tensions in the region. As Mr. Mladenov said, we are well aware of the new flashpoints in the region. We are fully committed to supporting any and all efforts to promote de-escalation. Canada understands all too well that failure to do so could have tragic consequences for civilians in the region and around the world. So many lives have been needlessly lost as a result of this time of tension, including the lives of those aboard Ukrainian Airlines Flight PS-752. As Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said, if there had been no tension or recent escalation in the region, those Canadians would be at home right now with their families. That is what happens when there is conflict and war. Innocent people become victims. It reminds us of the importance of efforts to de-escalate and - looking ahead - to reduce tensions. Since the beginning of the crisis, Canada has advocated diplomacy and international cooperation and called on all parties to honour their obligations. Indeed, that is in keeping with Canada's international relations since the founding of the United Nations. Approximately 10 days ago, during the open debate on the Charter of the United Nations (see S/PV.8699), we recalled the leading role Canada's then-Foreign Minister Lester B. Pearson played in defusing the Suez Crisis and creating the United Nations first large-scale peacekeeping force. (spoke in English) Today, Canada contributes to numerous United Nations peace operations worldwide, including the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the UnitedNations Truce Supervision Organization and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan. We also work in close partnership with the Government of Iraq, where Canada leads a NATO training mission of Iraqi Armed Forces and supports the efforts of the Global Coalition against Da'esh. In Iraq, the Government continues to confront internal and external challenges as it seeks to consolidate the territorial defeat of Da'esh. Canada continues to be deeply engaged in development, humanitarian, military and diplomatic efforts to support Iraq. Our priority remains a stable and united Iraq and preventing the resurgence of Da'esh. In Jordan, we are working with the Government to train local leaders, particularly women, to identify early signs of violent extremism in their communities. Jordan hosts thousands of Palestinian, Iraqi, Yemeni and, most recently, Syrian refugees. Jordan has done so for generations, often without full appreciation by the international community of the impact that that has had on its society. Lebanon and Turkey, which host the highest number of refugees per capita and the most in total, respectively, also remind us how the region and the world as a whole have been deeply affected by the crisis in Syria. Much of the focus of this open debate is on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Today, I reiterate Canada's long-standing support for a two-State solution, brought about through direct negotiations between the parties. That is just, in line with international law and can deliver lasting peace to the region and security and prosperity to both Israelis and Palestinians. We also unequivocally condemn rocket attacks on Israel by Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad, which have targeted, killed and injured civilians. Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad are terror groups that control a vulnerable population. We are thankful to Mr. Mladenov and to Egypt for their concerted diplomatic efforts regarding Gaza. The humanitarian and political situation in Gaza has become critical. If the security situation were to deteriorate any further, we could face another humanitarian catastrophe in the region. Canada urges all members of the international community to take the necessary action to avoid that outcome. Our ties to the region are deep, broad, diverse and long-standing. They are based on historic but evolving and ever-expanding relationships between Canadians and their friends, families, colleagues and business partners across the Middle East, from the Maghreb to the Gulf. There are millions of Canadians who trace their origins back to that region. Each has enriched Canada's social fabric, including the more than 60,000 Syrian refugees who have arrived since 2016 and are becoming Canadian citizens, such as Tareq Hadhad, the founder of a family-run company in Nova Scotia, Peace by Chocolate, which now employs 55 people. That is what we mean when we say diversity is our strength. It is in that spirit of commitment to diplomacy and international cooperation that Canada continues to be firmly committed to working with its partners in the region to combat the terror and violent extremism that have afflicted far too many countries represented here today.
