Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): We
have heard statements this afternoon by the delegations
of Libya, Israel and Palestine. In the light of this
afternoon's debate, I would first of all like to recall that
respect for international humanitarian law is a
permanent guiding principle of Belgium's
interventions. That essential principle demands that all
actors concerned demonstrate their sense of
responsibility. A sense of responsibility inspires me to
make three comments.

First, with regard to the incident itself, at this
stage, the varying accounts available to us assure us as
to the restraint of those involved. However, they do not
provide the requisite clarity to come to a definitive
conclusion. For the sake of the population of Gaza, we
should nevertheless wonder about the usefulness of the
counter-productive politicization that has resulted from
an attempt to provide humanitarian assistance by ship.

Secondly, with regard to the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, along with
our partners in the European Union and the Quartet,
which share our deep concern, we regularly call for the
opening of the crossing points to both humanitarian
and commercial traffic. The Israeli authorities cannot
consider themselves absolved of their responsibilities
vis-a-vis the Gaza Strip. We therefore call on them to
assume their humanitarian responsibilities and lift the
restrictions to access imposed against the press and the
diplomatic community. Moreover, with regard to the
humanitarian situation in southern Israel, we continue
to systematically condemn all rocket launches from the
Gaza Strip.

Thirdly, we welcome the state of calm achieved
thanks to Egypt's mediation, with its dual goal of
making a lasting improvement in the living conditions
of the Palestinian and Israeli populations in and around
the Gaza Strip. However, from the beginning, we have
emphasized that tranquillity should not be an end in
itself.

It is urgent that we put an end to the anomaly of
the situation of siege that followed the illegal
usurpation of power by Hamas in the Gaza Strip. There
is an urgent need for the calm to yield to humanitarian,
security, economic and political normalization. Finally,
it is urgent that Hamas, which hopes to be seen as a
political actor, act on its sense of responsibility for the
true interests of the Palestinian people, beginning by
9

restoring the Gaza Strip to the sole and legitimate
authority of President Abbas.

