Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Security Council has been compelled to meet on
an urgent basis to discuss a further extrajudicial
execution committed by a Member State against
citizens of the territory that it occupies unlawfully and
in breach of a large number of resolutions of this very
body.

Once again, the Cuban delegation strongly
condemns the most recent selective assassination
committed by Israel, the occupying Power, in which
Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi and others accompanying him in
the Gaza Strip lost their life. The State terrorism
exercised by Israel continues unchecked. This new
extrajudicial execution is one more addition to Israel's
extensive and still increasing record of aggression and
violations of the most fundamental human rights and of
physical and psychological damage to the Palestinian
people. Those include illegal settlements, demolition of
homes, arbitrary detentions, torture, the building of a
separation wall on Palestinian lands and the suffocation
of the Palestinian economy. Yasser Arafat, the
legitimate President of the Palestinian Authority,
remains confined and is still cited as one of the
possible victims of future extrajudicial assassinations.

The crisis in the Palestinian territories has
worsened as the number of dead and injured increases,
the vast majority of them innocent civilians. Israel
must respect international humanitarian law, including
the Fourth Geneva Convention.

Cuba reaffirms its full support for the cause of the
Arab peoples, in particular that of the Palestinian
people, against Israeli occupation and aggression, and
we have profound solidarity with their resistance and
rebellion.

At the same time, Cuba expresses its
condemnation of suicide bombings and other acts
aimed at Israeli civilians, innocent victims of the spiral
of violence caused by their Government's policies,
while we oppose the manipulation of those isolated
acts in order to question the exercise of self-defence by
the Palestinian people and to justify both selective and
large-scale actions directed at the Palestinian
population.

Violence and the use of force cannot lead to a
solution to a conflict that should have been resolved
many years ago had the Security Council acted
resolutely and without the dual standards that it applies
to this issue. Virtually half of the times the United
States has exercised its veto in the Security Council, on
40 occasions, it has done so in connection with the
Middle East issue. Of those times, 28 have been
directly linked to the situation in the Palestinian
territories illegally occupied by Israel. That is not to
mention the constant threats of the use of the veto,
which have impeded the adoption of a number of draft
resolutions that did not even come to a vote or were
significantly watered down.

If it really desires to make progress towards a just
solution to the Palestinian problem, the United States
should immediately suspend financial support for the
purposes of war and its military supplies to Israel,
which include tanks, helicopters, missiles and aircraft
that are used against civilians.

Those deliberate extrajudicial executions not only
cost lives, but also destroy any hope of progress
towards peace. The Cuban delegation repeats that a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East cannot be
achieved without an end to the Israeli occupation, and
until the Palestinian people exercise their legitimate
right to establish an independent State with its capital
in East Jerusalem, and until all of the occupied Arab
territories are returned and Israel withdraws from the
Gaza Strip, the West Bank and the Syrian Golan to the
border of 4 June 1967. That also requires an end to
Israeli provocation in southern Lebanon and a
guarantee of the return of the Palestinian refugees,
while eliminating the unlawful Israeli settlements in all
of the occupied territories.

