Mr. Doutriaux (France)(spoke in French): I wish
to thank Mr. Kenzo Oshima for the briefing he gave us
on the implementation of the Secretary-General's
recommendations on the important issue of protecting
civilians in armed conflict.

With your permission, Madam President, I would
like to pick up on a few points mentioned in the
excellent letter prepared by Norway in response to the
previous report of the Secretary-General.

We wish to refer to the question in paragraph 1 of
the letter, which was also raised by Mr. Oshima, of
reorganizing all activities of the United Nations, funds
and programmes in the area of protecting civilians in
armed conflict. This is an important matter. It was in
this spirit that we, with the Council, drafted the
resolution adopted yesterday on the protection of
children in armed conflict. The resolution that we
adopted yesterday included the reorganization of all
activities of the United Nations and its Member States
in this area. Perhaps, Mr. Oshima, we could think of
the resolution that was adopted yesterday on the
protection of children in armed conflict as a precedent
for preparing a similar type of resolution or other text
that would clarify our ideas about dividing
responsibilities in the area of protecting civilians in
armed conflict.

In paragraph 2 of the Norwegian letter - the
letter from the President of the Security Council but
drafted by Norway - we refer to the issue of
cooperation between the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in the context of a
peacekeeping mandate. As Ambassador Eldon
mentioned a moment ago, it might also be useful to
think about cooperation with the Department of
Political Affairs when the conflict in question - I am
thinking of Afghanistan because there is no mandate
for a peacekeeping operation there - does not relate to
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, but to the
Department of Political Affairs. Obviously, as you
yourself said, Mr. Oshima, there are serious problems
in protecting civilians in the Afghan conflict, so this
cooperation must definitely be expanded. It clearly
already exists, but the cooperation between OCHA and
the Department of Political Affairs should be
restructured.

Next, in paragraph 3 of the letter, we refer to the
checklist of questions concerning the modification and
establishment of peacekeeping mandates. It is my
understanding that Mr. Oshima is engaged in
consultations with interested Member States on the
question of the aide-memoire, the checklist of issues. I
would like to tell you, Mr. Oshima, that my country is
interested in this question, and we would be delighted
to be able to exchange information on this important
issue with OCHA.

Paragraph 4 of the letter mentions the workshop
of experts, and like Ambassador Valdivieso, we are
also interested in having other workshops of experts. I
think that others have been announced. I would be
interested in hearing more about Ambassador Eldon's
experience in an earlier workshop. We would be
interested in participating in upcoming workshops on
this question.

