Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. I
also listened to the statements made by Dr. Hala and
Ms. Khoulani.

The United Nations attaches great importance to
addressing the issue of detainees and missing persons
in Syria. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, Mr. Pedersen, told the Security Council that
he had five priority objectives to achieve, the second of
which is making progress on detainees, abductees and
missing persons. For some time now, Special Envoy
Pedersen has conducted good offices and maintained
a positive and cooperative relationship with all Syrian
parties, including the Syrian Government. China
supports Special Envoy Pedersen in his continued
dialogue and consultation with all Syrian parties and
encourages all parties to build mutual trust through
measures such as the exchange of prisoners.

The Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2474 (2019) in June, on the subject ofmissing
persons in armed conflict; it should be implemented
in earnest. Recently, with the efforts of the relevant
working group under the Astana framework, the Syrian
Government and its opposition simultaneously released
some prisoners. Good progress has therefore been made
in that regard. The working group has committed to
pushing all Syrian parties towards making progress on
releasing prisoners of war, detainees and abductees,
handing over bodies and identifying missing persons.
That is an effective and necessary mechanism that will
lead to increased mutual trust among all Syrian parties.
China supports the working group in continuing to play
its constructive role.

China is concerned by the overall humanitarian
situation in Syria and the livelihood of the Syrian

people. Years of conflict have resulted in a tremendous
need for humanitarian assistance in Syria, and economic
sanctions further erode the living conditions of the
Syrian people. The international community should
continue to provide monetary and material assistance
to the Syrian people and support the rebuilding efforts
of the Syrian Government and people.

The international community, in carrying out
its humanitarian work in Syria, should fully respect
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria; strictly follow Security Council
resolutions, the United Nations humanitarian assistance
guidelines and the relevant provisions of international
law; adhere to the principles of neutrality, fairness and
non-politicization; and strengthen communication and
coordination with the Syrian Government.

A political solution is the only way to settle the
Syrian issue. The international community should
support the United Nations in playing its main role of
offering its good offices and support Special Envoy
Pedersen in his effort to advance the political process,
in accordance with the Syrian-owned and Syrian-led
principle and resolution 2254 (2015).
Syrian parties should proceed by taking into account
the future of the country and the fundamental interests
of its people, defuse differences through negotiations,
advance national reconciliation and gradually find a
political solution, in line with the reality of Syria and
the legitimate concerns of all parties.

The international community should encourage
the Syrian parties to voluntarily adopt measures that
are conducive to reconciliation and continuously build
mutual trust. Moreover, efforts should be undertaken to
continue to support the role of the Astana process, with
a view to assisting all Syrian parties in engaging in full
dialogue and consultation.

