Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
We congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency. We thank your predecessor for his
remarkable stewardship of the Council. We also thank
you for your response in convening this open meeting
of the Security Council to consider the grave situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories due to the
continued aggression by the Government of Israel, its
failure to carry out the commitments it has undertaken
and its pursuit of policies inflicting open-ended
destruction and forcing large number of Palestinians to
leave their homeland because they find themselves
living in intolerable conditions in their national
territory.

The Palestinian leadership has made every effort
to implement the road map. Various Palestinian
factions made every effort and complied with a 50-day
truce, until the Israeli Government violated that
ceasefire by an aggression aimed at dragging the
Palestinians into a new series of acts of violence,
knowing that such aggression and the actions of the
Palestinians would dash all hopes for peace as
envisaged by the international community. The whole
world condemned the decision of the Israeli
Government to remove Yasser Arafat.

The Government of Saudi Arabia has condemned
this serious Israeli escalation, which could lead to an
explosion of the situation in the region and to the total
collapse of the peace process. This decision not only is
in breach of international law and Security Council
resolutions, but also is a new affront to the peace
process and to the Quartet's efforts to implement the
road map, and it may be the final nail in the coffin of
the peace process.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, while it joins the
international community in condemning this decision,
calls upon all members of the international
community- as represented by the Quartet - to
move swiftly and decisively in the face of the Israeli
policy aimed at denying the will of the Palestinian
people and confiscating their land and legitimate
institutions. History will not look kindly on the
international community for not attempting to do
justice to the Palestinian people, for leaving the
solution to Israel's dictates, for being biased towards
Israel and for allowing Israel to attempt to make peace
according to its own vision and its own interests in
defiance of judicial norms and the international
community's demands. Israel has been and continues to
be the genuine cause of the failure of the peace
process.

Bias towards Israel has undermined the peace
process in the past and will cause its total collapse in
the future if this situation prevails. The influential
Powers are not playing the role of honest broker.
Conferences and initiatives will lead nowhere if they
give the impression that nothing can be done and that
the road ahead is clear. The international community in
general, and the Quartet in particular, must implement
the road map and must confront Israel's efforts to
torpedo international peace efforts aimed at bringing
about just and comprehensive peace to the region.

