Mr. Benitez-Versen (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba welcomes the convening of this important debate
on a topic of interest to us all. We should also like to
express our full support for the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The position of Cuba is clear. The Security
Council needs to undergo comprehensive, urgent and
far-reaching reform. There can be no genuine reform of
the United Nations until the Security Council is
reformed.

Security Council reform must by necessity
include the modification of its working methods. In
recent years, there have been modest changes in the
working methods of the Council, including on some of
the issues raised in the note contained in document
S/2006/507 and subsequent notes by the President of
the Council. But the majority of the changes have been
somewhat formal and, in reality, the Council is neither
transparent, democratic nor efficient.

Unfortunately, the permanent members - and on
occasion not even all of them - in particular when
dealing with highly important issues, continue to
negotiate behind closed doors, where they take
decisions of fundamental importance that are later
presented as faits accompli to the other members of the
Council and the rest of the membership of the United
Nations.
Cuba believes that, as a minimum, the following
urgent changes, to mention but a few, are necessary to
the working methods of the Council.

The number of public meetings should be
increased, in accordance with Article 31 and 32 of the
Charter of the United Nations. Closed meetings and
unofficial consultations should take place only in very
exceptional circumstances. The State concerned should
be allowed to participate in Council discussions on
topics that affect it directly, in accordance with Article
31 of the Charter. The opinions expressed by Member
States in thematic open debates should be reflected in
the resolutions and presidential statements of the
Council. Those countries that are not members of the
Council should be guaranteed access to subsidiary
bodies and the right to participate in their discussions.
The Council's rules of procedure, which remain
provisional after more 60 years, should be formalized
in order to increase transparency and accountability.

Cuba notes with serious concern the growing
tendency of the Council to consider matters and
assume functions that are not within its competence,
usurping the role granted by the Charter to other
bodies, in particular the General Assembly. This trend
must be stopped as a matter of urgency. The Council
needs, as soon as possible, to carry out a profound
revision of its agenda and to bring it in line with its
mandate. The Council should strictly observe the
provisions of the Charter and all the resolutions of the
General Assembly as the main deliberative,
policymaking and representative organ of the United
Nations.

The Council must give due account of its work to
the General Assembly by submitting truly analytical
annual reports, as well as special reports as provided
for under Articles 15 and 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations. Such special reports, unfortunately,
still do not exist.

The question of the veto is intrinsically linked to
the working methods of the Council, especially its
decision-making mechanism. The veto is an
anachronistic and anti-democratic privilege that should
be eliminated as soon as possible. Until that happens, it
would be important as a first step to consider various
options for limiting the use of the veto, such as limiting
the use of the veto to votes on measures adopted by the
Council under Chapter VII of the Charter; allowing for
the possible annulment of the veto through an
affirmative vote by an agreed number of Council
members in line with the number of members of an
expanded Council; or allowing for a possible

annulment of the veto by a two-thirds majority in the
General Assembly.

In conclusion, I stress our conviction that a more
transparent Council would be a more legitimate
Council. A more inclusive and accessible Council that
truly takes into account the opinions of the Member
States of the Organization would be a more effective
Council. We already have a significant number of
specific proposals to improve the Council's working
methods, such as those presented by the Non-Aligned
Movement. What we need now is to take action
without further delay.

