Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Permit me at the outset
to thank the Philippines presidency for having
convened this important meeting. We welcome your
presence in the Chair, Madam President, because it
shows how much importance you attach to this
important subject. We would also like to warmly thank
the Secretary-General, the President of the Economic
and Social Council, Mr. Caillaux and Mr. Martin for
their remarks. We salute the Secretary-General's
leadership in pushing for enhanced and meaningful
interaction between the United Nations and civil
society. We stand ready to support any action that will
bring that critical relationship more closely in line with
the realities of globalization and the complexities of
many other new global challenges of today.

The Presidency of the European Union will touch
upon a number of important issues that are not covered
by my statement. Needless to say, I fully associate
myself with the remarks to be delivered later in this
debate by Ambassador Ryan of Ireland on behalf of the
European Union.

Experiences with numerous post-conflict
situations since the end of the cold war have shown
that post-conflict peace-building processes that do not
sufficiently involve local actors - of which civil
society organizations are a central part - are doomed
to failure. That applies to the work of United Nations
peacekeeping missions, to wider United Nations efforts
for development and stability and to national
Governments. Germany is a strong promoter of a
culture of conflict prevention and dialogue. For that
reason, the federal Government has devised and is
implementing an action plan on civilian crisis
prevention, conflict resolution and post-conflict peace-
building. In this concept, civil society plays an
indispensable part in peace-building and therefore
forms a cornerstone of our strategy.

One of the many important contributions that
civil society provides is invaluable information that
forms part of an early-warning system on emerging
conflicts. In order to preserve the strength of those
contributions, it is important to respect civil society's
independence from Government. Civil society has a
role that is as indispensable as it is distinct from
Government and from the military. We wish to pay
tribute to the instrumental role that internationally
active non-governmental organizations have played in
bringing about three major breakthroughs that are
cornerstones of the international conflict prevention
and post-conflict peace-building architecture: the
Ottawa Treaty on landmines, the United Nations
Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
Weapons and the International Criminal Court. None of
those three would have been feasible or possible to
implement without the help of civil society.

Germany is also a strong supporter of the global
partnership for the prevention of armed conflict that
was established to enhance the role of civil society in
developing effective action to prevent violent conflict.
In order to focus on the role of another crucial group of
non-State actors in conflict prevention and peace-
building, Germany, as a past President of the Security
Council, initiated a debate on the role of business in
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and post-conflict
peace-building.

Having said that, we are fully aware that stable
and strong Governments are an equally important
precondition for sustainable peace-building. The final
decisions and responsibility must remain with
Governments. Even the most ingenious creativity of
the civil sectors, including civil society, will not
succeed in bringing about peace and stability if the
decision-making mechanisms of an effective State are
missing. Somalia, I believe, is a case in point.

I would now like to focus on a few points that are
of practical relevance to the Council. In Germany's
view, the Council's recent record on interaction with
civil society is, by and large, a good one. We are
pleased to note that the report of the Secretary-
General's Panel of Eminent Persons on United Nations-
Civil Society Relations, which was published
yesterday, seems to share that assessment. Our initial
impression of the report's recommendations is very
positive. The recommendations on making better use of
Arria-formula meetings and field visits are eminently
sensible, and our experience of contacts with non-
governmental organizations throughout the Security
Council's mission to Afghanistan has been extremely
positive, dealing as it did with the complexity of the
situation on the ground. We are also prepared to
explore creative new ways of enhancing cooperation,
such as Chatham House Rules-based seminars.
On the issue of civil society strategies to be
pursued by the United Nations field presence, I would
like to recall recommendations that were made at a
seminar held in 2003 in Istanbul, chaired by Mrs. Nafis
Sadik and representing, inter alia, the Department of
Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. Those recommendations included
systematic consultation with civil society members
through assessment teams preparing new peace
operations; secondly, regular consultative meetings
between civil society and the highest United Nations
representative; thirdly, the establishment of a non-
governmental organization coordinator at a senior level
in the United Nations field presence; fourthly, the
instruction of incoming United Nations mission leaders
and personnel by local civil society leaders with regard
to in-country norms and cultural traditions; and lastly,
transparent and factual information on mission
activities and funding in national languages so that
civil society may effectively interact with the United
Nations mission. We support those recommendations.
We trust that, on that basis, a creative and cooperative
relationship among civil society, the Security Council
and the United Nations system as a whole can be
further enhanced and developed.

