Mr. Stagno Ugarte (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me, first of all, to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate of
the Security Council to take up the role of the United
Nations in promoting justice and the rule of law. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
valuable report, as well as the delegations of Germany,
Finland and Jordan for the informal working document
they have prepared as a contribution to our
deliberations.

As the Secretary-General rightly stated in his
report, peace, justice and democracy are fundamental
prerequisites that reinforce each other. There can be no
peace if there is no democracy. There can be no
democracy if there is no legal certainty and an effective
and impartial judiciary. There cannot be justice without
peace and a legitimate and responsible Government. In
that context, the promotion of justice and the
strengthening of the rule of law are essential elements
in the promotion of international peace and security, in
the domestic stability of countries that have
experienced armed conflict and in the sustainable
development of all the nations of the world.
The concept of the rule of law goes beyond the
mere administration of justice when legal standards are
violated. The rule of law is an essential aspect of
democratic governance. The rule of law means that all
persons, physical and legal, must be subject to a body
of clear, precise and pre-existing laws that provide
legal clarity as to what types of actions are prohibited
and that establish a framework of minimum guarantees
for an individual's freedom of action. It is also
essential that Government authorities be subject to a
rigorous set of standards that circumscribe the scope of
their actions and protect private citizens from any
abuse of power on the part of the State.

In that connection, we can identify three different
dimensions of the rule of law: the legislative, the
administrative and the judicial. From the legislative
perspective, the rule of law demands transparency,
clarity and moderation in the promulgation of laws.
Legislation must protect and guarantee the fundamental
rights and freedoms of all individuals. From the
administrative point of view, the rule of law requires a
conscious effort to circumscribe the use of State
authority in order to protect an individual's sphere of
action. Any abuse of power or instance of corruption
by public officials is a violation of the rule of law.
From a judicial point of View, the rule of law must
provide remedies in order to correct any violations or
harm done when the legal order is violated, as well as
to protect the fundamental rights of individuals.

Promoting the rule of law in transitional
situations at the end of armed conflicts requires action
in all three dimensions. The United Nations must assist
communities in transition to adopt a clear-cut, fair and
impartial legal framework that guarantees full respect
for the human rights of all citizens. From the
administrative point of View, the Organization must
promote responsible governance that democratically
responds to the aspirations of people while providing
genuine accountability for its own activities. From the
judicial perspective, the international community must
lend assistance and technical support to courts and
police in order to increase their effectiveness,
legitimacy and independence while protecting
individual rights. As the Secretary-General correctly
stated in his report, all those elements are
interdependent, and all require joint action.

The administration of justice in transitional
situations is particularly important in cases where
grave violations of international humanitarian law have
occurred: genocide, crimes against humanity and
massive violations of human rights. Such situations
require both justice and reconciliation. My delegation
fully agrees with the Secretary-General that we must
never extend amnesty to the perpetrators of such
crimes. At the same time, we believe that the
Organization must promote any mechanism for
reconciliation and social reintegration that will make it
possible to overcome the trauma of armed conflict. To
the extent possible, every society should design its own
mechanisms for reconciliation.

With regard to serious cases in which it is
necessary to ensure the administration of justice, the
United Nations must ensure that legal processes fully
respect the rights of accused persons to due process
and that places of detention are in full conformity with
minimum standards for the treatment of prisoners.
Costa Rica is extremely concerned at seeing traditional
mechanisms being used to dispense justice, for those
usually do not include minimum guarantees to protect
the basic rights of accused persons.

Costa Rica fully supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the Organization should not
participate in any tribunal that can hand down a death
sentence.

In cases in which a State is either incapable or
unwilling to try the perpetrators of the most serious
crimes, the international community must - and I
emphasize must - have recourse to the International
Criminal Court, which is a standing impartial body
with judges who enjoy the highest possible moral and
professional qualities that can provide the correct
administration of international justice. The
International Criminal Court is a bulwark against
impunity and legal uncertainty. We call on the Security
Council to in future make full use of the option of
submitting particular cases to the International
Criminal Court.

As the Secretary-General has said, it is now
essential that the international community provide this
new institution with the required resources and support
so that it can investigate, prosecute and try those
responsible for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. We appeal to everyone to continue
strengthening the Court.

My delegation objects to any future establishment
by the United Nations of special or mixed criminal
tribunals. First of all, the ICC is a viable and economic
alternative. Secondly, while such tribunals of a special
nature did have a salutary effect at the outset, their
costs have snowballed, and they have fallen prey to
countless difficulties that have prevented the prompt
and effective administration of justice. Mixed tribunals
are even more dubious, because they do not have
sufficient budgets; and, despite all the efforts of the
Secretariat, they do not always provide the minimum
guarantees of due process.

Furthermore, we fully agree with the delegations
of Finland, Germany and Jordan in saying that
institutional reform is necessary so that this
Organization can contribute effectively to the
promotion of justice and the strengthening of the rule
of law.

We cannot allow a task of such importance to be
spread out among 11 different organs and departments.
We agree with the aforementioned three delegations
that this task must be assigned to a centralized body.
However, such an administrative streamlining should
not create any further confusion in the chain of
command or in the internal hierarchy of the Secretariat.

From this perspective, my delegation supports
option C in the working paper prepared by the three
delegations - in other words, my delegation supports
the creation of a new division entrusted with the
promotion of justice and strengthening the rule of law.

Finally, promotion of justice and strengthening
the rule of law cannot be confined only to post-conflict
situations. Justice is a delicate organism that requires,
in all climates, and under all latitudes, constant care if
it is to flourish. The promotion of justice and
strengthening the rule of the law by the United Nations
cannot be limited only to exceptional situations falling
under the Security Council's responsibilities. This
should not be the case. Our Organization must promote
justice and the rule of law in every single nation of the
world. From this perspective, it is worth considering
the possibility of including an item on the rule of law
on the General Assembly's agenda.

