Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mark Lowcock and commend
the outstanding work of his teams in responding
to the humanitarian emergency in Syria. I would
also like to thank the Policy Director of Physicians
for Human Rights for her briefing and for the
commitment of humanitarian and medical staff on the
ground. The assessment made by our two briefers is
irrefutable - there is a humanitarian disaster taking
place in north-west Syria. The lives of more than
3 million civilians, including 1 million children, are at
stake. Beyond the emergency response, we must focus
more than ever on three priorities.

The first is the restoration of the ceasefire in Idlib,
which is an absolute imperative. France condemns
in the strongest terms the strikes that continue
to indiscriminately target civilians and civilian
and humanitarian infrastructure. We call on the
signatories to the ceasefire agreement - Turkey and
Russia - to honour their commitments and ensure
its effective implementation in north-west Syria with
a view to establishing a nationwide ceasefire, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). Russia must
apply the necessary pressure on the regime to avoid
further violence, the primary victims of which are
civilians. Fighting the terrorist groups listed by the
United Nations is necessary, but that must never be
used as an excuse for indiscriminate bombing, which
only increases the risk of terrorism and, in particular,
the risk of the scattering of jihadists. Moreover, I
reiterate that France will be extremely firm and stands
ready to react in the event of a new, confirmed use of
chemical weapons.

Respect for international humanitarian law is
binding on all and is not negotiable. That is the second
priority. The parties to the conflict must assume
their responsibilities to protect civilians, particularly
the most vulnerable and humanitarian and medical
personnel. The targeting of civilian and humanitarian
infrastructure, such as hospitals and schools, including
those that have been deconflicted, is an unacceptable
violation of international humanitarian law. We call
on the United Nations to investigate such incidents.
The deliberate targeting of civilian infrastructure
constitutes a war crime and will not go unpunished.

Immediate, safe, secure, comprehensive,
sustainable and unhindered humanitarian access to
the entire Syrian territory must be guaranteed. That
is the regime's primary responsibility. Humanitarian
aid must be able to reach, as a matter of priority, those
most in need - women, children, displaced persons
and refugees. There is an urgent need for a new aid
convoy to be immediately deployed to Rukban camp.
We call upon those who have the means to do so to
exert the necessary pressure on the regime to ensure
such access in all areas under its control, in particular
in the territories it reclaimed in 2018, in the south-west
and in eastern Ghouta. The findings of the Human
Rights Watch report that documents the regime's
obstruction and predatory humanitarian aid practices
warrant a response. It is essential that the delivery
of humanitarian aid not be arbitrarily impeded when
supplied in accordance with the principles of neutrality,
independence, humanity and impartiality. Here, too,
the regime's supporters have a particular responsibility.

The third priority is the launching of a sustainable
political process under the auspices of the United
Nations, on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) in its
entirety. The Council mustbe united in that objective. We
fully support the Special Envoy's efforts in that regard.
We welcome his ongoing efforts and reiterate our call
for rapid progress on the political process. We call for
a credible and balanced constitutional package, both in
the composition of the committee and in its procedural
rules. It is the sole responsibility of the Special Envoy
to announce the formation of the committee and to
convene it in Geneva. Ifthe regime continues to impede
it, it will be up to the Special Envoy to tell us when he
considers that he has exhausted all possible avenues to
reach agreement on the committee. It will then be the
responsibility of the Council to decide how to proceed.

In parallel, we must now start preparing for the
holding of free and transparent elections, under the
supervision of the United Nations, and in which
all Syrians, including refugees, will participate, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). To emerge
from the Syrian tragedy, it is essential to give Syrians
an opportunity to express themselves freely about the
future of their country. That work must go hand in hand
with the pursuit of confidence-building measures that
can contribute to the establishment of a neutral and
secure environment.

Without progress on those essential points, there is
no reason for France and its partners to change their
positions on reconstruction, the lifting of sanctions
and normalization. The regime and its supporters
are continuing to destroy infrastructure, particularly
medical and educational facilities. They have already
asked the international community to finance what they
are currently destroying. That is out of the question.
There can be no military solution to the Syrian crisis.

