Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General and Mr. Tegegnework Gettu for
their detailed briefings and remarks. I also welcome
to the Council and thank Ms. Cate Blanchett, United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Goodwill
Ambassador, for her invaluable remarks.

It has been a year since the most recent outbreak
of violence in Rakhine state in Myanmar, which forced
more than 700,000 Rohingya to flee to Bangladesh.
We remain deeply worried about the humanitarian
situation, especially in Rakhine state, where hundreds
of thousands of people are waiting for our assistance.
Every day lost to bureaucratic deliberations means that
we are collectively responsible for human lives that
are perishing.

As we welcome the signing of the memorandum
of understanding among Myanmar, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
on assisting in the repatriation and resettlement
process, we also urge its full implementation and hope
that the Myanmarese authorities will fully cooperate
with United Nations agencies. We acknowledge
the information about the Myanmarese authorities'
granting of access to 23 villages and hope that UNHCR
teams will have unlimited and independent access to
those pilot project sites.

We continuously urge the Government of Myanmar
to step up its efforts to create sustainable conditions
conducive to the safe, voluntary and dignified return
of Rohingya refugees and internally displaced persons
to their homes. We believe that significant steps from
the decision-makers in Naypyidaw are needed, as
progress on the ground is insufficient. Therefore, we
are pleased to hear that further contacts between the
relevant ministries of Bangladesh and Myanmar are
being established to discuss the implementation of the
bilateral agreement signed in November 2017.

We are deeply concerned about the findings of the
report (A/HRC/39/64) of the Independent International
Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar, which was published
yesterday, in particular with regard to violations that
might amount to crimes under international law. In
that context, let us underline that, in order to stop
the recurrence of violence, the issue of impunity and
accountability for those crimes needs to be addressed.
We call upon the Government in Naypyidaw to cooperate
with the Fact-Finding Mission, including by granting
access to the country. We furthermore acknowledge the
formation of the independent commission of inquiry
by the Myanmarese authorities and hope that it will
commence a transparent and unbiased investigation of
all cases of human rights violations.

I believe that there could not be a better way to
commemorate Mr. Kofi Annan than to fully concentrate
on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Rakhine Advisory Commission, which he chaired, in
order to address the root causes of the crisis.

Before I conclude I would like to underline that we
are not forgetting that Myanmar is a developing country
with a fragile economy that is prone to natural disasters.
A comprehensive approach focused on building the
resilience of its society and supporting the State's
internal capabilities needs to be further developed. We
are aware that rebuilding Rakhine and healing the local
communities will be a long process. The international
community, after delivering immediate humanitarian
aid, should focus on developing a long-term strategy to
assist Myanmar in rebuilding and developing Rakhine
state and other parts of the country that will require
international assistance.
