Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Mr. President, allow me at
the outset to congratulate you for assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month and to thank
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Indonesia, for his successful presidency last month. I
would also like to express my gratitude to the
non-permanent members of the Security Council whose
membership concludes at the end of this month, and to
congratulate the new members of the Council, wishing
them every success in their work in the Council.

It is an honour for me to address the Council on
this historic day, as it adopts, upon the request of my
Government, the resolution for the extension of the
mandate of the multinational forces in Iraq for the last
time.

The last few months have been a decisive test for
the commitment and courage of the Government and
the people of Iraq in their efforts to establish a stable
democratic system in an exceptionally difficult
environment. Iraq has completed the establishment of
its constitutional and legal institutions and now
possesses a permanent constitution, voted upon by the
people of Iraq, a parliament representing all different
social segments of society and a national unity
Government consisting of all political parties.

The Government of Iraq has made enormous
strides towards the day when a self-sustaining Iraqi
security force would be able to provide security to the
Iraqi people. While Iraqis remain grateful to all
friendly countries that assisted in the liberation of Iraq
from the previous tyrant and dictator, Saddam Hussein,
no Iraqi Government official - indeed, no Iraqi
citizen - wants the presence of foreign troops on Iraqi
soil one day longer than they are needed. The presence
of the multinational forces in Iraq today, and for the
coming year, is essential to accomplish the mission
they started when Iraq was liberated.

It is also necessary to mention here what was
accomplished on 16 December 2007, namely, the
handover of security responsibility to the Iraqi
Government in Basra province, the second largest in
Iraq and the ninth province to be handed over to the
Iraqi Government by the multinational forces. This
handover is a positive indication that the Iraqi forces
are capable of assuming control over the important city
of Basra.
I would like to concentrate on the main
challenges facing Iraq. One such challenge is terrorism,
which is placing a heavy burden on the Government
and the people of Iraq. The security plans carried out
by the Iraqi army and the national security forces with
the assistance of the multinational forces have
contributed to surrounding the terrorists in isolated
pockets in Iraq. The remnants of Al-Qaida along with
their allies have suffered continued defeats, which is
clearly reflected in a tangibly improved security
situation in Iraq and a decline in the levels and number
of terrorist activities, together with a reduction in the
threat of civil war in the country.

We look forward to Iraq's playing an active role
in achieving stability and security in the Middle East.
Iraq aspires to become an arena where all parties can
engage in dialogue rather than a region for settling
issues. Towards that end, we initiated the neighbouring
countries' meeting and hosted the American-Iranian
dialogue in Baghdad.

The Government of Iraq has also signed a
declaration of principles with the United States with a
view to establishing a long-term cooperative and
friendly relationship between the two countries.
Establishing stability and security in Iraq reflects
positively on the security and stability of the whole
region and will contribute to the enhancement of
international peace and stability.

The Government of Iraq continues its efforts to
achieve national reconciliation, ensure expanded
political participation of all national political forces,
guarantee respect for human rights and the supremacy
of law, achieve economic growth, and provide basic
services for the Iraqi people. The Iraqi Government is
working towards the adoption of ambitious plans to
rebuild its economy on a sound and modern basis,
which would enable the Iraqi economy to contribute
effectively to the international economy.

Towards that end, the Iraqi Government, in
partnership with the United Nations, is working to
implement the initiative of the International Compact
with Iraq, which is contributing to the enhancement
and strengthening of national and international
counter-obligations in the political and economic fields
and in the areas of the rule of law, the promotion and
protection of human rights and the establishment of
democracy.

The continued efforts of the Iraqi Government
have resulted in activating a national dialogue and
reconciliation process and in disseminating tolerance,
moderation and brotherhood. The Government also
succeeded in preventing a sectarian war which had

threatened the whole country. It has supervised a
number of conferences to promote national
reconciliation, including conferences of Iraqi tribes,
political forces, civil society organizations,
intellectuals and army officers, in addition to
conferences held outside Iraq.

The Government has also sent delegations to
meet with political figures and parties in several
countries in the region. Among the main results of the
national reconciliation process is the openness and
cooperation with Iraqi tribes which has had a positive
influence in eliminating terrorist organizations and in
restoring Government control and the rule of law. The
provincial support councils, which emerged from the
national reconciliation process, are a pioneering
exercise in combating terrorism and a reflection of the
Government's strategy of not relying solely on the
military option in the handling the security situation.

The Government also succeeded in recruiting
350,000 volunteers in the army and security forces in
Iraq. It has also made progress in training and
equipping those forces and has recruited 27,500 tribal
members to combat Al-Qaida fighters. Members of a
number of factions that have split from Al-Qaida in
Baghdad and served other provinces and that have
joined training centres total more than 14,178
individuals. The Iraqi Government has also
reintegrated 73,622 officers and soldiers from
previously dismantled ministries into different Iraqi
ministries, in addition to reintegrating 21,893 officers
and soldiers into the military services. It has also re-
employed 2,586 members of the previous security
institutions into the new Ministry of Interior.

It should also be mentioned that the joint efforts
of the Iraqi and multinational forces over the last few
months have resulted in the return of 6,000 displaced
families to their homes. The joint efforts between the
forces have also resulted in the killing and detention of
the main leadership of Al-Qaida, the takeover of
thousands of weapons and ammunition depots, the
ending of sectarian killing and forced displacement all
over Iraq, the reduction of violence in Baghdad and
other provinces by more than 75 per cent, and the
tracking down of militias and all other outlaws. In
addition, the capacity and capability of the Iraqi army
and police have increased with respect to numbers and
equipment through the efforts of the Ministries of
Interior and Defence.
Despite the apparent improvement in the security
situation, we realize that Iraq needs still more time and
continued intensive efforts to enable our armed forces
to take over the security responsibilities from the
multinational forces in all of the country, as they
continue to play a very important role in supporting
and backing our troops in combating terrorism, militias
and outlaws.

My Government, while reaffirming the
importance of the role of the multinational forces,
alongside our national forces, in contributing to the
efforts to establish security and the rule of law,
requests that the Security Council consider extending
the mandate of the multinational force in the light of
Iraq's achievements over the past few years, namely
the strengthened capacity of its army and security
forces and significant successes in the security,
political and economic spheres. This progress calls for
a review of the role and authority of the MNF in order
to strike a balance between the need to extend the
mandate of the force one last time and the progress
made by Iraq in the area of security. It is also essential
for the Iraqi Government to be treated as that of an
independent and fully sovereign State.

My Government would also like to emphasize
that it welcomes today's resolution on the
understanding that the functions of recruiting, training,
arming and equipping the Iraqi army and Iraq's
security forces are the responsibility of the Iraqi
Government. The Government would also assume
responsibility for command and control of all Iraqi
forces; the MNF, in coordination with the Iraqi
Government, would provide support and backing to
those forces. The Iraqi Government would also be
responsible for arrest, detention and imprisonment
tasks; when those tasks are carried out by the MNF,
there will be maximum levels of coordination,
cooperation and understanding with the Iraqi
Government.

We welcome this resolution on the understanding
that it is the final extension of the mandate of the MNF
and expect that, in future, the Security Council will be
able to deal with the situation in Iraq without the need
for action under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations. My Government also welcomes the
reflection in the resolution of its request to include
language reaffirming respect for the independence,
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Iraq and
reaffirming further the importance of the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of Iraq.
We believe that the provisions of resolution 1546
(2004) on the deposit of proceeds into the

Development Fund for Iraq (DFI) will help to ensure
that proceeds from Iraq's natural resources are used to
serve the interests of the Iraqi people. The role played
by the International Advisory and Monitoring Board
serves the same purpose. We recognize that the DFI
plays an important role in helping Iraq to convince
donors and creditors that it is managing its resources
and debts in a reasonable way, in the interest of the
Iraqi people. Towards that end, the Government of Iraq
has requested the Security Council to continue to apply
the provisions of paragraph 22 of resolution 1483
(2003) until 31 December 2008, including in respect of
the funds, financial assets, and economic resources
described in paragraph 23 of resolution 1483 (2003).

Before concluding, I would like to stress that for
Iraq to achieve its goals, development programmes and
reconstruction, Iraq must be capable of advancing
itself; it should release itself from the legacy of the
former regime and be liberated from its financial
burdens. Iraq is still suffering from the heavy burden of
compensation for the invasion of Kuwait by the
Saddam regime, and it remains in need of the support
of the international community and donor countries.
Iraq has paid large sums, which add up to more than
$22 billion - and it continues to pay.

In this regard, I would like to highlight the letter
of the Prime Minister annexed to the resolution, in
which he requested the Security Council to review its
resolutions relating to the deposit of 5 per cent of
Iraq's proceeds from oil into the Compensation Fund
with a view to reducing that percentage as much as
possible. The deposit of such a high percentage creates
a financial burden for the Iraqi people at a time when it
is in dire need of those funds to rebuild its
infrastructure. Furthermore, the increase in oil prices
means that the real amount represented by that 5 per
cent is at least five times what it was.

Finally, allow me to express our gratitude and
appreciation to all members of the Security Council, to
the United Nations and to all friendly and brotherly
countries who have assisted the Government and the
people of Iraq in ending long decades of dictatorship
and injustice and in building a democratic, federal and
prosperous Iraq in which generations will enjoy the
fruits of security, stability and prosperity.

