Mr. Pronk: There was a question concerning the
south, which is, of course a question concerning the
country as a whole. It concerned the elections provided
for in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. There is
no concrete reason to expect that they will not take
place. However, nobody is preparing for them. We
need a census before elections, and preparations for the
census are lagging so far behind that it will be a big
problem to have the elections take place in time. It is
being discussed politically at the moment; so far it is
not being discussed in the institutions. We are
preparing for elections within our mandate, but we
cannot organize or start elections; we can only
facilitate and support them.

I thank delegations for their questions concerning
Darfur. They all related to what I said about the short-
term plan, the delinking and the longer run. Let me try
to focus on these three issues.

First, members of the Security Council will
remember that for the short run - and this means
between now and the end of the year - I said to
broaden the basis of support and secure a truce,
because there is more and more fighting at the moment.
Reform the Ceasefire Commission, get a better Darfur
Peace Agreement (DPA) and avoid a collision course.

The question was addressed to me of how the
Ceasefire Commission came about. Agreement was
reached on 9 May. When we got the mandate for the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) from
the Security Council in resolution 1590 (2005) of
24 March 2005, I instructed the UNMIS Commander to
call for the first meeting of the Ceasefire Joint Military
Committee (CJMC) on 24 March - right away. The
Ceasefire Commission did not meet after the signing of
the DPA. It was postponed and postponed and
postponed. That was the first major blunder. There
were no meetings - but there were violations. The

Minni Minawi faction attacked the Abdul Wahid
faction, and it later withdrew; there was conflict
between G19 and the Government. None of these
violations were ever addressed: there was no meeting.
So the message was that you can violate without being
sanctioned. This was exactly the same situation as in
the Ceasefire Commission after the N'djamena
Ceasefire Agreement of 8 April 2004. The whole idea
was to build something new. But it was not new; it was
the same. That was the first problem.

The second problem was that after they started
meeting, six weeks later, the two signatories, the
Government and Minni Minawi, were brought together,
and they became allies. They said that all the others
should first sign and then they could join. So you had
ceasefire violations of the previous agreements as well,
which had been signed by Abdul Wahid and others.
They could not be discussed at the meeting, because
half of the parties to the fight were not allowed to be
present. You are being attacked, but you must sign first
and then you can participate in the meeting. Of course,
they did not do this.

I presented six options to solve the problem:
subcommittees, et cetera. They were all rejected.

The DPA says that Darfur should be brought into
a system of demilitarized zones, buffer zones and
neutral zones. This zoning should be done by the
Ceasefire Commission. There was no zoning exercise
whatsoever. It ought to have started before a specific
deadline. The deadline meant nothing anymore. Every
deadline was simply shifted aside. There was no
zoning. Instead of the zoning, which ought to have
been based on the status quo on the date of the signing,
parties started to increase their own zones by fighting.
And they could do so, because nobody said that it
should not be done or that it was a violation: they did
not meet, or if they met, the issue could not be raised
by the parties because they themselves were doing it.

The Janjaweed disarmament plan is, of course,
the most important thing, but the word has hardly been
mentioned. It was presented by the Government -
late - but at least there was a plan. That plan should
have been discussed, addressed and approved - or
disapproved and then improved through the Ceasefire
Commission. It has not been discussed so far in the
Commission. But it is the most important issue.

The United Nations is only an observer. I myself
was in Abuja in order to get the United Nations as a
member, but the international community was not
interested. So we are an observer. I send my Deputy
Force Commander, who is not just any person, to the
Commission meetings - assuming they take place.
Very often, when he arrives by plane at Al-Fashir, they
say "Oh, the meeting is not taking place; it has been
postponed because the Government is not yet ready",
or whatever. This has happened four times. If the
meeting takes place and if he raises an issue, he is
silenced. The United States, also an observer at the
Commission, is also being silenced. The European
Union, as a member, does not protest against the
silencing of the United Nations in the Ceasefire
Commission.

The Commission is dead in its present form. I am
withdrawing my Deputy Force Commander from the
meetings, because he cannot speak anyway. He is not
allowed to raise issues. That is the answer to the
question.

The Ceasefire Commission has to be reformed,
renewed, to make it independent and fully
representative for everybody who is fighting to get a
ceasefire. And it must be authoritative, as the CJMC is
in the south: it has had dozens of meetings. Parties
come, and they fight in the meetings. That is definitely
what you have to do. But then they reach a kind of
conclusion, and we see implementation. We send our
monitors through the whole of south Sudan, and they
raise issues. The system is tripartite, and if one of the
parties does not show up for some reason, we leave. In
the Ceasefire Commission, the parties can say, "Well,
we do not have monitors". That is not a tripartite
system. The monitors cannot go to see, question and
investigate what is going on in Darfur. The Ceasefire
Commission is also in a coma. That is the answer.

It has to be improved and renewed. Otherwise,
fighting and violations will continue, and nothing will
be implemented. This means that you also have to
bring all the other groups into the Ceasefire
Commission. Some of them did not want to sign, but
they did not fight. They said that they would abide by
previous agreements, from N'djamena onwards. We
had quite a number of agreements, and they did abide.
One did not - a new group, the New Redemption
Front (NRF) - and they carried out an attack in West
Kordofan. That was truly a very bad start to the month
of July. But, as I said, since then they are constantly
being attacked. Now it is an all-out war between the
Government and that new movement.

You have to talk with them: they have power,
they have weapons, and they want to talk. But if all
you do is to tell them that they must first stop and then
can join, it is not going to happen, whether you like it
or not. And the aim, of course, is to achieve peace on
the ground.

Bring all of them on board - in the Ceasefire
Commission and in all the other committees. The more
you say that they should stay out of all the institutions
of the DPA, the more the constituency of all these
groups will lose faith in the DPA. It is a self-fulfilling
prophecy at the moment. That is why you have to
broaden this process.

This also means that although the DPA is a good
text in itself, you have to start talking again, and you
have to find a way to start talking without calling the
talks a re-opening. Such a diplomatic trick can always
be found. But you must add a number of issues without
reducing what is in the DPA. What are some of those
issues? The representative of Ghana mentioned
compensation and wealth. As for compensation, I
definitely agree. It is a small amount of money. Thirty
million dollars for, I would say, 2 million refugees and
internally displaced persons is not enough. But in the
DPA it is said that the initial figure is $30 million. So if
you raised it to $200 million, bringing us to a
reasonable amount of money per family, even in their
own view, you would not violate the DPA because it
only said "initially" $30 million. So you can be
creative; you could easily use some of the international
money designated as reconstruction funds, for
example, for a purpose like this.

Secondly, how can we bring about further
improvement? I think Minni Minawi should, with his
faction, take a step backwards. He occupies many
positions: he is Senior Assistant to the President and
Chair of the Transitional Darfur Regional Authority as
well - if it starts. He has it all. To bring the others on
board, put international pressure on him to take a step
backwards in order to give others some room. It might
be helpful. That is not a violation of the DPA because
nowhere does it say that one person should have all
those positions. It could be done differently. You could
play with the numbers with regard to the groups in the
councils: instead of 20, make it 25 and so forth.
Playing with the numbers merely to renegotiate some

other numbers without really changing the overall
agreement is always possible. This is also face-saving
for leaders of those other movements, who have to
inform their own constituencies that some talks have
taken place and that they got something, so that it is
now really worthwhile to sign the agreement.

Then, of course, there is the disarmament of the
Janjaweed. The representative of Ghana is quite right
that money is important for these people. However, the
most important reason why the people on the ground
do not believe in the DPA is their fear of the
Janjaweed. That is the overriding issue. If you go into
the field - to the Jebel Marra or the camps - the
people always ask, "What about the Janjaweed and the
DPA?" They will do anything to stop the Janjaweed. It
is true. The Government says that it is not true, but
there are indications that quite a number of the
Janjaweed have been incorporated into the security
force. That may be good or not good. It is a specific
way to disarm. In any case, the people on the ground,
who have always said that everything is one and the
same body, think that this is still the case. This is
extremely important. In order to get the people to
accept the DPA, the Janjaweed should be stopped. And
that is not happening - the contrary is true.

This brings me to the question of the de-linking. I
use that word for a number of reasons. De-link what
you have to do today from what you have to do
tomorrow. I use today and tomorrow nearly literally.
Today we must address these points, which I have
mentioned, relating to broadening, a truce and reform
of both the Ceasefire Commission and the DPA. Why
the need for de-linking? The most important thing is
peace on the ground. You get a peace agreement in
order to facilitate a peace on the ground, and you get a
robust international force in order to monitor a good
peace agreement. Make the robust force the instrument,
not the objective. It is an instrument to reach an
objective.

This year, understandably, nearly all of the talk
was about the force, the robust force, and the specific
form of the force. But had to be done on the ground in
order to get the people behind the peace agreement
gradually receded beyond the horizon.

De-link: support the African Union Mission in the
Sudan (AMIS). AMIS can be a good force; they were
in the beginning. They are less so at the moment for
quite a number of reasons. Do not ask me to elaborate.

Support for AMIS can, of course, be made conditional
upon the transition, but then you do not de-link it. A
very strong force must be on the ground as soon as
possible in order to protect the people. If supporting
AMIS is dependent on the acceptance of the transition,
the force will be postponed because the transition will
not be easily accepted.

So de-link; and do it. Make the force as robust as
possible. That is the terminology I have always used in
the Council, without saying that it should be from the
African Union or from the United Nations. Members
will remember the terminology that I have always
used: Robust, strong, big and broad. Broad mandates
like the one outlined in resolution 1706 (2006), which
is a good, broad mandate, are better mandates for a
force than previous mandates. A bigger force must be
mandated - 17,000 or 18,000 - and it must be
deployed everywhere.

Regarding the discussions on the transition, I ask
members to accept my advice from the field; they have
the right to my advice. Resolution 1706 (2006)
"invites" (para. 1) the Government to give its consent
to the transition. The Council said under the presidency
of the United Kingdom that there would be
consultation and that there would not be any force
against the consent of the Government. This means that
the Council will have to acquire that consent. It will
not acquire that consent by repeating that they have to
consent. That is not politics. So, make it attractive.
Everybody thinks at the moment that the next meeting
between a specific aide from one country and a
diplomat from another country will perhaps create that
consent. It will not. The underlying factors at the
moment have to be analysed. Why does the
Government of the Sudan not give its consent?
Whether you like it or not, analyse the underlying
factors.

The Government of the Sudan bears
responsibility for devilish, atrocious acts, especially in
2003; less now, but in particular during the past. Let
me play devil's advocate. The Council must understand
Khartoum. How does one get their consent? Either one
must make the offer attractive in the present situation,
or in some other way.

First, here is how to make it attractive. A
consultation - a negotiation, because they are an
equal partner - might also result in a package,
whereby they accept the transition and they get, for

instance, commitments: economically, debt relief;
trade, lifting of the sanctions; security, staying in
power and security cooperation. The Government of
the Sudan is anti-United Nations and anti-West in
terms of peacekeeping, not only because they are
angry, but also because there is fear of radical groups
which will attack the Government itself. The beheading
of Mr. Taha, the likes of which was certain to happen
eventually, as a signal, is a phenomenon that has spread
fear throughout Khartoum.

There are groups that will attack the Government
if the Government says "yes" to the big Powers of the
world. Those groups are there and are coming, so there
is also some legitimate fear. Devilish things have
happened in Africa, but you have to negotiate. You
have to analyse the underlying structural forces - I
just mentioned some of them - in order to get
consent. You must try, rather than just say you have to
accept. It does not work.

If you study all the statements made by all the
leaders in the Sudan since about 10 February, they have
been consistent. You cannot accuse the Government of
the Sudan of not having been very clear and consistent.
It says no, and it gets more and more support for that
"no". Even the friends of the United Nations and the
friends of the CPA - Vice-President Taha was here in
this Chamber a year ago - have made a very clear
anti-transition statement. Those who are in favour of
the transition in the Sudan have no power whatsoever.
Mini Minawi is used up. He has no power. The Sudan
People's Liberation Movement speaks but will not
make it a political issue, and the Government's
opposition - the other parties - do not have the
people on the streets, and the Government knows that.

The consent will not be given very easily, so we
have to talk, even with people who have carried out or
were responsible for atrocious things in the past. I
think it would be wise to think ahead. If the
Government does not accept the invitation - "accept
the invitation" is the language used - it might be
useful to begin thinking ahead already, because to ask
every time for another month of the presence of the
African Union is not in the interests of the people over
there. They are scared in Darfur.

There are, of course, also other options. You can
define transition. What type? The Security Council has
the right to my advice, even if it is not exactly the same
language which it has laid down in the resolution.
Chapter VIII is difficult, I know, but Chapter VIII is a
possibility. It is a possibility on the basis of the
Charter. The Government, I am certain, will accept
Chapter VIII. It has made that clear already.

Another possibility is major support, financed out
of the United Nations budget, not by going around
from one capital in the North to another capital in the
North to beg. Major United Nations structural support
for the African Union in order to make it really
effective is also a possibility. I think the Government
would accept that - an African Union force, but very
strongly embedded in United Nations support that is
secured for the long run, with all the expertise
necessary, but still called an African Union force. That
would be a face-saving device for the Government of
the Sudan. It comes close to what I proposed to the
Security Council one and a half years ago at the same
meeting - a joint African Union/United Nations
operation.

That is only plan B. It would come into effect
only after the invitation is not accepted, but at a certain
moment I think it will be necessary, given the present
political configuration, to think about what is possible
and, at the same time, effective. We have been very
disappointed by the African Union over the past couple
of months, and what I have said about the Ceasefire
Commission adds to that, because it is being led by the
African Union. But it is not inherently weak; it can be
much better. It can be helped, also, to be much better,
as it was in the last couple of months of 2004 and in
2005. It can be improved again.

Predictions for the longer run, very briefly, only
make sense if, in the short term, such changes are
accepted. Secondly, it is extremely important to deal
with the root causes of the problem in Darfur, so we
have also to talk with the people - Arabs, Arab tribes,
nomads - whose interests are also at stake. If they do
not think that their interests are going to be preserved,
that is again a source of conflict. That has to be
addressed in the Darfur-Darfur dialogue. The
preparations and the whole dialogue have not yet
started. It is necessary to do that as soon as possible
with all groups, not only those that have taken sides,
and particularly with the others that would find a

reason to continue to use their weapons rather than to
find a solution that is related to other land-tenure
systems and to the sharing of water. All those issues
have to be brought into that framework.

I wish it would have been possible for the United
Nations to lead the Darfur-Darfur dialogue. I have
always asked, in our internal discussions, for the
United Nations to be given the political lead on Darfur
and the African Union the military. The Darfur-Darfur
dialogue would have been different.

We must also deal with reconciliation. It is
extremely important. The tribal dimension in Darfur is
underrated in its effect and its importance. There are
major tribal problems. I can say, for instance, that in
July the biggest number of casualties - people
dead - were not the result of attacks by the parties on
civilians; 150 people were killed because of a tribal
conflict that was not related in any way to the war in
the South Sudan. As is so often the case, dozens upon
dozens of deaths are the results of tribal conflict. It is
underestimated. It has to be brought together; it is all
related to economic, land, water and other specific
issues.

We have also to discuss returns and to set an
example - not an overall return for each and every
body at the same time, but a start to the process
regionally, locally, in order to show, with the help of
protective forces, that it does work and that those
people can go back and start to produce their own food
again, so that confidence is built gradually.

I would give that process a number of years.
Darfur and the addressing of the root problems cannot
be solved in a year or two. It will take as many years as
we are giving to the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan in the framework of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. That is at least seven years.

