I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing. We have also studied very carefully the report of the Secretary-General on cross-line and cross- border operations in Syria (S/2020/401). We welcome the presence of colleagues from Syria and from Turkey to participate in this meeting. China is paying close attention to the humanitarian situation in Syria. We are worried that the humanitarian situation could be further exacerbated by the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We welcome the ceasefire appeals made by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, and we call on all parties to enhance mutual trust and jointly safeguard the well-being of the Syrian people. As we have stated repeatedly, the Syrian Government bears the primary responsibility for improving the humanitarian situation in Syria, including preventing and containing the spread of COVID-19. Its role cannot be replaced. The Syrian Government has taken responsive measures to raise public awareness of the virus and reduce the risk of community transmission. Those efforts should be acknowledged. We encourage the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, other United Nations agencies and the international community to help strengthen Syria's capacity to respond to the pandemic. China has provided medical assistance to Syria to combat COVID-19, and we will continue to do so. Concerning cross-line humanitarian assistance, we are pleased to see improvement in the scale of such operations. The Syrian Government has maintained close contact with the United Nations in conducting cross-line operations as well aS assessment missions. We encourage further cooperation and coordination in that regard. The relevant parties should enhance political dialogue and remove all obstacles that hinder cross-line humanitarian access to the north-west and north-east of Syria. With regard to cross-border humanitarian assistance, our position has been clear and consistent. We agree that all forms of humanitarian operations should be modified to meet the new challenges posed by the pandemic and take into full account the needs of the Syrian people. Meanwhile, we should remember that the cross-border mechanism was established as a contingency or temporary measure. The sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria must be respected under any circumstance. It is also our view that the humanitarian issue in Syria should be dealt with in an integrated and impartial way. We call on all parties to continue to engage in a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned political process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). Civilians and their livelihoods must be protected. In that connection, we reiterate the urgency of the immediate lifting of unilateral sanctions, which not only hinder medical supplies, but also undermine a country's capacity to mobilize resources, develop its economy and improve people's livelihoods. There is no way to justify unilateral sanctions. We call for more analysis on the humanitarian implications of sanctions in future reports on the Syrian humanitarian issue.
