Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): The
unanimous adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) by the
Security Council today is a glimmer of hope in the
distressing picture of the conflict ravaging Syria.

The conflict has created unimaginable suffering. A
year ago we mourned the deaths of 100,000 people; that
number has probably doubled since then. Some 3 million
refugees have fled Syria, and their numbers are growing
with every passing day. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 10.8 million
people in Syria - half of them children - are in urgent
need of humanitarian assistance. Some 6.4 million
individuals have been internally displaced in Syria,
and more than 4.5 million live in areas difficult or
impossible to access for humanitarian workers. Among
the crimes perpetrated daily, in particular by the Syrian
armed forces, I note the bombing of hospitals and
schools, intentional attacks on health staff, attacks on
humanitarian convoys, the indiscriminate use of barrel
bombs, and starvation as a weapon of war so as to bring
besieged populations to their knees.

In order to protect civilians caught in the cross-
hairs of this war, the Security Council has repeatedly
called on parties to the conflict to respect international
humanitarian law. That was the thrust of presidential
statement S/PRST/2013/15 that the Council adopted on
2 October 2013, as well as the direct intention behind
resolution 2139 (2014), adopted four months ago with a
view to improving humanitarian access to the affected
populations. It was also the idea behind draft resolution
S/2014/348, blocked by a double veto two months
ago, which sought to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.

Since the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014), the
humanitarian situation in Syria has only deteriorated. In
his latest report on the implementation of the resolution
(S/2014/427), the Secretary-General is forced to note
that the primary obstacle to humanitarian access is
the deliberate decision of the Syrian authorities to
systematically prohibit the delivery of vital supplies.
Month after month, the Syrian authorities have
confiscated medication and surgical equipment intended
for the most vulnerable sector of the population living
in areas controlled by the opposition. Month after
month, the Syrian authorities have continued to block
humanitarian convoys at crossing points identified by
the United Nations as priorities. As a result, month after
month the number of Syrians deprived of humanitarian
assistance has only grown.

Given all this, as well as Syria's blatant
non-compliance with resolution 2139 (2014), the
sponsors of resolution 2165 (2014) - Australia, Jordan
and Luxembourg - were forced to seek other ways
and means to ensure that humanitarian assistance
reaches more Syrians wherever they may live, be it in
areas controlled by the Syrian Government or by the
opposition, and that humanitarian assistance is not
instrumentalized by the Syrian authorities to political
and military ends. That is the basic goal of the new
resolution.

The provisions of resolution 2165 (2014) are clear
and legally binding. They are based on the observation
that the ongoing deterioration of the humanitarian
situation threatens peace and security in the region. In
adopting resolution 2165 (2014), the Security Council
has taken decisions that leave no room for ambiguity or
uncertainty. The United Nations humanitarian bodies
and their partners are authorized to transport aid to Syria
through four additional crossing points in neighbouring
countries - two on the border with Turkey, one on the
border with Iraq and one on the border with Jordan. The
use of those additional border crossings should allow
assistance to reach between 1.4 and 2 million people
who have hitherto been inaccessible to humanitarian
workers.

The consent of the Syrian authorities will no longer
be necessary. The monitoring mechanism, established
under the auspices of the Secretary-General for an
initial period of six months, provides for a simple
notification system. Resolution 2165 (2014) also
affirms that the United Nations and its partners are
authorized to use routes that cross conflict lines so as
to bring aid through the most direct channels to those
who are in need. The United Nations and its partners
can distribute medical and surgical supplies without
interference from Damascus.

The delivery of humanitarian assistance should
begin immediately and without hindrance throughout
Syria on the basis of needs assessed by the United
Nations, rather than by Damascus. Resolution 2165
(2014) is an operational, specific and innovative
document. We sincerely hope that it will facilitate a true
breakthrough on the ground. Ifresolution 2165 (2014) is
not complied with and resolution 2139 (2014) continues
to suffer the same fate, the Security Council has clearly
affirmed that supplementary measures will be taken.

In voting today, the Security Council has prioritized
shared humanity and the common concern for the
interests and vital needs of the Syrian people. We are
proud to have actively contributed to this, alongside our
Australian and Jordanian colleagues. The humanitarian
distaster will nevertheless persist and continue to have
a serious impact on neighbouring countries so long as
a political solution to the Syrian conflict is not found.
I should therefore like to conclude by expressing the
hope that the Security Council's newfound unanimity
and the appointment on 10 July of Mr. Staffan De
Mistura as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria will breathe new life into the search for a political
solution.

