Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
brotherly delegation of Kuwait for convening this open
meeting of the Security Council. We are grateful to
the Council members that supported the call for this
meeting. We appreciate the comprehensive briefings by
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the Assistant Secretary-General of the Department
of Political Affairs.

Bangladesh continues to acknowledge the
international community's support in providing
life-saving humanitarian assistance to more than
1 million people forcibly displaced from Myanmar's
Rakhine state. In the coming months, we will further
strengthen efforts to improve shelters in preparation for
the onset of the monsoon. We are providing informal
education for children and adolescents in order to
develop enabling skills and expanding spaces accessible
to women and girls in order to help to further amplify
their voices in decisions that impact on their future.

We appreciate the Council's sustained engagement
through the implementation of presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/22, adopted by consensus last year.
Among other priorities, it is evident that our shared
objective is to ensure the voluntary, safe and dignified
return of the people forcibly displaced from Myanmar's
Rakhine state to their original homes, or somewhere
close. That critically depends on their perception of the
situation on the ground to be conducive to their safe
and sustainable return, with their rights restored and
without the fear of reprisal. Our experience with the
verification process for return so far makes it apparent
that that has not been the case, as also recounted by the
High Commissioner for Refugees. A series of emerging
investigative reports about evidence oftargeted killings
and the discovery of mass graves in Rohingya villages
in northern Rakhine state last year also perhaps explains
the prevailing reluctance to repatriation among those
forcibly displaced.

We are currently in discussions with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) with regard to the voluntary, safe and
dignified return of the Rohingya. We continue to
urge the Myanmar authorities to involve UNHCR in
the repatriation process in order to build confidence
and trust among the returnees. We are also working
closely with other relevant United Nations agencies
and humanitarian actors to deal with the daunting
challenges to provide succour to the Rohingya.

As envisaged in the bilateral documents concluded
between our two Governments, it would be helpful to
see tangible progress in realizing the commitments
made by the Myanmar side, including with regard
to implementing the practical and far-reaching
recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, led by Mr. Kofi Annan. However, on that
particular aspect, we have yet to see any specific results
beyond a professed intention in the form of setting up a
number of high-level entities. As recommended by the
Advisory Commission, without a comprehensive rights-
based approach, finding a lasting peaceful solution to
the situation in Rakhine state will continue to pose a
challenge to the Myanmar authorities.

One major restraining factor to voluntary return
among the forcibly displaced is the fact that, despite
Myanmar's claims to the contrary, the influx of the
Rohingya into Bangladesh continues unabated to
date. According to reports, the remaining Rohingya
based in northern Rakhine state continue to cross the
border to escape from hunger, hostility and abuse. In
only the first 10 days of this month, a total of 1,500
new arrivals have been recorded on the Bangladesh
side. Those latest entrants have cited the following as
grounds for their continued exodus: persistent threats
from both security forces and armed vigilantes and the
occurrence of sporadic and indiscriminate violence;
an acute food shortage and forced starvation due to
the constraints imposed on harvesting their crops; the
burning down of and denial of access to local markets,
the cut-off of essential supplies, theft of livestock and
restriction on humanitarian assistance; the forced
closure of businesses and a lack of livelihood options;
and the alleged abduction of girls and young women, as
well as sexual violence and enslavement.

That unfolding situation is largely corroborated by
the case of approximately 6,000 displaced Rohingya,
who are currently staying in no man's land or on
the zero line of the border between Bangladesh and
Myanmar. So far, those people have refrained from
entering Bangladesh and have reportedly expressed
their willingness to return to their own villages in safety
and to gain access to their lands and other livelihood
opportunities. They have also reportedly asked for the
restoration of their basic rights, including freedom
of movement. Regrettably, however, the Myanmar
authorities appear to have opted for compelling those
people to leave the area and have proposed verification
as a precondition for their return despite the fact that
they have not crossed over to the other side of the
border. We reiterate that, given the current situation on
the ground, the early resettlement of those people from
no man's land could in fact work as a crucial test for
rebuilding the confidence to return among the forcibly
displaced people in Bangladesh.

In order to carry out advocacy among the prospective
returnees, Bangladesh has sought information from
Myanmar about the preparations made in Rakhine state
with regard to the rebuilding of villages, resettlement
plans, the provision of livelihood assistance, access to
basic services and safety arrangements, as envisaged in
the arrangement signed between our two Governments
last month. In response, the Myanmar authorities have
shared information related to the construction of two
reception centres and a transit camp on their side of
the border. The repatriation process was scheduled to
begin on 23 January. The process in fact started by
establishingjoint working groups on 15 January.

The prospective returnees have made it clear that
they do not expect to go back to Myanmar to stay in
camps. They would like to have assurance from the
international community about the possibility of the
following: first, resettlement in their original villages,
not in closed camps; secondly, the restoration of their
agricultural land and business ventures; thirdly, the
right to cultivate and harvest their land and to run their
business ventures; fourthly, the right to traditional
fishing; fifthly, access to local markets; and sixthly,
freedom of movement to conduct a normal life.

A number offorcibly displaced people in Bangladesh
have also put forward claims for compensation for the
arson and damage to their homes and property during
the most recent cycles of violence. In the aftermath of
the arson, there have been reports of confiscation of
land and abandoned property by the local authorities,
which understandably acts as a deterrent to return.
There have also been reports of the bulldozing and
clearing of villages in northern Rakhine state that would
not only eliminate features of recognition to establish
ownership rights, but would also seek to wipe out
any remaining proof or evidence of alleged atrocities
committed against the forcibly displaced people.

It remains a matter of concern that the Human
Rights Council's fact-finding mission continues to be
denied access to Rakhine state. It is imperative that
demonstrable efforts be made to ensure accountability
for alleged crimes as part of efforts to heal the trauma
suffered by the Rohingya and restore their confidence
in the possibility of sustainable return. It is a matter of
ongoing concern that northern Rakhine state remains
out of the reach of international media and that very
little humanitarian access to the affected people is
allowed through relevant United Nations agencies and
their local and international partners.

As recommended by the Council, Bangladesh
remains engaged in good faith with Myanmar to
create a situation conducive to the sustainable return
of the Rohingya and other displaced communities. We
have based our pronouncements and approach only
on facts and steered clear of vilifying any individual
or the friendly people of Myanmar. Even though the
Rohingya humanitarian crisis is often projected as a
bilateral issue between Bangladesh and Myanmar, it
needs to be acknowledged that the present crisis is the
result of systematic discriminatory and abusive policies
pursued by the Myanmar authorities over decades. Our
Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina therefore
categorically said in her statement at the General
Assembly last year, "The crisis has its root in Myanmar
and its solution has to be found in Myanmar".

To that end, we urge the Security Council to
act as the custodian of the process on behalf of the
international community. Council members have once
again demonstrated their readiness to do so by offering
a number of constructive recommendations that we
hope the Myanmar authorities will duly acknowledge
and act upon. We are confident that the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy will be able to serve as a
conduit for the international community's meaningful
engagement with Myanmar.

In this context, we reiterate our suggestion that the
Council undertake a visit to Bangladesh and Myanmar
in order to witness the humanitarian situation on
the ground and add momentum to the repatriation
process in response to the legitimate aspii tions of
the Rohingya and other displaced communities. The
voluntary return of forcibly displaced people can take
place only under the assurance ofnon-criminalization,
non-discrimination and sustainable resettlement and
reintegration. For its part, Bangladesh will continue
to seek the international community's engagement in

making sure that the bilateral instruments that we have
so painstakingly put in place will deliver desired results
for the most persecuted minority in the world.

