Ms. Juul (Norway): For years we have heard
warnings of the imminent collapse of the Palestinian
economy. While the socio-economic situation remains
dire, there have been some positive developments.
Support from donors has increased. Negotiations
between the parties continue. The Palestinian Authority
is implementing key projects. But beyond those
achievements, it is hard to see even the outlines of a
sustainable Palestinian economy, unless Israel delivers
on its promises to lift restrictions.

Economic growth is key to political progress. The
international donor community has spent years
supporting Palestinian institution-building and
promoting accountability. Actions such as Israel's
recent restrictions on money transfers to Palestinian
banks in the Gaza Strip undermine Palestinian
institutions. If the Palestinian Authority is unable to
pay salaries, it will lose popular support. With
restrictions on money transfers, the United Nations is
unable to pay its staff and disburse emergency support.
Such restrictions undermine legitimate institutions,
bolster the black market economy and embolden
radical organizations.

Settlement activity continues to increase in the
West Bank. Israel's 2007 census shows that the settler
population increased from 130,000 in 1995 to more
than 270,000 today. Israel deserves recognition for the
evacuation of an unlawfully occupied house in Hebron
two weeks ago, but we remain deeply concerned about
the emerging pattern of destruction of Palestinian
houses and evictions of Palestinian families. Those
actions are contrary to international law and prejudice
the outcome of future negotiations.
Israeli settlements and closures have evolved into
a coherent infrastructure throughout the occupied
territories. That infrastructure strangles the Palestinian
economy, undermines Palestinian institutions and
prevents the development of a Palestinian State.
Settlements and closures have become a fundamental
threat to the vision of two States.

We have seen dangerous fragmentation on the
Palestinian side. Militant Palestinians continue to
undercut bilateral negotiations by indiscriminately
aiming their violence at Israeli civilians. Negotiations
may come to naught unless they are supported by
Palestinian unity. Support for renewed reconciliation
efforts is urgently needed, along with an effective
ceasefire in and around the Gaza Strip.

We are faced today by political uncertainty on
many fronts. Decisive action by key stakeholders is
needed to support ongoing negotiations. As donors we
need to remind ourselves of the connection between
financial support and political results. We must join our
efforts to support the peace process. Fragmentation
among donors will only harm the prospects for peace.

We welcome the recent adoption of resolution
1850 (2008), which, in paragraph 4, calls on donors "to
assist in the development of the Palestinian economy,
to maximize the resources available to the Palestinian
Authority, and to contribute to the Palestinian
institution-building programme in preparation for
statehood".

The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee remains the key
instrument for mobilizing and coordinating donor
support, working in tandem with the Annapolis
process. We have succeeded in mobilizing today's high
levels of contributions to the Palestinian Authority
under the able leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas
and Prime Minister Salam Fayyad. The Committee's
meeting in September of this year confirmed the
renewed commitment of all parties - Israel, the
Palestinian Authority and donors - to support the
creation of a Palestinian State. The willingness of
donors to continue to support the process depends upon
whether the parties achieve results. But the opportunity
is there and momentum must be consolidated to
achieve a negotiated solution to the conflict and the
establishment of a viable Palestinian State.

