Mr. Kickert (Austria): I would like to thank
Indonesia for convening this open debate on the
protection of civilians on the occasion of the twentieth
anniversary of the protection of civilians agenda.

Austria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the
Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians and
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union. In my national capacity, I would like,
in all brevity, to highlight three points.

First, I would like to make the important connection
between the twentieth anniversary of the protection of
civilians agenda this year and the twentieth anniversary
of the women and peace and security agenda next year.
Both of these issues highlight the crucial importance of
placing human security at the centre of our collective
actions. Only by identifying and addressing actions
that endanger the security of every individual, as well
as involving all of society, can we take steps towards
sustainable peace. Among many worrisome current
trends, we continue to see unlawful attacks and threat
of attacks against educational institutions. Austria is a
proud supporter of the Safe Schools Declaration, and we
will participate in the third International Conference on
Safe Schools. We hope that, on that occasion, we will
be able to welcome many more States as supporters of
the Declaration.

Secondly, as in previous years, we thank the
Secretary-General for his excellent report (S/2019/373).
We note with particular concern that the report continues
to highlight the grave consequences of urban warfare,
including from the use of explosive weapons in densely
populated areas. For that reason, Austria will host an
international conference on protecting civilians in
urban warfare, which will take place on 1 and 2 October
in Vienna. We look forward to broad participation
at the conference and hope that it will contribute to
raising awareness and strengthening the debate centred
on finding concrete solutions. We will also host a side
event on the margins of today's open debate tomorrow,
Friday, 24 May, on protecting civilians from the use of
explosive weapons in populated areas, which will take
place in Conference Room D.

Thirdly, as the protection of civilians has become
an integral part of many United Nations peacekeeping
missions, we need to make sure that peacekeepers are
well-prepared to fulfil their protection of civilians
mandates, including through adequate training to
implement those mandates. In that light, Austria offers
two United Nations-certified courses annually aimed at
creating better awareness of the protection of civilians
at the operational level. The recent renewal of the
certification of those courses for another four years
serves to underline their continuous importance and
high quality.

Lastly, let me repeat our call for full compliance
with international humanitarian law. Austria continues
to be a strong supporter of strengthening compliance
with international humanitarian law. In that regard, we
remain steadfast in our support for the International
Criminal Court as a central means of combating
impunity for atrocity crimes.

