Mrs. Viotti: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
invitation to brief the Security Council in my capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission. I would also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, for his briefing and for his work
as Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). I also welcome
the presence among us of His Excellency Ambassador
Joao Soares Da Gama, Permanent Representative of
Guinea-Bissau.

Since I last briefed the Council, Guinea-Bissau
has made important strides towards sustainable peace.
During the past months, the country's institutions have
been able to maintain political stability and sustain
economic growth. They have also managed to
withstand two potentially destabilizing events, which
occurred a few days apart: the incident of 26 December
2011 and the demise of President Malam Bacai Sanha,
on 9 January. The national authorities and the people of
Guinea-Bissau overcame those difficult moments with
political maturity and in full respect of the relevant
provisions of the country's Constitution.

When facing the unexpected challenge of dealing
with the presidential succession, the national
leadership opted for steering the process in an inclusive
and consultative manner. Interim President Raimundo
Pereira opened up broad consultations with all political
forces, including the opposition. In accordance with the
Constitution, he scheduled the polls within 60 days of
the President's demise, notwithstanding the huge
logistical and financial challenges that that decision
entailed.

The Guinea-Bissau configuration has endeavoured
to extend immediate and concrete support to the country
at this most delicate juncture. It met on 6 February to
exchange views and to promote support and resource
mobilization for the elections. The international
community's timely and generous response has
demonstrated its confidence in Guinea-Bissau during
these challenging times.
5

According to electoral observers, including from

the African Union, the Economic Community of West

African States and the Community of Portuguese-

speaking Countries, the first round of the presidential

elections was considered to have been free, fair and
transparent.

It is crucial now that all stakeholders, especially
the two run-off candidates and their supporters,
demonstrate political maturity, maintain a peaceful
environment and refrain from any action that could
lead to unnecessary tension. It is important that
electoral grievances be resolved through legally
established channels, with full respect for the rule of
law.

While supporting Guinea-Bissau in its efforts to
hold the anticipated elections, the configuration has not
lost sight of other peacebuilding priorities, such as
security sector reform. The launch of the pension fund
for the armed forces and the security forces remains
one of the highest priorities for peace consolidation
and stability in the country. It is very important that the
new Government, once installed, pursue the launch and
implementation of the fund as a matter of priority.

As I highlighted in previous briefings, an area in
which Guinea-Bissau has certainly made remarkable
strides is macroeconomic management and economic
revitalization. This month, the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) conducted the fourth review of the
country's performance under the Extended Credit
Facility, as approved in May 2010. The mission
concluded that Guinea-Bissau had made further
progress in stabilizing its economy, reaching a growth
rate of 5.3 per cent and meeting most structural
benchmarks. The IMF team encouraged the
Government to pursue its reform efforts and noted that
political stability and improved security would be
critical for sustained economic growth.

As the international community, we must
continue to support Guinea-Bissau so that such
achievements can help to create a virtuous cycle of
stability and growth. That is why sustained efforts also
need to be geared towards other peacebuilding
priorities, among which is capacity-building to
strengthen the justice sector, to consolidate the rule of
law and to fight drug trafficking, as well as initiatives
that address social challenges, including critical
shortcomings in the delivery of basic social services
6
and the creation of opportunities for youth employment
and empowerment.

We look forward to the successful and peaceful
completion of the current electoral process and to
continuing our proactive engagement with the new
authorities on our joint peacebuilding agenda.

