Mr. Winid (Poland): Poland aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I should like to add a few remarks in my national
capacity.
First, I would like to thank the Malaysian presidency
for organizing this timely and important debate, and I
welcome the adoption of the resolution on the abduction
of children (resolution 2225 (2015)), which Poland
co-sponsored. I also thank today's briefers, in particular
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
for her moving update.

Children are the ones that suffer most in the course
of and following armed conflicts. Growing up in a
hostile environment has an immense impact on a child's
health, physical integrity, education and social abilities.

Although there are no exact figures and the
numbers are constantly changing, tens of thousands
of children continue to serve in Government forces or
armed opposition groups. It is high time to intensify
our efforts to suppress this dreadful trend. As the main
initiator of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
adopted almost 26 years ago, Poland is doing its utmost
to raise awareness about children's rights and ensure
that they are respected in their own countries and
internationally.

In this regard, recently the Polish Government has
provided assistance to a number of Syrian families
suffering from the horror of conflict. As a sign of
solidarity with those persecuted, we have committed to
helping Syrian children resume normal lives in Poland.
I wish to seize this opportunity to extend my warm
thanks to the Governments of Jordan and Lebanon for
their support in the evacuation of Syrian refugees on
route from the conflict area to Poland.

Bearing in mind the provisions contained in the
preamble to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and the desire expressed therein for children to grow up

"in a family environment, in an atmosphere of
happiness, love and understanding",

we are of the opinion that the international community
should undertake all possible steps to eradicate the root
causes and consequences of the involvement of children
in armed conflict.

Comprehensive action plans should be elaborated
to help children recuperate and more effectively adjust
to living conditions during hostilities and in the post-
war period. In this context, ensuring universal access to
education must be a priority. Poland is therefore proud
to have been one of the first countries to endorse the
Safe Schools Declaration, signed in Oslo, which aims
to prevent the military use of schools during armed
conflict.
I would like to thank in particular Ms. Zama
Coursen-Neff, director of the Children's Rights Division
of Human Rights Watch, who is actively promoting the
concept of safe schools. I also thank Ambassador Geir
Pedersen of Norway and Ambassador Maria Cristina
Perceval of Argentina for their Governments' leadership
and engagement in promoting this crucial initiative.

We are concerned that in South Sudan, Syria,
the Congo and Mali, children are being abducted or
recruited as soldiers, thus becoming active participants
in armed conflicts. Their recruitment is carried out in
a violent and cruel way. Some of them enter military
service voluntarily,just to escape poverty or protect their
families. In that context, let me recall that resolution 2143
(2014) underscores the importance of mainstreaming
child-protection issues when undertaking security-
sector reform, including age-assessment mechanisms
to prevent underage recruitment and the establishment
of child-protection units in national security forces.

Last but not least, it is of the utmost importance, in
our opinion, that all countries sign, ratify and effectively
implement the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict. Along those lines, violators of
those provisions should ultimately face international
accountability mechanisms, such as the International
Criminal Court.

