Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix
for his briefing. We also thank Ms. Ursula Mueller,
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
and His Excellency Mr. Festus Mogae, Chairperson of
the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, for
their efforts to address the situation in South Sudan.

The Security Council, the African Union and other
relevant actors have decisively shown their support for
the initiative led by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD). They all agree that this is a
unique opportunity to find a way out of the conflict
and finally bring about lasting peace in South Sudan.
However, it is clear that a process of this nature will
not yield positive results unless the parties take their
commitments seriously and show genuine political will
to implement them.

In that connection, we regret and vigorously
condemn the violations of the Agreement on the
Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and
Humanitarian Access, finalized on 21 December 2017
at the conclusion of the first phase of the High-level
Revitalization Forum. We call on the parties to avoid
future clashes and comply with the responsibilities
they agreed to, such as ending hostilities, protecting
civilians and ensuring safe and unimpeded access to
humanitarian assistance, which are crucial to moving
on to the second phase of the Forum, slated for February.

We welcome the efforts that IGAD has been
undertaking for several months to ensure the success
of the Forum. We highlight the fact that it has been
possible to bring together all stakeholders and to
engage in dialogue with them. We express our support
for the launching of the second phase, as well as our
hope that the negotiations can be carried out in good
faith and with the serious commitment of the parties.
We reiterate that a sustainable solution to the conflict
in South Sudan can be arrived at only through an open
and sincere political process and an inclusive dialogue
that facilitates the fulfilment of the 2015 Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan.

The difficult security-related and economic
circumstances in South Sudan have unleashed a difficult
humanitarian situation. According to reports of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), 7 million South Sudanese need humanitarian
assistance and there is a large number of refugees and
internally displaced persons who are experiencing a
lack basic services, food insecurity and outbreaks of
diseases, such as cholera, in addition to the situation of
vulnerable segments of the population, such as women
and children, who require special attention. We are
concerned about the many challenges for this year and
we call on the international community to cooperate
with OCHA to guarantee humanitarian assistance in
South Sudan.

We also believe it is essential to ensure a good
operating environment for humanitarian workers and
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
We call on Government and opposition forces to
provide security to humanitarian workers throughout
the territory and to allow unrestricted access to
humanitarian aid.

With the progress made in the deployment of the
Regional Protective Force (RPF), we hope that a more
robust presence of UNMISS patrols can be extended
and guaranteed in areas with a higher incidence of
clashes, such as in Equatoria, Bahr el- Ghazal and Upper
Nile. We call on the Government to make the requisite
administrative procedures less bureaucratic in order to
render the deployment of the RPF more agile, which we
hope will give UNMISS more flexibility in deploying
to prevent clashes between the parties. We believe that
strengthening the three-level strategy for the protection
of civilians is also a very important point that should
be taken into account in the strategic review in order to
improve the performance of UNMISS.

With regard to the Peace and Security Council
summit that will take place on 27 January during the
thirtieth ordinary session of the Assembly of the African
Union, Bolivia affirms its support for the conclusions
to be adopted on the next steps to address the situation
in South Sudan.

In conclusion, we wish to express our thanks to
the United Nations team and to UNMISS for their
commitment, excellent work and the sacrifices they are
making in that country.

