Mr. Fedotov: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council.

As the Secretary-General's statement at the
recent Geneva ministerial conference on Afghanistan
conference highlighted, renewed efforts by the
international community, together with regional
support and engagement, are needed to overcome the
serious challenges related to insecurity, poverty and
the rule of law. Illicit opium and the criminal economy
are among those urgent challenges, as recognized
in the conference's joint communique, which calls
for increased efforts to fight corruption and illicit
narcotics. According to this year's Afghanistan Opium
Survey, the overall area under cultivation remains
the second-highest measured since the beginning of
systematic opium poppy monitoring and recording, in
1994. The area under cultivation fell this year by 20 per
cent as compared with the record level of 2017, and
was accompanied by a drop in opium yield, but both
decreases can be attributed to the devastating drought
that Afghanistan has suffered. Eradication remained
insignificant, falling to 400 hectares in four provinces,
as compared to 750 hectares in 14 provinces in 2017. As
a result, more than 5,000 tons of opium are potentially
available for heroin production within and outside
Afghanistan, which translates into more than 600 tons
of export-quality heroin.

Continuing high levels of supply have brought
prices down to rock bottom. The farm-gate value of
opium decreased by 56 per cent compared to last year
but, at $604 million, that still represents nearly 3 per
cent of the country's gross domestic product. High
levels of opium supply mean that there are a lot of drugs
that will go to various destinations at a cheaper price.
Moreover, Afghanistan remains an important source
country of hashish. This year's World Drug Report
found that Afghanistan had reported 22 per cent of the
global total of hashish seized in 2016. Afghanistan is
the first victim of that overproduction of drugs, which
contributes to high rates of drug use in the country. Up
to 200 tons of raw opium are consumed annually. A
report by the Ministry of Counter Narcotics estimated
adult drug use at more than double the global use rate.
That poses a grave threat to public health and safety and
hinders peacebuilding, economic growth and stability.
Balanced responses to drug supply and demand are
therefore critical to supporting Afghanistan's efforts
to achieve progress in combating corruption, money
laundering and terrorism financing.
The Afghan Government has taken steps to
increase resilience to illicit financial flows and foster
good governance. Measures encompass banking
regulation, the National Procurement Authority, the
digitalization of many processes, including land titling
and asset declaration, the anti-corruption law and
strategy, the National High Council for Rule of Law
and Anti-Corruption, the Anti-Corruption Justice
Center, the new penal code, and the law on anti-money
laundering and countering financing of terrorism. The
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
continues to provide support in all its mandate areas,
including to address the Geneva mutual accountability
framework priority area on anti-corruption, governance,
the rule of law and human rights. UNODC is seeking to
step up strategic responses in line with the peacebuilding
and conflict prevention priorities of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
That includes strengthening the interconnectivity
of country and regional and interregional action
to facilitate alternative development activities and
access to international markets. Our Office in Kabul
is supporting the Afghan Government in identifying
common targets under a regional counter-narcotics
strategy, which should be fully plugged in with existing
coordination mechanisms.

I hope that we will be able to further strengthen
progress, including through the implementation of the
recommendations of the special session of the General
Assembly on drugs (General Assembly resolution S-30/1), as well as through the forthcoming ministerial
segment at the March 2019 session ofthe Commission on
Narcotic Drugs. As ever, UNODC remains committed
to supporting Afghanistan and the international
community to address these shared challenges.

