Let me thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the invited briefers. The Russian Federation strongly condemns all forms of violence against civilians in armed conflict, including sexual violence. We welcome the various multi-country initiatives and individual efforts designed to properly address this evil in any war. Russia therefore stands committed to international cooperation in this area. We acknowledge the valuable contribution made by Special Representative Pramila Patten and her Office. We appreciate her assistance in strengthening national capacities to counter sexual violence and her dedication to developing dialogue, supporting victims and drawing public attention to the consequences of those heinous crimes. Last year, at the open debate on the same subject under the German presidency, the Secretary-General said: "Despite all ... efforts, the reality on the ground has not changed. Sexual violence continues to be a horrific feature of conflicts around the world" (S/PV.8514, p. 3). That is true, but sexual violence is not a stand-alone phenomenon; it is a dirty but inalienable part of an armed conflict. It might be naive for the international community to rely on sniping at one particular crime ina situation of ongoing armed conflict. The eradication of war crimes goes along with resolving armed conflict itself. It is not possible to combat sexual violence without the active involvement of national authorities in this process. It is well recognized that the primary responsibility in protecting civilians in their territory is borne by Governments. Fighting impunity and ensuring accountability are the key parameters of a sovereign State. With increasing number of attacks by terrorist groups, including their use of sexual violence as a tactic of war, we need to intensify our efforts to address the threat of terrorism. Justice must prevail in the battlefield or be properly adjudicated, primarily in courts, where such crimes have been committed. We need to act jointly and vigorously. We must avoid politicization of the topic. Any information submitted for the attention of the Security Council must be verified. Speaking of human rights, it is important not to confuse the perspectives through which we address the issue of sexual violence in armed conflict. It is crucial to clearly distinguish between sexual violence as a war crime and sexual violence as criminal wrongdoing. The Security Council has to remain within its mandate of maintaining peace and security. We do not honour attempts to expand the interpretation of the relevant scope pertaining to armed conflict and post-conflict situations that has been agreed and laid down in resolutions of the Security Council. Finally, the United Nations and its affiliates must exhibit the highest standard of behaviour. The zero-tolerance policy on sexual violence has to be applicable to all, including peacekeeping missions. That also applies, mutatis mutandis, to the humanitarian actors and non-governmental organizations that are legally operating in countries affected by armed conflict. The efficiency of the Security Council is directly linked to its ability to bridge different approaches by enhancing respectful dialogue and constructive cooperation. We are committed to acting accordingly in the interests of peace and supporting the victims of sexual violence and for the sake of building just societies.
