Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me join others in thanking
Special Representative Yamamoto for his briefing
this morning. We very much welcome the report
(S/2017/ 189) of the Secretary-General, which underlines
the important work being carried out by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
We believe that UNAMA continues to play a critical
role in the stabilization process and in preventing
renewed conflict in Afghanistan. We are particularly
pleased to see the significant attention given to women
and peace and security in the report. In that light, I
would also like to welcome today's very rich briefing
by Ms. Sima Samar.

Sweden remains fully committed to supporting
the Afghan people on their path to a democratic,
prosperous and peaceful society. The report before us
today makes clear that there is still some distance to
travel on that journey. It shows that, while progress
has been made in some areas, the economic, political
and security outlook remains bleak. Moving forward
will require the full implementation of the economic
and political reforms pledged by the Government at
the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan. We welcome
UNAMA's continued efforts to support Afghanistan's
full assumption of leadership and ownership for its
security, governance and development, consistent with
the transformation decade. As Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Yamamoto just highlighted,
the international community cannot afford to lose focus
of the socioeconomic development of Afghanistan. We
must channel our efforts to supporting equitable growth
that can tangibly deliver employment and prosperity for
all Afghans, particularly Afghanistan's youth.

We encourage the Government to continue to take
the necessary steps towards holding free, inclusive and
transparent elections that are credible in the eyes of the
Afghan people. Women's full and equal participation
in the electoral process is essential. We urge UNAMA
to continue to pay increased attention to women's
participation in the electoral and political processes
in its reporting. Women's full and active participation
in public and political spheres is crucial to ensuring
lasting peace and the elimination of poverty. Women's
meaningful inclusion in the peace process, including the
ongoing implementation of the peace agreement with
Hizb-i-Islami Gulbuddin is therefore vital. Excluding
half of the population from the peace process is not only
wrong, but shortsighted. Women's inclusion in peace
processes has been proven to lead to more successful
and sustainable peace agreements.

The humanitarian, human rights and the security
situation in Afghanistan remains alarming. We are
particularly concerned to hear that the number of civilian
casualties is at the highest level since 2009 - many of
them children. Indeed, Afghanistan is one of the most
dangerous places in the world to be a child. Shockingly,
in 2015, one out of every four casualties in Afghanistan
was a child. Children also live in fear of abduction,
hunger and recruitment as child soldiers. We call on all
parties to the conflict to stop all targeted and deliberate
attacks against civilians and to take all the necessary
measures to protect them.

All violations of international humanitarian law
must be condemned. We strongly condemn the recent
attack on the International Committee of the Red
Cross, as well as Wednesday's attack on a hospital
in Kabul. All parties to the conflict must implement
and respect resolution 2286 (2016), pertaining to the
protection of health care in conflicts. We call on the
Afghan Government to report to the Secretary-General
on measures taken to implement the resolution. Places
where the young and the sick seek support should never
be targeted.

Building peaceful and inclusive societies is not
easy. It takes courage and determination from all
parties. A politically negotiated settlement to the
conflict in Afghanistan is the only way to achieve
a sustainable peace and the only way to build an
Afghanistan in which all citizens, regardless of gender,
religion or ethnicity, can fully play their part and reach
their full potential. Reaching such a settlement is more
urgent than ever. We strongly encourage continued
Afghan-owned and -led efforts towards unity and
cooperation, along the lines of the negotiated deal with
Hizb-i Islami. Increased political dialogue with other
insurgent groups, including the Taliban, is now needed.

As pointed out by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, regional tensions continue
to undermine long-term stability and economic
growth in Afghanistan. A peaceful and prosperous
Afghanistan would benefit the entire region. We call
on all actors, not least Afghanistan's neighbours, to act
constructively and responsibly for peace. We encourage
the United Nations system - both on the ground and
at Headquarters i to actively engage in activities and
dialogue promoting regional cooperation and stability.

Finally, Sweden has consistently and significantly
assisted Afghanistan for more than three decades. Our
support for the people of Afghanistan remains firm,
and we will continue to support them in their efforts
towards a peaceful and stable society for all.

