Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like to take this opportunity to welcome the
presence among us today of Presidents Boris Tadie and
Fatmir Sejdiu. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his presence and for the report
(S/2008/354) which he presented to us on the future of
the United Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
Kosovo.

In its nine years of operation in Kosovo, UNMIK
has helped Kosovo establish and consolidate its
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government as
democratic and responsible institutions, and to promote
a viable economy. Nevertheless, in spite of these
undeniable efforts and achievements in many areas,
much remains to be done. Here, we need to see the
process of reconciliation and the complete integration
of the Kosovo communities. This is a major challenge.

The new situation prevailing since the declaration
of independence of Kosovo is now a given fact, the
principal acts of which are - and previous speakers
have already recalled them - the promulgation of the
constitution, which entered into force on 15 June; the
wish of the Kosovar authorities for the United Nations
to carry out residual and limited tasks; the willingness
of the European Union to deploy personnel in the
police, justice and customs spheres; and the
disengagement of the European Commission with
respect to financing economic reconstruction, which
had been under UNMIK authority, and the decision of
the authorities in Pristina to assume responsibility in
this area.

It is in this new context that the debate takes
place on the nature and appropriateness of the
international presence in Kosovo, including on the
future of UNMIK. This merits particular attention by
the Security Council. It is important to arrive at a
compromise on these crucial issues so as to maintain
peace and stability in Kosovo and in the region.

My delegation would like, in that regard, to thank
the Secretary-General for having taken the initiative to
undertake consultations with all parties with a view to
proceedings, within the framework of resolution 1244
(1999), to a reconfiguration of the international
presence in Kosovo. We endorse and support this
approach because it allows us, inter alia, to preserve
the important achievements of the United Nations and
of the international community in Kosovo and to adapt
their presence to the evolving situation on the ground.
We invite all parties and the entire international
community to cooperate with the Secretary-General
within the framework of this new approach so as to
ensure in Kosovo, and in the Balkans as a whole, a
prosperous future in peace, good-neighbourliness and
mutual understanding.

