Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I would like to join other
members of the Council in thanking our briefers this
morning, Judge Meron, President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge
Joensen, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), and the two Prosecutors,
Mr. Brammertz and Mr. Jallow, for their comprehensive
statements. Let me at the outset reiterate Pakistan's
complete support for the important work of the two
Tribunals.
We note the progress in the completion strategies
of the ICTR and the ICTY during the period covered by
the latest reports (see S/2012/354 and S/2012/349). We
note that, during the past six months, the Tribunals have
continued to engage in trial and appeals proceedings, in
drafting judgements and in referring cases to domestic
jurisdictions. We appreciate that, during the reporting
period, the Tribunals continued to contribute to
procedural and evidentiary international criminal law in
a professional manner.

We also note the efforts made by the Tribunals with
regard to their work to ensure that the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals can
commence its activities on 1 July. We appreciate the
role of the Tribunals in the preparation of a joint budget
and the work on the rules of procedure of the Residual
Mechanism.

We recognize the difficulties in the assignment of
work to judges, in staff management and in the process
of winding down the work of the two Tribunals. The
recruitment of employees and the retention of staff
with an institutional memory of cases continue to pose
major challenges to the work of the Tribunals in the
completion process. We support the idea of providing
sufficient resources to the Tribunals in order to make
it possible for them to complete their work in a timely
manner. As the lack of experienced staff could cause
additional delays in the completion of the Tribunals'
work, it would be logical to consider innovative
strategies, such as retention incentives, as appropriate,
on a case-by-case basis.

While there are no outstanding fugitives under the
jurisdiction of the ICTY following the arrest of Mladic'
and Hadzic' in 2011, it is a matter of concern that there
are nine persons indicted by the ICTR who still remain
at large. We hope that, with the cooperation and efforts
of relevant Member States, the ICTR will be able to
arrest and hold accountable the remaining fugitives.
Their arrest would go a long way towards meeting the
completion strategy targets and to reducing the burden
of the Residual Mechanism.

The cooperation of Member States would also be
helpful in the referral of cases to national jurisdictions
and in the transfer of individuals who have been either
convicted or acquitted, or who have served their
sentences, to relevant countries where their family
members are located. We note that the ICTR President
and Registrar have been making efforts to find host
States for some acquitted persons who are under the
Tribunal's protection. The issue of the relocation of
acquitted persons in particular has assumed urgency in
view of the imminent closure of the Tribunal. We call
upon all States that are in a position to do so to show
political will and to consider positively the Tribunals'
request for more support and cooperation.

In conclusion, I would like to note that, in our View,
it is essential to preserve the legacy of the Tribunals
on account of their contribution to the fields of
international humanitarian law and legal doctrine. The
decisions of the Tribunals have led to the jurisprudence
that will influence the fight against impunity and the
future of global justice. In that context, we note with
appreciation that the ICTR Legal Library has compiled
a special bibliography containing all relevant literature
on the work of the Tribunal. The conference on the
global legacy of the ICTY in November 2011, which
was convened to study the impact of the Tribunal's work
on international criminal procedure and international
humanitarian law, was also a step in the right direction.

