Mr. Salame: I would like to congratulate
Kazakhstan on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I also wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the
Council on the work of the United Nations to address
the crisis in Libya.

I wish to report that the United Nations is poised to
increase its presence in Libya. Our compound has been
prepared and protection arrangements made so that we
can increase the number of staff who are staying and
working in the capital - as security permits, of course.

At the same time, we are expanding our presence
across the country and visiting communities throughout
Libya. In the coming weeks and months, we will
continue to reach out to more cities and towns. It is only
by truly understanding the country that we can succeed
in the implementation of the action plan for Libya and
help its citizens put an end to a transition that is taking
too long.

The second anniversary of the Libyan Political
Agreement was on 17 December 2017. Despite very
differing views about what the anniversary might
entail, Libyans ultimately chose for the day to pass
without violence or significant protest. The fact that
the anniversary proceeded peacefully is in no small
part due to the unity of the Council. The presidential
statement of 14 December (S/PRST/2017/26) sent a
clear message: the international community stands
behind the Agreement and will not accept attempts to
undermine it. That was reiterated by three neighbouring
countries, whose Ministers for Foreign Affairs met in
Tunis on 17 December 2017.

Whether it be the adoption of electoral legislation
or appointments to sovereign positions, such as
Governor of the Central Bank of Libya, all actions need
to proceed in line with the Agreement for its duration.
In practice, that means harmony between the House of
Representatives and the High State Council.

We must remain alert. Although 17 December is
behind us, the spectre of violence remains present.
Military forces are flexing their muscles in many parts
ofthe country. Close to the border with Tunisia, clashes
have occurred between forces affiliated with two
rival communities.

The area in the eastern vicinity of Tripoli remains
a worrying flashpoint. Tension has also heightened
around the city of Derna. The very reason that I am
not briefing the Council from Tripoli, as I had planned
to do, but from Tunis, is because bloody clashes at the
airport have halted all flights in and out ofMitiga airport
for the whole week. Civilians - men and women and
children - continue to be killed or injured in crossfire.
Armed groups fight recklessly in residential areas with
no thought for the safety of civilians.

The arms embargo has never been more important.
It is for this reason that recent reports ofa large shipment
of explosives intercepted by the Greek Coast Guard
are particularly alarming. A country with 20 million
pieces of arms does not need a single piece more. I have
received the Panel of Experts today, and its members
are looking into this matter with the professionalism
for which they are known. The efforts of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) have
been pivotal to the relative quiet that Libya has enjoyed
over recent months. These extremely time-consuming
conflict-prevention efforts must continue if hope in the
political process is to be maintained.

This fragile and shaky status quo is not sustainable.
Libya needs a competent and efficient Government,
one that can deliver the public services that the
people desperately need, one that is able to unify their
country's institutions, one that will preside over the
elections that will end this transition. In our view,
amending the Libyan Political Agreement is the most
appropriate means for fulfilling that endeavour, and
we have not wasted a single day in our push for it. I
am encouraged by the efforts of members of the House
of Representatives and of the High State Council to
achieve this goal and by several initiatives generated to
reach the consensus needed for that end. The work of the
joint drafting committee has crystallized consensus on
the adjustments to the executive authority. Although a
formal agreement has yet to be reached, this consensus
is desirable and it is reachable.

In line with the action plan, three goals are the
ultimate focus of our work. First, with regard to the
Constitution, Libya requires a strong, permanent legal
framework. The transition cannot definitively end
until Libya stands upon a true Constitution. The draft
Constitution as provided by the Constitutional Drafting
Assembly is currently undergoing judicial review.
Out of respect for the Libyan judiciary, we await the
decision of the courts. I expect this will be concluded
very soon - in fact, in the next 10 days. Once a decision
is reached, we will determine how we can best support
the process.

Secondly, with respect to national rebuilding,
the fabric of Libyan society is frayed and requires
meaningful reconstitution if it is to be mended. Unless
a national polity is rebuilt, no meaningful progress can
be made in unifying institutions, preventing outbreaks
of violence or achieving widespread acceptance of
election results. Rebuilding a Libyan national polity
necessitates two parallel efforts.

First, the United Nations has successfully facilitated
numerous dialogues between local communities
formerly in conflict. Agreements have been adopted
and meaningful steps to address the past have been
taken. Communities once at odds have shown their
willingness to build a common future. The Government
of National Accord has recently started to play its part
in this effort, which has been demonstrated by its
support for the Misrata-Tawergha Agreement and its
provisional funding. On this matter, we will also do our
part in particular to guarantee a safe return to that area.

Our other national rebuilding track consists of
reaching out to the major players and groups previously
marginalized. They are gradually being brought into
the political fold as equal and accepted partners as long
as they commit to the political process. Through town
halls, shuttle visits and whatever other tools we have
at our disposal, we are intensely working on tearing
down the walls among Libyan political factions and
untangling past local and political animosities, thus
moving towards the national conference, which will
provide a space for Libyans from all quarters to come
together and adopt a common vision for Libya.

The third focus of our work is elections. On
6 December 2017, the High National Electoral
Commission launched a voter-registration update. I am
pleased by the remarkable eagerness that Libyan men
and women have shown in registering. Our expectations
for participation have been exceeded. Some 600,000
Libyans have newly registered to vote in just over six
weeks. The number of people on the electoral register
now exceeds 2 million and continues to rise. The United
Nations has been able to provide the Commission
with extensive technical support for voter registration
and will continue to assess the arrangements for the
next steps.

However, before credible elections can be conducted
much work remains to be done. A constitutional
framework must be agreed upon. The security
conditions must be conducive to making the process
free and fair. There must be confidence that the results
will be accepted by all. For either the referendum,
presidential or parliamentary elections, laws are also
needed. Libya's relevant institutions have an obligation
to produce the requisite legislation and to do so in a
manner consistent with the Libyan Political Agreement.
I urge these institutions to avoid mutual suspicion and
unilateral action and to put the interests of the Libyan
people above all other considerations.

I thank the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Algeria,
Egypt and Tunisia for taking the time to meet with
me and for their strong backing of the action plan for
Libya. I also express my gratitude to the Kingdom of
Morocco for receiving me and for its continued support
for our work in Libya. It was an honour to meet with the
Secretary General of the League of Arab States, whose
support has been highly valued. This month, I also
travelled to two of Libya's southern neighbours, where
I had the privilege to meet with President Mahamadou
Issoufou in the Niger and President Idriss Deby Itno
in Chad, two countries substantially affected by the
evolution of the Libyan scene. I have greatly benefited
from their wisdom.

Of utmost importance for UNSMIL is our
relationship was the African Union (AU). This week I
returned from Addis Ababa where I met with the AU
Commission to discuss deepening our cooperation
and the AU's support for Libya. Twice this month I
had the honour to meet and have an exchange with AU
Commission Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat, and
we shared common views on the way forward.

The political crisis in Libya has been accompanied
by a humanitarian crisis of equal dimensions. Only a
strong, effective Government can turn the tide and put
an end to the suffering, but those suffering cannot wait.
To address the most urgent needs, the United Nations
will launch a humanitarian response plan next week.
The plan will target those in especially vulnerable
situations, focusing on such life-saving interventions
as basic services, shelter, food and demining. The
Stabilization Facility for Libya is another important
tool to help communities. These concrete actions are
now widely recognized by the Libyan people. I thank
the donors who have contributed to either of these two
funds, and I urge the Government of National Accord
to do its part as well.

A matter of great humanitarian concern is the dire
situation many migrants in Libya continue to face. I
saw some of this situation first hand last month when I
visited a detention centre in Gheryan. Further, we have
evidence that many migrants are subject to grave abuses
inside and outside official places of detention, including
various forms of sexual violence. We keep pressing
the authorities to eradicate these egregious crimes
and bring those responsible to justice and, in view of
several serious incidents against humanitarian actors in
the conduct of their duties, I urge the Government to
ensure their safety. I also salute the strong cooperation
between the African Union, the European Union and
the United Nations. As members of the Council know,
a Task Force has been established between our three
organizations and it has made progress in supporting
voluntary returns of migrants. Co-chairing the
operational group in Tunis, UNSMIL is dedicated to
these efforts.

However, the concentration on migration should
not allow us to forget those many Libyans held without
judicial process and often subject to ill treatment.
Failure to address custodial abuses fuels local conflicts
and undermines national reconciliation and efforts to
build a rule-of-law-based State.

Transformative change is overdue. Most worrying
for us are the individual predatory agendas that
continue to dominate at the expense of the collective
good. No political solution can be durable unless an end
is put to the predatory economies that have dominated
the Libyan scene in the past few years, where public
resources are more often than not used for various
purposes other than in the service of the Libyan people.

Conflict over resources is indeed at the heart
of the Libyan crisis. The Mission will not spare any
effort to advocate that national wealth be directed
towards the provision of public services rather than to
special interests. This is all the more necessary as fuel
shortages, electricity shortages and water shortages
are common across the country. It is a painful irony
that a country of such plenty is consistently so short of
the necessities.

I would note once again that it is our collective
responsibility to ensure that Libya's remaining frozen
funds are effectively managed as a safeguard for the
future. Additional work is still needed to make this
truly happen.

As the Council is aware, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman visited Libya from
9 to 12 January. Mr. Feltman's visit was timely and very
welcome. It was an opportunity to reinforce messages
to the Libyan political and military leaders that it is time
for compromise, in the interests of the Libyan people.
On behalf of the Secretary-General, Mr. Feltman urged
the Libyan interlocutors to truly commit to working
together and implement the action plan to create the
conditions necessary to end the transitional period.

I would once again like to express my appreciation
to the Council for its steadfast commitment and support
to the action plan for Libya and to our efforts to end the
crisis in that country.

