Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): It
gives me great pleasure to preface my statement by
welcoming your Excellency, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Costa Rica, as President of this Council. Costa
Rica is a State that has constantly made constructive
contributions in support of the edifice of world peace.

The Security Council meets today to discuss and
evaluate the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the framework of
the Council's discharge of its primary responsibilities for
the maintenance of international peace and security. This
responsibility extends to include following up on the
implementation of all peace agreements in all conflict areas
with a view to ensuring that no setbacks occur in such
areas and also to monitor the effective and balanced
implementation of the provisions of these agreements in
order to ensure the interests of all concerned parties in
achieving security, stability and peace.

Our general debate today assumes a special importance
in View of the fact that it is being held in positive
circumstances of attaining many achievements in the
implementation of the Dayton Agreement. Foremost among
these are probably the presidential elections, followed by
the municipal elections and other elections of legislative
bodies. All these are indications that the implementation of
the Dayton Agreement is proceeding in the right direction
in some fields.

However, a thorough analysis of the balance of the
implementation of the provisions of the Peace Agreement
makes it clear that, despite the progress made, that
implementation, in some fields, continues to be lagging to
a degree which causes concern, indeed fear, that the entire
Peace Agreement might collapse.

It is noteworthy that the progress made recently in
implementation of the Agreement is closely linked to the
efforts made to deal with and settle the question of war
crimes. Despite the difficulty of dealing with this
problem, the fact that the Stabilization Force (SFOR) on
10 July 1997 did apprehend one of the indicted war
criminals, and the fact that yesterday evening it also
apprehended two Croatian war criminals, has proved
beyond a shadow of a doubt that SFOR is indeed capable
of dealing with this question. This is particularly so
because out of a total of 78 indictees, only 20 have been
apprehended: 14 Croats, three Bosnians and three Serbs.
Only two of them have been tried and sentenced. Five
more are currently being tried in two different cases. It is
also noteworthy here that the Bosnians were the only
party that extradited all the indictees under their
jurisdiction - all three of them - and that Croatia has
displayed a great deal of good faith. The Republika
Srpska is the only party that, until now, refuses to
cooperate with the International Criminal Tribunal. Out of
57 Serbian indictees, only three have been apprehended,
which means that a good number continues to be at large.

A thorough analysis of the statistics I have just
mentioned and of the fact that major suspects, including
Karadzic and Mladic, continue to be at large and even
continue to exert a great deal of political influence, leads
us to state that the peace process in Bosnia will not
continuously progress without the apprehension of those
indictees, and that the reconciliation process will not
succeed without their being tried.

The Security Council bears a historic responsibility
at this important juncture to mandate SFOR and the force
to succeed it in the future to pursue the war criminals and
bring them to trial. The Council also has the additional
responsibility of providing the Tribunal with the necessary
financial support in order to enable it to discharge its
tasks with the requisite dispatch and efficiency.

The constitutional crisis that took place in the
Republika Srpska caused the international community
grave concern. It has proved that the lack of supervision
of the implementation of the Peace Agreement and
leaving the war criminals at large could lead to more
separation rather than unification. The de facto division of
that Entity into two parts, one administered from Pale and
the other from Banja Luka, is concrete evidence of the
results of such a situation, particularly in View of the
clear struggle for power to which some war criminals are
parties.

 

In spite all this, the parliamentary election held last
November brought a glimmer of hope. It is our hope that
it will lead to a rectification of the situation. However, this
cannot come about without the full implementation of the
results of the elections and in a manner that permits the
reunification of that entity. In this regard, the international
community must pursue an approach that links economic
aid on the one hand and the achievement of the desired
political objectives on the other, especially in Republika
Srpska.

The implementation of Annex 7 of the Dayton Peace
Agreement concerning the voluntary, free and safe return of
refugees and displaced persons, particularly in minority
areas, has become a disappointing and discouraging
process. This process makes it clear that the excessive
attention accorded to the political aspects of the Dayton
Agreement at the expense of the humanitarian and ethnic
aspects carries with it an inherent danger that threatens
peace entirely in Bosnia.

Of a total of more than 2 million displaced persons at
the end of the hostilities, only 381,000 - 171,000 refugees
and 210,000 displaced persons - have returned to their
homes. Until now, there has not been an opportunity for the
rest of the refugees and displaced persons to return to their
homes.

Despite the relative success of the open cities plan
launched by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, a plan that contributes to the delivery of
economic aid to the refugees and the internally displaced
persons at their current places of residence, and despite the
comprehensive plan adopted by the international community
for the return of large numbers of refugees, the political
obstacles impeding the implementation of these plans
remains great. Therefore, the need has become urgent to
take decisive measures, the most important of which is the
recision of the ethnically based property laws throughout
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the organization of a swift
return of refugees and displaced persons to their original
homes, and not - I emphasize "not" - to any other place
that they might be compelled to go to.

Human rights, freedom of movement and freedom of
the press throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina - which
have assumed increasing importance with the passage of
time - must be fully respected and guaranteed.

I turn now to the implementation of the military and
regional stability provisions of the Dayton Agreement. The
date set for the implementation of the second phase of arms
reduction under the Agreement on Subregional Arms
Control was 31 October 1997. However, Republika
Srpska continues to refuse to make the deep cuts
necessary to comply with the provisions of that
Agreement, casting doubt on its military intentions,
especially in View of the fact that the Federation's
military capabilities remain far below the maximum
established by the Agreement. In this regard, the fears and
concerns expressed by Republika Srpska vis-a-vis the
equipment and training programme are unjustified if it has
the political will to reconcile and avoid military
confrontations.

The Security Council therefore bears a special
responsibility for the implementation of this part of the
Dayton Agreement, not only to prevent the eruption of
conflict in this region in the future, but also within the
context of exercising its Charter responsibility for the
regulation of armaments.

As concerns the formation of the common
institutions, Egypt has closely followed the results of the
various meetings of the Peace Implementation Council,
the most recent of which was in Bonn on 9 and 10 of this
month. We would reiterate once again that the triumph of
the forces of reunification will depend to a great extent on
the creation of the common institutions. It is not logical,
for instance, to speak of reunification at a time when
there are no direct telephone contacts between the
Federation and Republika Srpska; when there is no
common currency; when laws of citizenship have yet to
be enacted; when there is no economic capacity to create
these institutions; and in an environment that does not
provide the necessary freedom of movement.

In this framework, the efforts for reconstruction and
economic development must be given high priority within
the struggle to reunite Bosnia, in the context not only of
implementing the Dayton Agrement, but also of the
international community's unrelenting efforts to help
Bosnia. The donors honoured their pledge of $1.8 billion
in 1996; they have also pledged $1.24 billion for 1997.
And yet, Republika Srpska's refusal to attend the annual
donors' conference and to respond to the efforts for
integration and unification raises serious questions about
the intentions of this entity at this complex stage of the
implementation of the Dayton Agreement.

What is currently impeding the reconstruction and
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
considerations of political control over the economy, as
well as the lack of a minimum degree of transparency on

 

economic questions. This is undoubtedly the result of the
lack of trust among the various parties. The reconstruction
efforts must therefore be linked to the responsiveness of the
parties to the political efforts being made. This year's
General Assembly resolution on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has sent the correct message by linking
economic assistance to the responsiveness of the parties to
efforts to achieve a political settlement. It is our hope that
this will lead to improved responsiveness to those political
efforts.
I have set out Egypt's View of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which is shared by all the States members
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference Contact
Group on Bosnia and Herzegovina. We deem it extremely
important that the role of the Security Council in Bosnia
and Herzegovina not be confined to the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, despite its valiant
efforts contributing to the stabilization of the situation, or
to the efforts of the International Police Task Force (IPTF)
to restructure the local police. All these efforts are clearly
reflected in the report before the Council today. We feel
that it is imperative that the Security Council set a number
of guidelines to address the aforementioned problems in
coordination with the Peace Implementation Council in
Bosnia. We also deem it important that the Security
Council assign a larger role to the Stabilization Force and
the force to succeed it in June next year, in order to impose
the will of the international community and of the people
of Bosnia to create a unified, multiethnic State whose
people live together under one roof, enjoying independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity within their
internationally recognized boundaries.

In conclusion, I wish to pay tributes to the efforts
made by the High Representative for Bosnia, Mr. Carlos
Westendorp, especially in the current circumstances in
which he is assuming his tasks. I also wish to commend the
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to
Bosnia; the Commander of the IPTF; the leaders of SFOR;
and all the men and women working in trying
circumstances to bolster peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

