Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): 1 would like to begin
by expressing my deep appreciation to the presidency
of Lithuania for convening this open debate on the
protection ofjournalists.

This subject is particularly important to Indonesia
for two reasons. The first is that we understand the
significance ofthe free flow ofinformation to our efforts
to institutionalize transparency and accountability.
Journalists are often a critical part of that process.
The second is that, in conflict situations, transparency
is often the first victim. As a result, journalism and
journalists journey into peril. Examples of such peril,
and the tragedy that consequently befalls journalists,
are not hard to find in recent or contemporary conflicts.

Indonesia is deeply concerned about incidents of
violence and deliberate attacks against journalists,
media professionals and associated personnel. The
irony is that, although we now live in a world where the
free flow of information and freedom of expression are
deemed to be basic and essential elements of democratic
societies, independent journalism is often the target of
various actors who wish to keep the inconvenient truth
hidden.

Amid this distressing but increasing trend, we
might continue to ask how international humanitarian
law protects journalists and other media professionals.
There should be no doubt that international law sets
out clear provisions for the protection ofjournalists in
such situations. Journalists in armed conflict should
be considered civilians and therefore be afforded the
protections to which civilians are entitled. Such assaults
and the ensuing tragedies are therefore in violation of
international humanitarian law. As we all know, the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols
explicitly provide protections for media personnel. In
that regard, it is important to underscore that in both
international and non-international armed conflicts, an
intentional attack on a civilian may amount to a war
crime under the Rome Statute.

Another important reference that we need to
strengthen further in this context is resolution 1738
(2006) on the protection ofjournalists in armed conflict,
which highlights the obligation of all States and parties
in armed conflicts to comply fully with international
humanitarian law. It also condemns deliberate attacks
against journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel in armed conflicts, and calls upon all parties
to put an end to such practices.

The obvious conundrum is that many of today's
conflicts are not being fought between States - that is,
between signatories to international legal instruments.
Instead, these conflicts involve insurgents, terrorists
and groups with no recognition of, let alone any respect
whatsoever for, international humanitarian law. In
effect, they are actors who often delight in the negative
publicity their heinous acts bring them. In other
words, this debate deals as much with the protection
of civilians in armed conflict as it does with the very
nature of impunity, as enjoyed by outlaws involved in
conflicts. This critical element makes the extremely
daunting task of protecting journalists in conflict as
important as protecting other civilians, and presents an
enormous challenge to the Council in its consideration
of this agenda item.

The important role thatjournalists play in monitoring
the observance of international humanitarian law often
means that, in conflict situations, they are vulnerable to
being targeted by those who wish to protect or maintain
their own impunity. My delegation therefore believes
that steps taken to prevent impunity can function as the
most important deterrent against the perpetration of
attacks onjournalists. Needless to say, we fully concur
that effective investigations of attacks on journalists
and the relentless prosecution of perpetrators are, in the
end, a potent means of protecting journalists.

We also call on news organizations to work in close
cooperation with relevant stakeholders, including,
the United Nations and its peacekeepers, to improve
the safety of media personnel during assignments in
conflict zones. While underlining the need for media
personnel to be prepared to confront the risks inherent
in war zones, my delegation believes that it is also
important for them to be well informed and up to date
on the provisions of international humanitarian law so
that they can take advantage of its provision for their
protection when covering conflict situations, and can
report on and monitor the observance of international
humanitarian law.

My delegation is of the View that it would be an
advantage in this context if the dissemination of
international humanitarian law were to be further
extended to all relevant stakeholders in armed conflicts,
including by embedding it in the process of mediation
between or among parties to conflict and in the training
of United Nations peacekeepers and related actors.
Undoubtedly, the raising of awareness of international
humanitarian law to the public at large in peacetime,
in the context of preventive action, is also essential
and will further promote respect for the rule of law
and inculcate the principles of humanity, which curtail
violence and preserve peace as desired by us all.

