The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Australia,
Bangladesh, Benin, Brazil, Canada, Congo, Cuba, the
Czech Republic, Egypt, Italy, Kenya, Nigeria, Norway
and South Africa, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I wish to extend a
warm welcome to Her Excellency Ms. Nkosazana
Dlamini Zuma, Minister for Foreign Affairs of South
Africa.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Dlamini
Zuma (South Africa) took a seat at the Council
table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Romano Prodi,
Chairman of the African Union-United Nations panel
on modalities for support to African Union operations,
and Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
2
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/8l3, which contains the text of
identical letters dated 24 December 2008 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
General Assembly and the President of the Security
Council transmitting the report of the African Union-
United Nations panel on modalities for support to
African Union peacekeeping operations.

I should now like to make a few introductory
remarks.

Today's open debate comes in the context of
continuing contacts regarding the cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, in the maintenance of
international peace and security under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. We have urged that
this open debate be convened, fully aware that issues
of peace and security are of concern not only to the
African Union, but to all regional organizations.

Wherever armed conflicts arise, they have severe
consequences, reflected in a lack of security, in human
suffering and in flows of internally displaced persons
and refugees. Those problems, which are being
suffered most intensely on the African continent, are
imposing grave burdens on the African Union, which
continues to seek to strengthen its capabilities in the
maintenance of peace and security. Thus, it is essential
to promote more systematic cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union in addressing
issues related to peace and security, particularly given
the fact that the majority of United Nations
peacekeeping operations are being carried out on the
African continent and the need to respond swiftly to
crises on the continent and provide the African Union
with predictable and strengthened capacities.

Today's debate is being held to follow up on the
Council's open debate held on 16 April 2008 (see S/PV.5868), presided over by the then President of
sisterly South Africa. At that meeting, resolution 1809
(2008) was adopted. It recognized the need to enhance
the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
financing regional organizations when they undertake
peacekeeping under a United Nations mandate. It also
welcomed the Secretary-General's proposal to set up
an African Union-United Nations panel consisting of
distinguished persons to consider in depth the
09-2716]
modalities of how to support such peacekeeping
operations, in particular start-up funding, equipment
and logistics, and to consider in depth lessons from
past and current African Union peacekeeping efforts.

In September 2008, an African Union-United
Nations panel was established, chaired by former
Prime Minister Romano Prodi of Italy, who focused
most specifically on ways and means to support
African peacekeeping operations established under
United Nations auspices. The panel carried out its work
and has now submitted its report to the Security
Council.

On behalf of the members of the Security
Council, I cannot fail to pay tribute to His Excellency
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and the
African Union-United Nations panel for submitting the
report with a view to useful deliberations in the
Council.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to
take the floor.


