The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Tajikistan, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alimov
(Tajikistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the interim
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Tajikistan. document S/ 1999/ 124.

(spoke in French)

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan
of 8 February 1999 (S/ 1999/ 124), submitted pursuant
to paragraph 11 of its resolution 1206 (1998) of 12
November 1998.

"The Security Council welcomes the regular
contacts between the President of the Republic of
Tajikistan and the leader of the United Tajik
Opposition (UTO) and the work of the Commission
on National Reconciliation aimed at achieving further
progress in the peace process. It regrets that that
progress has remained slow during the last three
months and underlines the necessity for the parties
to speed up the full and sequential implementation
of the General Agreement on the Establishment of
Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan
(S/1997/510), especially the Protocol on military
issues (S/1997/209, annex II). The Council calls
upon the parties to intensify their efforts to create
conditions for the holding in 1999 of a constitutional
referendum and presidential elections, as well as the
timely holding of parliamentary elections.

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council notes with appreciation
the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and of all the personnel of the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
(UNMOT) and encourages them to continue
assisting the parties in the implementation of the
General Agreement. It underlines the importance of
UNMOT playing a full and active role in the
implementation of the General Agreement and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to
consider means of achieving this taking into account
the security situation.

"The Security Council welcomes the continued
contribution made by the Collective Peacekeeping
Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(the CIS Peacekeeping Forces) in assisting the
parties in the implementation of the General
Agreement in coordination with all concerned.

"The Security Council welcomes also the
contribution of the Contact Group of Guarantor
States and International Organizations to the peace
process and, in this context, considers that the
holding of a meeting of this Group at the level of
Foreign Ministers in support of the peace process
could indeed be useful, if properly prepared.

"The Security Council welcomes further the
activities of various international organizations and
humanitarian workers related to the implementation
of the General Agreement and addressing the
humanitarian, rehabilitation and development needs
of Tajikistan. It calls upon Member States and others
concerned to respond promptly and generously to the
consolidated appeal for Tajikistan for 1999 launched
in Geneva in December 1998.
 

"The Security Council reiterates its concern that
the security situation in some parts of Tajikistan
remains precarious. It reiterates the importance of a
full investigation into the murder in July 1998 of four
members of UNMOT and takes note with appreciation
of the efforts of the Government of Tajikistan in this
regard. The Council calls upon the UTO to contribute
more effectively to the investigation in order to bring
those responsible to justice. It acknowledges the
efforts of the Government of Tajikistan to enhance the
protection of international personnel and calls upon
the parties to cooperate further in ensuring the security
and freedom of movement of the personnel of the
United Nations, the CIS Peacekeeping Forces and
other international personnel. The Council reminds
both parties that the ability of the international
community to mobilize and to continue assistance
for Tajikistan is linked to the security of the
personnel of UNMOT and international
organizations, and of humanitarian workers."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1999/8.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.30 pm.

