Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Somalia. Addressing the Council remains a
great honour and privilege for me.

As we approach Ramadan, the advancement of
peace and security in Somalia continues to be attainable
today through the concerted effort of the Somali national
security forces, the African Union Mission forces and
the visible action by the Government of Somalia to bring
into play the factors that contribute to the enhancement
and consolidation of stability through a comprehensive
approach to a security framework. I pay tribute to the
brave sacrifices that Somali national security forces
and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
have continued to make over the years with a view to
building a peaceful and prosperous Somalia.

Since my previous briefing to the Council (see S/PV.8165), Somalia has been confronted with many
challenges, some of which, if not addressed in a timely
manner, will negatively impact the current efforts of
the Federal Government and reverse the progress made
so far. As we speak, AMISOM. soldiers are valiantly
supporting and assisting the populations ofBeledweyne,
on the margins of the Shabelle River, who have been
flooded out and have had to abandon their homes as
a result. They are doing that with immense sacrifice
in the middle of a shortage of means of transportation
and resources to support the population. But they
are receiving profound support from the President
of HirShabelle.

That and other challenges have become more
evident lately, with a spillover effect on Somalia over
international rivalries and divisions within the Gulf
countries. Those external crises are quickly provoking
further divisions among Somalis and forcing them
to choose sides. There are warning signs that the
crisis could have negative implications for the fragile
relations between the Federal Government of Somalia
and its federal member states. I ask the Council to make
a strong and unequivocal statement to the opposing
sides in the Gulf region to refrain from any actions that
may further heighten tensions and affect the unity and
stability of Somalia.

A year ago Somalia was presented with a fresh
start with the election of President Farmajo and the
appointment of Prime Minister Hassan Ali Khayre.
They offered an important opportunity for the
rebuilding of Somalia's national institutions and
providing the country with what it needs to foster unity
and prosperity. Recent political crises in Parliament
not only heightened the absolute need to expedite the
building and strengthening of Somali State institutions,
but also the importance for all parties in the Somali
political construct to begin to identify and embrace
the common factors that unite all Somalis and do away
with those divisive issues that are ongoing sources of
weakness, tension and division among them. The people
speak the same language. They belong to the same
nation. They have the same aspirations. They profess
only one religion. The best use of such attributes can
effectively contribute to fortifying the unity and peace
in this great country.

In that context, AMISOM. applauds the efforts made

by the executive and the former Speaker in resolving
the recent crisis, the outcome of which offers hope for
a brighter future for all Somalis. As the new Speaker,
Mr. Mohamed Mursal Abdirahman, indicated in his
inaugural address last week, the Federal Parliament
will refocus its efforts to ensure that the constitutional
review is completed and pave the way for multi-party
elections to move forward with the necessary legal
framework by 2020 or 2021. The holding, earlier this
week, of the national constitutional convention in
Mogadishu is a clear demonstration of the Government's
commitment to match its words with action.

Despite challenges, there is real reason for optimism
across Somalia, as the Federal Government continues to
make great strides in the right direction. The executive is
already delivering on improving fiscal management and
strengthening the financial institutions, while placing
transparency and the fight against corruption at the
heart of its economic priorities. We now have a federal
budget that is supported by realistic revenue measures
and an effort to modernize the urgently needed tax
collection and taxpayer registration. That is in addition
to the ongoing consultations on tax legislation.

While delivering all of this, the Government is also
focusing on financial sustainability through its domestic
revenue collection. In a similar vein, the Government bill
for the establishment of the anti-corruption commission
is taking shape, with the implementation of the open
government initiative. With the Government's recent
announcement off its third International Monetary
Fund staff-monitored programme and its success at this
year's spring meetings in Washington, DC, Somalia's
pathway to debt relief is fast becoming a reality.

In April, as Council members are aware, the
Somalia transition plan was widely endorsed, first
here in Mogadishu by the Comprehensive Approach to
Security Executive Group, chaired by Prime Minister
Khayre, and later by the African Union during the Peace
and Security Council on Addis Ababa on 30 April.
Supporting the Federal Government in implementing
the transition plan remains AMISOM's key priority.
As I reminded partners during the high-level security
meeting on Somalia in Brussels earlier this month,
AMISOM. endorsed, and is firmly committed to, the
implementation of the transition plan.

AMISOM. is currently undergoing its fourth review
pursuant to its mandate under Security resolution 2372
(2017). In the past three days, AMISOM. has been
clear: in order to effectively support the transition,
the Mission must adjust its approach and reconfigure
its components to suit the demands of the transition.
We are ready to undertake such an exercise. In that
regard, AMISOM. uniformed personnel will require
the following: additional multipliers and enablers; a
mandate to conduct combat-readiness mentoring for the
Somali security forces, availed to them and co-located;
to undertake joint, well-coordinated operations with
AMISOM; and a more flexible approach to its logistical
support from the United Nations and other partners.
The civilian component will require consideration of
the strengthening of its capacity and presence in the
field across the federal member states.

As AMISOM. and the Federal Government begin
focusing on the stadium and the main supply routes
from Mogadishu to Baidoa and the town of Leego as top
priority objectives in the first phase of the transition, it
is important that the international community's efforts
be directed towards addressing the gaps identified in
the last operational readiness assessment of the Somali
National army, the police and local forces. Efforts
must seek to provide a swift response to issues of
force generation at both the federal and regional levels
in Somalia, in addition to satisfying key operational
requirements such as communications, transport,
casualty evacuation, medical evacuation, supplies and
logistics, as well as IED defeat capabilities.

In the coming weeks and months, AMISOM. and
the Somali security forces will be implementing the
operational phase of the transition plan. To be effective
and attain its objectives, the transition cannot continue
spending resources and losing lives to recover towns
and territory from Al- Shabaab only to see them returned
to the enemy. The transition, as it has been conceived,
must be comprehensive and effective, that is to say, it
must bring on board everything that is required for the
effective recovery, occupation and permanent holding
on towns and cities, and the effective protection of
their population.

We must therefore ensure that the population
centres and locations we capture from Al-Shabaab
are recovered and transformed into inhabitable places
where humanitarian agencies provide emergency
assistance to the liberated population; administrators
manage the liberated population, govern the town
and provide essential services and amenities to the
population; police protect the citizens and maintain law
and order; conditions are created for the local economy
to beginning to take shape, for trade and commerce
to be possible and for citizens to be able to go about
their lives freely, securely and confidently without fear
of being mugged or killed by Al-Shabaab around the
next corner.

All that requires commitment. It requires the
Government to be present and fully committed to
creating institutions. It requires United Nations
agencies to engage in strengthening the institutions
of Government and local administrations. They must
be present and fully committed in the places we are
going to liberate, starting with Leego. We are ready and
willing to work hand in hand with the United Nations
and other institutions, as well as the Government,
to realize those objectives - to ensure that once we
liberate a city it transitions to Somali security forces
and remains in their hands, not falling back into those
of Al-Shabaab.

The reality of the current threat landscape across
Somalia is that Al-Shabaab has gradually increased
its military capacity and resilience, resulting in
widespread attacks using IEDs as the weapon of
choice. To successfully and sustainably counter that
threat and disrupt and destroy Al-Shabaab, I urge the
Council to remain seized of the issue of predictable
and sustainable funding for AMISOM. and the Somali
security forces, and the provision to our forces of the
means and enablers required to minimize casualties,
defeat IEDs and identify and neutralize the enemy.

In that regard, I would like to express AMISOM's
gratitude to the United States Department of State
for the provision of the Intelligence, Surveillance and
Reconnaissance system, which is a very important
force enabler. As we speak, the system and its effect are
already being felt in the theatre of operations. We are
grateful that partners have started to understand the full
meaning ofthe reality in which we are living. The recent
meeting in Brussels showed that partners are now ready
to be generous in terms of supporting both the Somali
national security forces and AMISOM. in strengthening
their capacity to face Al-Shabaab successfully.

