Ms. Power (United States of America): Today we
have adopted resolution 2231 (2015), enshrining the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action agreed to six days
ago in Vienna.

By now, many are familiar with the basic tenets
of the deal, which, if implemented, would cut off all
pathways to fissile material for a nuclear weapon for
the Islamic Republic of Iran, while putting in place
a rigorous inspection and transparency regime for
verifying Iran's compliance. The Plan of Action will
cut the number of Iran's centrifuges by two thirds and
prevent Iran from producing weapons- grade plutonium.
Iran will also get rid of 98 per cent of its stockpile of
enriched uranium, going from a quantity that could
produce approximately 10 nuclear weapons to a fraction
of what is needed for a single nuclear weapon. The deal
will quadruple Iran's break-out time - the time needed
to produce enough weapons-grade uranium for one
nuclear weapon - from the current estimate of two to
three months to one year. It will also require Iran and
all States to comply with legally binding restrictions
on nuclear and conventional arms-related and ballistic
missile-related activities.

Ninety days from today, when our respective
capitals and legislatures have had a chance to carefully
review the deal's provisions, the commitments in the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action should take effect.
Sanctions relief will begin only when Iran verifiably
completes the initial steps necessary to bring its nuclear
programme in line with the deal. It is important today
to step back from the Plan of Action to its larger
lessons - lessons about enforcing global norms,
the essential role of diplomacy, the need for ongoing
vigilance and the absolute necessity of the unity of the
Security Council; lessons that have implications both
for ensuring implementation of the deal and for tackling
other crises that confront us today.

This year we mark 70 years since the founding
of the United Nations, which its second Secretary-
General, Dag Hammarskjold, famously said "was not
created to bring us to heaven, but to save us from hell".
In the wake of the devastating loss oflife in the Second
World War and the immeasurable suffering it caused,
representatives of nations around the world came
together with an aim - to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war.

The first lesson we can learn from how this deal
was secured is that it is not enough to agree to global
norms, such as that against the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. The Council and all the countries of the
United Nations must actually take steps to enforce
global norms. In 2006, in response to Iran's efforts to
develop a nuclear-weapons programme, the Security
Council put in place on the of toughest sanctions
regimes in its history, which was complemented by
robust sanctions imposed by the United States, several
other countries and the European Union (EU). Faced
with Iran's ongoing non-compliance, the United
Nations tightened its sanctions in 2007, 2008 and 2010.
The sanctions regime played a critical role in helping to
lay the groundwork for the talks that would give rise to
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.

The second lesson is one that was most eloquently
articulated more than 50 years ago by President John
F. Kennedy and echoed last week by President Obama:
"Let us never negotiate out of fear, but let us never fear
to negotiate". Given the devastating human toll of war,
we have a responsibility to test diplomacy. In 2010,
when then-United States Ambassador to the United
Nations Susan Rice spoke in the Chamber after the
Council strengthened sanctions on Iran, she cited the
ways in which Iran had violated its commitments to the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and its
obligations under prior Security Council resolutions.
Yet she also said:

"The United States reaffirms our commitment to
engage in robust, principled and creative diplomacy.
We will remain ready to continue diplomacy with
Iran and its leaders" (S/PV6335, p.5).

And when a credible opening emerged for negotiations,
that is exactly what the United States and the other
members of the P-5+l - the United Kingdom, France,
Germany, Russia and China - and the EU did.

There were many occasions over these past
two years of grueling negotiations when any party
could have walked away. The distances just seemed
too great, the history between us searing and the
resulting mistrust defining. But the United States
and our partners knew that we had a responsibility
to try to overcome these obstacles and resolve the
crisis peacefully. One only has to spend a week in the
Security Council - any week - and hear accounts of
the bloodshed and heartbreak in Yemen, Syria, South
Sudan, Darfur, Mali, Libya or any other conflict-ridden
part of the world to be reminded of the consequences
of war. Sometimes, as bother the Charter of the United
Nations and history make clear, the use of force is
required, but we all have a responsibility to work
aggressively in diplomatic channels to try to secure our
objectives peacefully.

This nuclear deal does not change our profound
concern about human rights violations committed
by the Iranian Government or about the instability
Iran fuels beyond its nuclear programmes - from
its support for terrorist proxies to its repeated threats
against Israel to its other destabilizing activities in the
region. That is why the United States will continue to
invest in the security of our allies in the region and why
we will maintain our own sanctions related to Iran's
support for terrorism, its ballistic-missiles programme
and its human rights violations.
And this deal will in no way diminish the United
States outrage over the unjust detention of United
States citizens by the Government of Iran. Let me use
this occasion to call once again on Iran to immediately
release all unjustly detained Americans: Saeed Abedini,
imprisoned for his religious beliefs; Amir Hekmati,
falsely accused of espionage; and Jason Rezaian, a
Washington Post correspondent who just a year ago was
covering the nuclear negotiations. I also call on Iran
to help locate Robert Levinson, who has been missing
from Iran since 2007. No family should be forced to
endure the anguish that the Abedini, Hekmati, Rezaian
and Levinson families feel, and we will not rest until
they are home where they belong.

But denying Iran a nuclear weapon is important not
in spite of these other destabilizing actions, but rather
because of them. As President Obama has pointed out,

"that is precisely why we are taking this
step - because an Iran armed with a nuclear
weapon would be far more destabilizing and far
more dangerous to our friends and to the world".

So while this deal does not address many of our
profound concerns, if implemented it would make the
world safer and more secure.

Yet while reaching this deal matters, our work is far
from finished. In the months and even years ahead, the
international community must apply the same rigour to
ensuring compliance with the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action as we did to drafting and negotiating it. This
is my third point - implementation is everything. And
that is precisely why so many verification measures
have been built into this deal. The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action will grant the IAEA access when it needs
it and where it needs it, including 24/7 containment
and surveillance of Iran's declared nuclear facilities.
Inspectors will have access to the entire supply chain
that supports Iran's peaceful nuclear programme, from
mining and milling to conversion, enrichment, fuel
manufacturing, nuclear reactors and spent fuel. If the
terms of the deal are not followed, all sanctions that have
been suspended can be snapped back into place, and if
the United States or any other participant in the Plan of

Action believes that Iran is violating its commitments,
we can trigger a process in the Security Council that
will reinstate the United Nations sanctions.

The fourth and final lesson we can learn from the
process that led us here today is that when our nations
truly unite to confront global crises, our impact grows
exponentially. The founders of the United Nations
understood that concept intrinsically and enshrined it
in the Charter, which calls on each of us "to unite our
strength to maintain international peace and security".
In the twenty-first century, it is now an axiom that
our nations can do more to advance peace, justice and
human dignity by working together than any single
country can achieve on its own, and that, indeed, only
when we act as united nations can we address the
world's most intractable problems.

Although we do not see that unity enough here at
the United Nations, the countries of the United Nations
did largely unite behind the cause of preventing nuclear
proliferation in Iran, and it was the persistent multilateral
pressure that came out of this unity, combined with a
critical openness to seeking a diplomatic solution that
gave the P-5+l and EU negotiators the leverage they
needed to get the deal that would advance our collective
security.

In conclusion, the only proper measure of this deal
and all of the tireless efforts that went into it will be its
implementation. This deal gives Iran an opportunity to
prove to the world that it intends to pursue a nuclear
programme solely for peaceful purposes. If Iran seizes
that opportunity; if it abides by the commitments that
it agreed to in this deal, as it did throughout the period
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan ofAction negotiations;
if it builds upon the mutual respect and diligence that
its negotiators demonstrated in Lausanne and Vienna;
and if it demonstrates a willingness to respect the
international standards upon which our collective
security rests, then it will find the international
community and the United States willing to provide a
path out of isolation and towards greater engagement.

We hope that Iran's Government will choose
that path, not only because it would make the United
States, its allies and the world more secure - which
it will - but also because it will more fully empower
the Iranian people, whose potential all of us should
wish to see unlocked. But let us just think for one
moment how much more effective the Council would
be if we were to bring the same approach to tackling
other threats to international peace and security today:
rigourous enforcement; a willingness to be relentless in
our pursuit of tough, principled diplomacy, even when
the odds seem stacked against us; a commitment not

just to resolutions but to their full implementation; and
a willingness to overcome divisions to strengthen our
collective security.

If we did all that, we can only imagine what we
might be able to achieve to mitigate the horrific
suffering in Syria today, and what progress the United
Nations could make were we to bring the same political
will to advancing the human rights of the world's most
vulnerable people as we have to cutting off Iran's
pathways to a nuclear weapon. How many more girls
worldwide would be in classrooms? How many more
warlords and dictators worldwide would be behind
bars? It is humbling to imagine how much more we
could achieve. It should motivate us to do far more.

