Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to join others in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and also to thank the Indian delegation for the
excellent work done during its presidency in August.

I would also like to join colleagues in thanking
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) during the past 90 days. Bosnia and
Herzegovina appreciates the work of the Committee,
which is of crucial importance for enforcement of the
Iran sanctions regime. We welcome the adoption of the
Committee's guidelines for the conduct of its work,
aimed at improving the implementation of sanctions
provisions and at assisting Member States in meeting
their obligations under those provisions. My delegation
also appreciates the results of the work of the Panel of
Experts. We believe that the Panel has made a valuable
contribution to the better implementation of resolution
1929 (2010).

It is our strong belief that only full
implementation of the safeguards agreements pursuant
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons can ensure that nuclear energy is used in a
safe and responsible manner. The role of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as an
implementing agency remains the most reliable
instrument for verifying compliance with the
stipulations of the Treaty. Bosnia and Herzegovina
maintains the view that all States without exception
must submit their nuclear facilities to the IAEA
safeguards regime and must be transparent in fulfilling
their commitments.

In this context, we remain concerned about the
lack of progress with regard to Iran's compliance with
the relevant IAEA and Security Council resolutions.
Therefore, we urge Iran to comply with all resolutions
of the Security Council and to implement the
Additional Protocol and all measures requested by the
IAEA. It is imperative that confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme be restored.

We still believe that a diplomatic and
negotiations-driven approach with Iran based on both
good political will and responsible judgment can
redress the current situation. We call for additional and
serious efforts by the parties directly involved and
sincerely hope that they will demonstrate the political
will needed to lead to a comprehensive solution to the
issue of nuclear-capacity development in the Islamic
Republic of Iran.

