Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The acceding countries Bulgaria, Romania,
Croatia and Turkey and the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA) country Iceland, member of the
European Economic Area, align themselves with this
declaration.

Let me begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Jessen-Petersen, for his
briefing and by reiterating the European Union's full
support for his work towards implementation of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

It has been nearly a year since the political
process was derailed by an outbreak of violence in
Kosovo in March 2004 and a few months since the
central-level institutions began to function. The
European Union shares the Secretary-General's
assessment that the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government have shown "some encouraging and
tangible progress" in their commitment to the
implementation of the standards. The new
Government's publicly stated resolve in this regard is
duly noted.

The European Union supports UNMIK's
prioritization of actions carried out within the
framework of those standards that most directly affect
minority communities and the goal of a democratic and
multi-ethnic Kosovo, especially those concerning the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons, the
protection of minority communities, freedom of
movement and decentralization. In that context, the
European Union calls on the Provisional Institutions to
make full use of the increased competencies recently
transferred to them by UNMIK. It encourages UNMIK
to examine the possibility of further such transfers.

Given the important milestones coming up in
2005, we welcome the substantial dialogue between all
Kosovo communities, as well as between Belgrade and
Pristina. The European Union calls upon all
communities to participate actively in the ongoing
process leading to the reform of local government and
to the establishment of a decentralized and sustainable
administration that can guarantee the protection of
minority communities and improved living conditions
for the population at large.

In that context, the European Union calls
particularly on the Kosovo Serb community to engage
constructively in the Provisional Institutions at a
central level. Kosovo Serbs must recognize that it is in
their immediate interest to participate in the ongoing
political process; that is the best way for them to
promote their legitimate concerns and to have a say in
shaping the future of Kosovo.

While the European Union is encouraged by the
fact that the authorities in Belgrade have announced
their readiness to restart a direct dialogue with Pristina,
it regrets that they have not as yet encouraged Kosovo
Serb participation in any of the ongoing processes.

While recognizing that progress in the
implementation of some of the standards has been
made, substantial further progress across all eight
standards will be necessary, particularly on the priority
actions taken in the framework of those standards. This
is especially important given the fact that we are
approaching the comprehensive review of overall
progress made towards implementation of the
standards, to be held in mid-2005. That review will
have a major impact on the timing of final-status talks,
and it is therefore in the common interest of all
concerned to ensure that real, verifiable progress has
been made in the implementation of the standards.

In the long term, and with the European
perspective for the Western Balkans in mind,
accelerated implementation of standards should not be
viewed as a goal in itself nor as a quicker way to a
decision on the future status of Kosovo. Through this
exercise of implementing the standards, and thereby
building a sustainable democratic and multi-ethnic
society, the people of Kosovo will move closer to
realizing that European perspective.

In that regard, the European Union underlines
that full and unrestricted cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia is an international obligation and an
essential requirement for further rapprochement with
the European Union.

The European Union has been steadfastly at the
side of the people of Kosovo throughout the post-
conflict period by providing the lion's share of
resources - military, financial and human - to repair
the damage of war and decades of under-investment.
The European Union will continue to help Kosovo to
make progress towards sustainable economic
development. However, such development is
contingent on the creation by UNMIK and the
Provisional Institutions, as a matter of priority, of the
necessary conditions in the framework of a
comprehensive, integrated strategy compatible with the
European Union.

I wish to conclude by reiterating that Kosovo will
not return to a pre-l999 situation and that the European
Union is unwavering in its commitment to helping a
democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo, characterized by
the protection it provides to its minority communities,
on its way to full integration in Europe, regardless of
its future status.

