Mr. Akram (Pakistan): First of all, I wish to
congratulate the United Kingdom on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the current
month and the delegation of South Africa on an
excellent presidency last month.

Madam President, we welcome this open debate
initiated by your Government on an important subject.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered by the
representative of Jamaica on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Post-conflict peacebuilding is crucial for
establishing peace and sustainable development in war-
torn countries. Together with conflict prevention and
peacekeeping, peacebuilding must be part of a
comprehensive response to complex crises. While that
concept is well recognized, the challenge is to fully
operationalize it in post-conflict stabilization efforts, to
ensure coherence and synergy between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding activities from the very outset of the
engagement of the United Nations, and thus to ensure a
smooth transition from peacekeeping to conditions of
self-sustaining peace and development.

To ensure such synergy and effective
peacebuilding, the 2005 World Summit recognized the
need for a dedicated institutional mechanism. That led
to the establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Together with the Peacebuilding Support Office and
the Peacebuilding Fund, the Commission is now the
central instrument for peacebuilding activities. The
unique structure and composition of the Commission
was conceived to bring together "all relevant actors to
marshal resources and to advise on and propose
integrated strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding
and recovery" (resolution 1645 (2005), para. 2 (a)).

Indeed, several issues reflected in the
presidency's concept paper for this debate (S/2008/29l, annex) - for example, the need to address the critical
gaps in peacebuilding - constituted the basic rationale
for the creation of the Peacebuilding Commission and
are indeed part of its mandate. As the Non-Aligned
Movement and others have pointed out, several of
those issues are being discussed by the Commission in
its various formats. We endorse the view that all
efforts, including this debate, should aim at
strengthening the role and the mandate of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

The coherence and integration of peacebuilding
activities and the provision of timely, adequate and
sustained funding are objectives that can best be
promoted by the Commission, since all major
stakeholders and partners are represented there.
However, in order to ensure that that task is conducted
effectively, the international community needs to
develop a common strategic vision of peacebuilding.

That requires, first, greater convergence between
the perspectives of the partners and those of the host
countries, based primarily on the priorities and policies
of the latter: national ownership and leadership are key
for the success of peacebuilding. Secondly, all actors
should demonstrate genuine political will and
flexibility to ensure effective peacebuilding. Thirdly, in
order to ensure a comprehensive approach, the
Peacebuilding Commission must be involved in
peacebuilding from the initial phases. The Security
Council should, we believe, make use of paragraph 16
of Council resolution 1645 (2005) and General
Assembly resolution 60/180 to seek the Commission's
advice in situations where peacekeeping missions are
still deployed. Empowerment of the Secretary-
General's Special Representatives to lead and
coordinate peacekeeping and peacebuilding is, of
course, desirable. However, this should not supplant,
but rather supplement, the authority and the role of
host countries.

There is, no doubt, a requirement for adequate
civilian expertise, particularly to support rule-of-law
activities. Such capacity is already being provided by
the United Nations in integrated missions. We also
support the Standing Police Capacity. However, the
concept of "rapidly deployable civilian capacities", in
large numbers and as a standing structure or
mechanism, needs further clarification with regard to
its objectives and scope, its actual requirements and its
possible implications. A somewhat similar proposal -
to establish a civilian cadre of 2,500 personnel - was
made earlier by the Secretary-General. It became the
object of numerous and legitimate questions and
concerns.

It should also be noted that civilian capacities
with relevant experience and perspectives are normally
available in the host countries and among their
diasporas, which can and should be harnessed and
utilized. Mr. Brahimi's comments this morning were
very pertinent in that regard. The objective should be
the durable development of national capacities, not
steps to replace them. These are conclusions that we
derive from the Peacebuilding Commission's
discussions relating to the countries on its agenda.

The identification of gaps is a key step in
formulating and implementing successful strategies.
That should be done not piecemeal but through an
objective and comprehensive diagnosis of the situation.
Experience has shown that the biggest and most
ominous gap in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
strategies is the failure to comprehend and address the
root causes of conflicts. In particular, the issues of
poverty and unemployment and the imperative of
socio-economic development have remained largely
neglected in plans and strategies.

Post-conflict challenges in several countries are
likely to become further exacerbated by the current
global food crisis. That was mentioned in the
Peacebuilding Commission's discussion on Sierra
Leone yesterday. We still lack a strategy that would
enable countries emerging from conflict to stand on
their own feet to achieve self-sustained peace and
development. Many promises of aid remain unfulfilled.
Often the benefit and effectiveness of such aid is open
to question, a point raised by others and by
Mr. Brahimi in this discussion.

One conclusion seems to be that such aid is best
channelled through the budgets of the host
Governments. On the other hand, many countries
afflicted by complex conflicts continue to be deprived
of revenues and earnings from their own resources, due
to unequal trade regimes, industrial country
agricultural subsidies, an inability to process their raw
materials and so forth. One example is again Sierra
Leone. Insufficient attention has been accorded to
national and international mechanisms to halt the
illegal exploitation of the natural resources of these
countries or, indeed, to enable the countries concerned
to make full use of those resources for the benefit of
their own peoples.

Thus, a fuller perspective of the peacebuilding
challenges and the formulation of adequate response
strategies are essential to achieve sustainable peace and
development. Such a comprehensive approach can be
best pursued through an inclusive and participatory
process. The Pakistan delegation expects and hopes
that the potential of the Peacebuilding Commission
will be fully utilized to this end by all Member States,
including by the members of the Council.

