Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Ambassador Cherif and the Chadian
team for the superb work they have done in December.
It is still a little early to uncork the champagne because
our programme has filled up beyond the symbolic date
set by this wrap-up debate, but we know that we are
in good hands in dealing with this late-year urgent
business.

This monthly debate is obviously a bit unusual, and
somewhat moving and special because in a few days
we will say farewell to five marvelous colleagues and
their teams. I tell them all - Maria, Joon, Sylvie, Gary,
Eugene-Richard and Olivier - that I have thoroughly
enjoyed working with them, as has my team. Two years
of shared living in the Council have forged strong
links that will survive the separation. For us, it has
been an honour to work with them in a body that is
so important to our Organization. We have not always
agreed on everything. France, a very active, activist
and even overactive penholder, has asked a great deal
of them with the texts it has submitted, with sometimes
very ambitious deadlines. They have always responded
with great enthusiasm and expertise, faithful to their
interests and values and to the desire to elevate us
collectively. They have taken important initiatives and
contributed their ideas, for which we warmly thank
them. The time allotted to me here does not allow me
to say a word to each of them individually, but we will
have many opportunities to do so in the coming days.

It is also a rather special debate because of its date.
This being December, it is an opportunity to offer a
status update on the past year and to outline prospects
for 2015. I shall begin with two topics on which we
have made insufficient progress because we have been
unable to settle our differences.

That is the case of Syria, obviously. Certainly,
the work of eliminating Syria's military chemical
capabilities advanced in 2014, although there remain
gray areas concerning the regime's initial statements
and concerning the repeated use of chlorine gas.
Certainly, the Council opened new paths to humanitarian
assistance by adopting important resolutions upon
the initiative of Luxembourg, Australia and Jordan,
to which I pay tribute. However, the Council remains
divided on the political aspect of the crisis. That is
why we must support the ongoing efforts of Staffan de
Mistura. We hope that they will bear first fruits in 2015
and reopen a space for a political settlement.

The same can be said regarding Ukraine, where
Russia's refusal to listen to the very clear messages of
other Council members and the General Assembly has
contributed to tensions and the impasse. Likewise, we
are concerned about Russia's initiatives to incorporate
Abkhazia and South Ossetia, efforts that challenge
international norms. We hope that in 2015 Russia will
engage in real de-escalation efforts, both in terms of
rhetoric and in practice; we actively encourage such
de-escalation. President Hollande visited Moscow to
promote a change in Russia's approach, and France
will continue to seek ways, without undermining its
principles, to improve relations between Russia and its
neighbours.

As significant as they are, those divisions have
not, to date - and I hope also in 2015 - prevented the
Council from acting in many other crises, some ofwhich
sprung up in 2014. Such is the case regarding terrorism,
our mobilization against the terrorist group Daesh and
the Ebola outbreak, which has beenjudged to constitute
a threat to international peace and security, as well as
the crises in Africa. I will address two examples: the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In the Central African Republic, joint
action on the part of the African, French, European and
United Nations forces have helped to avoid the spectre
of genocide, 20 years after the one in Rwanda. That
mobilization - which took place on the initiative of
France, but with the support of all - is a tribute to the
United Nations. That effort must continue in 2015 to
help the country get out of the rut that it finds itselfin.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, vigorous
action on the part of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and the Force Commander has
served to enhance the image of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Crucial deadlines lie ahead in
early 2015, including on commitments with regard to
military actions against armed groups, starting with
the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda, if
they do not disarm; the reconfiguration of the United
Nations presence, taking into account the strategic
review under way; and the role of the United Nations in
the light of the presidential elections.

Boko Haram's crimes can no longer go unpunished.
France supports the countries of the region. It encourages
regional initiatives to halt that terrorist organization.

The crisis in Gaza this summer was a new and
tragic reminder that the status quo is not an option.
France believes that the Security Council must play its
part in relaunching the peace process and in guiding the
parties to a negotiated settlement. France will continue
working with all parties in search of a consensus text,
with that in mind.

The year 2015 will be marked by two important
events that we should not miss: the review of
peacekeeping operations and the seventieth anniversary
of the United Nations. In last month's wrap-up session
(see S/PV.7325), my delegation spoke about the review
of peacekeeping operations, which I will not repeat,
except to highlight its timeliness and state that it
provides a unique opportunity to improve an instrument
that, although it was not foreseen in the Charter, has
become the most familiar face of the United Nations
after, of course, our Secretary-General. France will
make every effort in that regard.

The year 2015 will also mark the seventieth
anniversary of our Organization. France intends
therefore to promote its initiative with regard to the veto
in cases of mass atrocities. It also calls for significant
progress on the issue of the expansion of the Security
Council.

Finally, I will mention a subject close to the heart of
my delegation, namely, the attention focused on human
rights issues in the daily work of the Council, and in
particular, the situation in North Korea. Violations by
the North Korean regime, as reported by the Commission
of Inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, constitute, both in their severity
and their magnitude, a threat to international peace and
security. That situationjustifies the full mobilization of
the Security Council.

I conclude by again thanking our Chadian
presidency, expressing my gratitude to the outgoing
five States and rejoicing in soon be able to welcome,
around the table, the five newly elected members, to
whom I wish good luck and pledge the full cooperation
of my country.

