This statement is issued on behalf of the members of the Group of Friends on the protection of civilians in armed conflict: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Cote d'Ivoire, France, Germany, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Uruguay. The Group of Friends thanks the Estonian presidency of the Security Council for organizing today's open debate. We also thank today's briefers for their statements. This debate takes place in unprecedented times. A year ago, we were celebrating the twentieth anniversary of the protection of civilians resolution 1265 (1999) at the Security Council and committing to strengthening the protection agenda for the years to come. Today, protection challenges are as acute as ever, and the protection of civilians becomes even more crucial in the time of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The pandemic poses a threat to human security and exacerbates the vulnerability of people living in conflict situations. It magnifies existing protection challenges. The primary responsibility to protect civilians lies with the parties to armed conflict and includes facilitating safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access. In that regard, measures to combat COVID-19 must not negatively impact the delivery of humanitarian assistance and protection. We must also be watchful for measures that increase the vulnerability of certain groups or that unnecessarily limit the ability of United Nations mission personnel to fulfil their mandates. The Group of Friends welcomes and continues to support the Secretary- General's call for an immediate global ceasefire in armed conflict in the light of the global COVID-19 pandemic. We call on the Security Council to endorse that call without delay. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/366) paints a bleak picture of the state of the protection of civilians. The number of civilian deaths and injuries remains appallingly high, as does the number of displaced persons, who are often forced to flee multiple times. In that regard, we take note of the Secretary-General's establishment of the High-level Panel on Internal Displacement. Indiscriminate attacks occur with horrifying frequency and have devastating consequences for the civilian population, in particular children. In that regard, on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of two of the optional protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, we reiterate the importance of protecting children during armed conflicts, including by guaranteeing unimpeded access for humanitarian actors. Conflict-related sexual violence persists, often as part of a broader strategy. All too often, the wounded and sick, as well as the medical and humanitarian personnel and their facilities, are intentionally attacked. Given the importance of independent reporting, the decrease in journalists reporting from conflict zones owing to the high level of insecurity is of grave concern. The Secretary-General has emphasized that civilian suffering could be significantly reduced if international humanitarian law and international human rights law are respected. We recognize the Security Council's consistent calls for all parties to observe their obligations under international humanitarian law and urge immediate compliance. Member States, as well as parties to armed conflicts, are obliged to respect and ensure respect for international humanitarian law in all circumstances. National implementation of international humanitarian law is the cornerstone of that important source of law. Accordingly, we commend the resolution adopted by the thirty-third International Conference of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), on national implementation of international humanitarian law, and support the Secretary-General's enhanced focus on national implementation of the protection of civilians agenda. Moreover, we echo the Secretary-General's recommendations to ensure accountability for violations of international humanitarian law. Our international legal framework on protection of civilians is sound; the challenge lies in its implementation. The Group of Friends welcomes the adoption by the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court of an amendment to the Rome Statute to include the war crime of intentionally using starvation of civilians as a method of warfare in non-international armed conflicts. We call on States parties to the Statute to ratify or accept the amendment. Fighting impunity is of paramount importance to ensure that violations do not go unpunished and to deliver justice to victims. The Group of Friends wishes to highlight the active role played by the Council since the last open debate (see S/PV.8534) by welcoming the adoption of resolution 2474 (2019), on missing persons, and 2475 (2019), on persons with disabilities. We urge Member States to implement all the appropriate measures necessary to clarify the fate of the missing and to fully cooperate with all relevant actors, especially the ICRC. As resolution 2475 (2019) is crucial to the better protection of persons with disabilities, we also call on the Secretary-General and the Member States to strengthen their implementation efforts. Despite progress, the Group of Friends would like to comment on the risks and opportunities in relation to the protection of civilians identified in the Secretary- General's report. First, we remain gravely concerned at the humanitarian harm being caused during active hostilities in populated areas. The nature of armed conflict in urban areas poses acute challenges for the protection of civilians, and more can be done to strengthen compliance with international humanitarian law during armed conflict and to advance the protection agenda. Strict application of the rules and principles of international humanitarian law, including on precaution, humanity, distinction, necessity and proportionality, is required by all parties to conflict. In that regard, the Group of Friends takes note of the consultation process towards developing a political declaration to enhance the protection of civilians in urban warfare, including protection from the possible humanitarian impacts of the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. Secondly, new technologies are changing human interaction profoundly, including in times of armed conflict. Digital technologies have helped protect civilians in situations of armed conflicts and have offered a range of opportunities for more efficient clarification in cases of missing persons, as well as in the recording of casualties. At the same time, those technologies have also been misused, thus exacerbating violence. The Group of Friends stresses the necessity of responding to the malicious use of digital technology and calls on all Member States to use those new assets in compliance with their existing obligations under international law, including the Charter of the United Nations, international humanitarian law and human rights law. In that regard, the Group of Friends would also like to emphasize that malicious cyber operations on medical facilities, as currently experienced throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, cannot be considered acceptable in either times of peace or of armed conflict. Thirdly, we note the increased attention given in the Secretary-General's report to civilian suffering linked to the environmental impact of armed conflict and climate change. Armed conflicts can contribute to significant environmental degradation that, in turn, affects the population. Environmental damage in conflicts should, therefore, be more visible in humanitarian reporting. We therefore call for a better understanding of the matter. Fourthly, the Group of Friends notes that 29 May is International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers. We welcome and celebrate the focus on women and peacekeeping. The Group recalls that women peacekeepers deployed in civilian, military and police roles, including in leadership positions, have a significant impact on the pursuit of peace and protection of civilians, and we encourage the full, effective and meaningful participation of women in United Nations peacekeeping operations. We pay tribute to the service and sacrifice of all peacekeepers, particularly while implementing mandates to protect civilians. The Group of Friends reiterates the importance that we attach to the full and effective implementation of protection of civilians mandates by relevant United Nations peacekeeping operations, and we encourage safe, meaningful and effective engagement with local and affected communities in that regard. The Group takes note of the 2019 Department of Peace Operations policy on the protection of civilians and of the recent launch of the handbook entitled "Protection of Civilians in United Nations Peacekeeping". We stress that the Security Council must ensure that United Nations peacekeeping operations have clear and realistic mandates and that the General Assembly must allocate resources to them that are consistent with those mandates. We also encourage peacekeeping operations to take into account gender mainstreaming as a cross-cutting issue in the implementation of their mandates and to deploy gender advisers. We further underline the importance of peacekeeping personnel receiving extensive and adequate pre-deployment and supplementary in-mission training in order to implement protection of civilians mandates appropriately. The Security Council should support the inclusion of protection of civilians mandates in relevant peacekeeping operations as an integral part of comprehensive political strategies, in coordination with the Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries and host States. Finally, we call for results and accountability in the implementation of protection of civilians mandates, in line with resolution 2436 (2018). As the United Nations marks its seventy-fifth anniversary, the protection of civilians - or the lack thereof - continues to have a huge impact on the priorities of the Organization in its three pillars. More consistency and political will are needed in the overall efforts to enhance protection of civilians and implementation of the law and political commitments, both by Member States and parties to conflict and at the level of the Security Council. The Group of Friends is committed to doing its part and to contributing to global-level advocacy to enhance the protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
