Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania):
Thank you, Madam President, for convening this open
meeting on Timor-Leste.

We would like to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi and to
commend him for introducing the fine report of the
Secretary-General (S/2005/310) reviewing the final
activities of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) and updating us on
preparations for the establishment of the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), as recently
authorized by the Security Council. Tanzania continues
to fully support the work of the United Nations in
Timor-Leste.

We are encouraged by the positive developments
that have been recorded in Timor-Leste over the past
three months. Democracy has been further
strengthened by the holding of local elections in
several districts, small hurdles here and there having
been overcome. It is also encouraging to note a
leadership capacity to peacefully resolve potentially
divisive differences, as was the case with the
settlement of the recent controversy over the teaching
of religion in schools.

The building of key State institutions, especially
the judicial system, takes time. We wish to commend
the speedy progress being made in laying the
groundwork for the delivery of justice in Timor-Leste,
as this is an important element in the continuing effort
to rebuild and establish the rule of law in the country.

We note with appreciation the cooperation
extended by both Timor-Leste and Indonesia to the
independent Commission of Experts appointed by the
Secretary-General to review the prosecutions of
previous human rights violations. We trust that the
report of the Commission of Experts will strengthen
the work of the Truth and Friendship Commission
recently established by the two countries.

Strengthening relations between Timor-Leste and
neighbouring Indonesia is a priority. The visit to
Timor-Leste by President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono
on 8 and 9 April and his commitment to resolve
outstanding issues between the two countries, covering
border security, maritime boundaries and the status of
Timor-Leste refugees residing in Indonesia, constitute
a very positive act of understanding, reconciliation and
good-neighbourliness. Expanded bilateral cooperation
is key for resolving residual issues to the benefit of the
two countries. We wish to pay tribute to this
encouraging high-level development and hope that this
cooperation will be extended to cover outstanding
sensitive issues, including the prosecution of serious
human rights violations committed in Timor-Leste.

We note with satisfaction the step-by-step growth
of Timorese State institutions, realizing full well that
uninterrupted international support will continue to be
required beyond UNMISET to ensure the growth of a
viable State.

The one-year United Nations follow-on mission,
the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL),
which will focus on knowledge and skills transfer,
marks an important step towards full Timorese
ownership of the nation-building process. While
thanking all those who contributed to the success of
UNMISET, we welcome UNOTIL; we should ensure
that it is equally successful in its follow-on mandate.
The Secretary-General has signalled an anticipated
shortfall of required resources under UNOTIL, which
will need to be bridged by the international community.
The additional resources will further stabilize the
security of Timor-Leste and strengthen its democratic
governance institutions. The call by the Secretary-
General should be heeded, with a timely and adequate
response.

In the face of poverty, unemployment and
illiteracy, among the problems that continue to plague
Timor-Leste, nation-building efforts can stumble.
External support to help fight those problems will
continue to be needed even after the conclusion of
UNOTIL's mandate.

A combination of popular support, energetic
leadership, a focused national development strategy
and democratic governance has set Timor-Leste on the
trajectory towards becoming a vibrant and prosperous
country. Continuing international support is required
for the specific objective of consolidating the pillars of
statehood and the path of sustainable development,
which Timor-Leste has already established and clearly
defined.

