Mr. Seger (spoke in French): Since this is the last

meeting of the Council before the closing of the United
Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) at the end of 2014,
not including the meeting scheduled for January, let me
begin by conveying my heartfelt thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, and his entire team in Bujumbura.
I would like to welcome in particular the exemplary
professionalism and unshakable dedication that they
have always shown in implementing the complex tasks
assigned them by the Council and the implementation
of a smooth transition by the end of the year. Thanks
to their support, I was able to play my part in the
peacebuilding process.

I also welcome the presence of my dear friend
Ambassador Zacharie Gahutu, Director General for
International Organizations and Non-Governmental
Organizations at the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
Burundi.

I would like to cover three main points today. After
some remarks on the current situation in the country,
I would like to expand on the subject of the end of the
United Nations mission and its implications. Finally, I
would like to talk about the round-table meeting that
will be held on 11 and 12 December in Bujumbura
between the Government and its main bilateral and
multilateral partners.

During my most recent briefing to the Council
in May (see S/PV.7174), I observed a growing lack of
trust that was hindering the country's progress on two
levels: both internally between the ruling party and
the opposition and externally between the Government
and its main international partners. Today, with the
electoral process fully under way, those tensions persist.
To not repeat what has already been said by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, I will refrain
from dwelling on the details of recent developments,
but will limit myself to some key messages with
regard to next year's elections, which are of paramount
importance.
Inclusive participation is key. Indeed, I believe
we cannot overestimate that element. All political
stakeholders must be allowed to participate in the
electoral process in a free, fair and secure manner.
Political space must be opened up not only in theory
but in practice and throughout the entire country. The
Government is primarily responsible in that regard. I
therefore call on it to prepare for the elections with the
confidence of a country that is undertaking this exercise
in democracy for the third time since emerging from its
bloody past, and with the vigilance of a country that is
aware of the fragility of its peacebuilding process and
the responsibility inherent in it.

I also urge the opposition parties not to repeat the
mistakes of 2010 and to participate in the elections.
They must declare their willingness to contribute to
the country's political dynamic in order to strengthen
the democratic process and work hand in hand towards
a prosperous future for Burundi. There must be a
medium- and long-term vision rather than a focus on
short-term political considerations.

Finally, while the primary responsibility lies with
the Government, I appeal to all political stakeholders to
refrain from any behaviour that could further increase
tensions or lead to acts of political violence. I remain
confident that that will not occur, since no-one would
stand to gain from it, but we should all continue to work
hand in hand to prevent that from happening.

BNUB's imminent departure at the end of the year
is a crucial and delicate moment for Burundi - crucial
because it gives the country an opportunity to prove
that it is ready to start a new chapter in its peacebuilding
process, but also delicate because it comes only five
months prior to the general elections. BNUB will
leave behind serious gaps, not least in the areas of
political dialogue and high-level facilitation, which
were identified as priority areas in the joint transition
plan adopted by the Council earlier this year. However,
efforts are well under way to ensure a smooth transition
into the post-BNUB phase, and I am happy to note that.
I welcome the United Nations electoral mission, which
will be deployed with the approval of the Government
on 1 January 2015 and will remain until after the
elections.

The strengthening of the United Nations country
team is also on the right path. It is important that the
transition from BNUB to the country team be carried
out in a seamless manner. I therefore call upon the
United Nations Development Programme for a timely
nomination of a Resident Coordinator for Burundi
with the necessary profile to support the country at the
socioeconomic level and on related institutional and
political issues.

Furthermore, the Government's commitment to
cooperate with the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights to continue to promote that agenda
in Burundi is an encouraging sign, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General noted.
However, while the political will to open a stand-
alone office exists, the necessary financial means to
maintain its field presence are still lacking. Therefore,
as Chair of the Burundi configuration, I organized a
working lunch with Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights Ivan Simonovie to raise awareness
among interested Member States of the needs of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. I was encouraged by the broad support
expressed at that meeting, and I appeal to participants
today to make a contribution. That echoes what the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General just
stated a few minutes ago. Beyond the Office's role as
a protective presence, considerable work remains to
be done in the field of human rights in terms of civil
and political rights, the transitional justice process and
the establishment of social and economic rights for all
Burundians, which is a goal we all pursue.

Last week, I also had a very fruitful meeting with
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to the
Great Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit. We both believe
that the current challenges have to be tackled through
a regional approach and are committed to working
together to enhance the role of regional and subregional
organizations. Those organizations, including the
African Union, the East African Community, the
Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries
and others, will become even more important once
BNUB has left Burundi. Regional cooperation is also
crucial to fulfilling the economic potential of the
countries of the Great Lakes region and promoting the
socioeconomic development necessary for its people.

I believe Burundi will continue to make progress in
peacebuilding, leaving its conflicted past behind once
and for all. Until then, vigilance is required, including
by the Council, and I will seek to provide continued
support to the country on its path.
This brings me to my third and final point, the
round-table meeting. On 9 October, I wrote a letter
to the Council announcing that a round-table meeting
between the Government and its main bilateral and
institutional partners would take place on 11 and
12 December in Bujumbura. That decision was reached
at a high-level luncheon I organized on 29 September,
attended by the First Vice-President and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Burundi, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and other
eminent persons from Member States and multilateral
institutions.

On the basis of the concept paper, which I also
transmitted to the Council, it was agreed that the round
table would have three objectives: first, to take stock of
progressachievedinandchallengestotheimplementation
of the second poverty reduction strategy paper, which
was presented at the 2012 Geneva Partners Conference,
in particular in view of the 2015 elections; secondly,
to discuss the implications of BNUB's departure and
its consequences for the future cooperation between
Burundi and its bilateral and institutional partners at
the regional and international level; and, thirdly, to
evaluate future perspectives for a mutually beneficial
partnership for Burundi's development and long-term
prosperity on the assumption that, in 2015, fair, safe,
democratic and universal elections will have laid the
foundation for peaceful and sustainable development in
the country.

Ideally, the number of high-level representatives of
the Government and the main partners participating in
the round table would be limited in order to encourage
an open and frank conversation in an informal setting. I
am encouraged by the many assurances of commitment
I have already received from high-level representatives
in that regard. Together with the Government, we are
currently working on a joint declaration to be adopted
at the end of the December meeting, and we will submit
it to all the main partners in due time. The declaration
aims at identifying the progress achieved, as well as the
areas requiring further attention and intervention. Its
objective is to define a new set of mutual commitments
that would guide the common way forward during the
election year and beyond.

I welcome the Government's decision to organize
the round table. Invitations should be sent out soon. I
intend to travel to Burundi in the days leading up to the
round table to meet the parties involved, as is the usual
practice. Prior to that, I will be part of a delegation of
Chairs of the Peacebuilding Commission visiting the
African Union in Addis Ababa. On that occasion, I will
further discuss the issue of regional engagement.

There is no doubt that Burundi is going through a
challenging and decisive phase. The tasks at hand are
critical to the consolidation of the gains the country
has achieved and to laying the foundation for a long-
term vision, following the elections in 2015. BNUB's
drawdown and, even more importantly, the 2015
elections are milestones and must be managed with
utmost care, but they also offer new opportunities.
Burundi has a historical chance to show the international
community that it has overcome its painful past and that
it is embarking on a new era based on strong democratic
institutions and defined by the improvement of the
living standards of its population, in particular of its
youth. The international community must help Burundi
achieve those goals.

