The President: I should like to inform the
Council that l have received letters from the
representatives of the Sudan and Sweden, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hassan
(Sudan) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Liden (Sweden) took the seat reservedfor him
at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Le Roy to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should like to acknowledge the presence at the
Council table of His Excellency Mr. Mikhail Margelov,
Special Representative of the President of the Russian
Federation on the Sudan and Chairman of the Foreign
Relations Committee of the Council of Federation and
2
the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation. On
behalf of the Council, I extend a warm welcome to him.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations. Members of the Council have
before them two reports of the Secretary-General on
the deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, contained in documents
S/2009/297 and 8/2009/352.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations. I now give him the floor.


