Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to congratulate the Rwandan presidency for taking
the initiative of convening this open debate on "United
Nations peacekeeping operations: The United Nations
and regional partnership and its evolution". I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Mr. Popowski of the European Union and Mr. Antonio
of the African Union for their briefings.

In my statement, I will emphasize the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.
There are three main areas I would like to stress,
namely, the political, operational and financial.

In terms of the political, despite the primacy of
the Security Council, the dispositions of Chapter VIII
of the Charter set out and encourage agreements with
regional entities to maintain international peace and
security. In that regard, the United Nations should
establish and strengthen effective partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations.

We particularly welcome the partnership and
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in the area of peacekeeping. We applaud
the annual meeting of the members of the Security
Council and the members of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, along with consultations
between the Secretariats of the United Nations and the
African Union Commission through their respective
offices, and we encourage exchanges of personnel and
knowledge between the United Nations and the African
Union at all levels and in all areas.

The African Union, which is the successor to
the Organization of African Unity, is a young but
committed organization. It is bold and determined,
has swift deployment capacities and increasingly
takes risks and imposes peace where it didn't exist,
taking into account linguistic, historical, geographical
and cultural symmetries, thus arriving at a better
understanding of the realities on the ground, all of
which is undeniable. Despite weaknesses in financial,
human and logistical and material resources, the AU
has deployed a number of peacekeeping operations on
the continent, specifically the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan, the AU-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, the African Union Military Observer
Mission in Somalia and the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali, as well as the International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic.
Those regional operations have greatly contributed to
peace and security internationally.

We must recall that Africa is prominent on the
agenda of the Security Council, with 16 United Nations
operations currently deployed on the continent. All six
countries currently on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission are also African. We should add to that
the crises in the Central African Republic, South Sudan
and North Africa, specifically Libya, as well as other
threats, such as terrorism, organized crime, trafficking
of all types in the Sahel region and maritime piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea and along the Somalian coast.
Those many crises are one more reason to strengthen
the partnership. Meetings and consultations between
the the African Union and the United Nations should be
deepened and intensified, in a spirit of mutual respect,
before taking important decisions with regard to
international peace and security and on the continent.

The two organizations can and should do better
with regard to conflict prevention and mediation, as
well as peacekeeping and peacebuilding in Africa. We
ask the United Nations and the bilateral and multilateral
partners to assist the African Union to operationalize as
quickly as possible its Peace and Security Architecture,
especially the Rapid Reaction Force project and the
African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises
team. With regard to operations, despite laudable
initiatives, good will and the work of the African
Union and other regional organizations such as the
Economic Community of Western African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Southern African Development Community and the
Economic Community of Central African States to
resolve disputes on the continent, those subregional
organizations still face major challenges with respect
to resources, equipment and logistics.

The insufficiencies of the African States and
subregional and regional organizations are usually
compensated by assistance from the United Nations and
bilateral partners, who provide the necessary support,
whether by flying in troop contingents or by donating
equipment. We can also address those gaps through
South-South cooperation and even intra-African
cooperation to strengthen our own capacities so
that we do not rely exclusively on outside support.
Likewise, coordination, the exchange of information
and collaboration have enabled the improved analysis
of situations and better planning and implementation
ofpeacekeeping operations. In that regard, we welcome
the joint United Nations-African Union review of
the African Union Mission in Somalia and the joint
evaluation missions of the United Nations-African
Union in advance of the transformation of African
peacekeeping operations to peacebuilding operations
of the United Nations.

With respect to finances, we applaud the
contributions of the United Nations, the European
Union, and the bilateral and multilateral partners
to peacekeeping operations. The United Nations
Trust Fund, the African Peace Facility and voluntary
contributions have all been very useful to the
peacekeeping operations of the African Union,
especially for the African Union Mission in Somalia.
We welcome the transformation of the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali into the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and we are awaiting the transition of
the African-led Mission in the Central African Republic
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
in September.

It is important to promote capacity-building for the
stabilization of recent post-conflict areas and also to
provide for the security of maritime routes and coasts.
We therefore welcome the increase in the personnel
of the Mission and the support to the Somali army
provided through a trust fund. We would also ask the
Security Council to re-examine the arms embargo
imposed on Somalia in order to facilitate the supply of
weapons and other material to the security and defence
forces of Somalia.

Given the current economic and financial context
and the balance of power on the continent, African
efforts, supported by United Nations mandates, are
very important, because they are less costly than United
Nations operations and are increasingly effective. In
that regard, the African Union Mission in Somalia is
a good example of partnership between the African
Union, the United Nations, the European Union and
other partners and might serve as a model for more
significant contributions to the budget.

We call upon Member States and partners to
provide voluntary contributions to the Peace Fund of
the African Union, and we ask the Security Council
to make available to the African Union the necessary
resources that will enable it to further contribute to
international peace and security. It is time for all of the
recommendations of the Prodi report (see S/2008/813)
designed to ensure predictable, flexible and lasting
financing to be taken into account and implemented.

Finally, we would like to pay tribute to all the
African troop contingents for their work on the ground,
despite limited means and difficulties encountered, and
we would like to express our gratitude to the United
Nations, the European Union and the multilateral and
bilateral partners. Chad continues to be committed
to contributing to international peace and security,
as reflected in its past contributions in support of
the Central African Republic in the context of the
Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of
the Bangui Agreements, the Multinational Force of the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community in
the Central African Republic, the Multinational Force
of Central Africa, the Mission for the Consolidation of
Peace in the Central African Republic, and the African-
led International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic, as well as African-led International Support
Mission in Mali, which has today become the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.

