Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by thanking the Under-Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs, Patricia O'Brien, for briefing the Council on
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/360)
submitted pursuant to resolution 1976 (2011) on the
modalities for the establishment of specialized Somali
courts to try suspected pirates in Somalia and outside,
including an extraterritorial Somali specialized
anti-piracy court and the possible participation of
international personnel and other international support
and assistance.

The international community is facing an
unprecedented and growing threat from piracy. The
report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/360) presents a
very alarming picture. Despite an increased naval
presence in the Internationally Recommended Transit
Corridor (IRTC), piracy attacks off the coast of
Somalia have continued to increase, as have the
geographical range of the attacks and the level of
violence employed by pirates.

As of 14 June, 23 ships are being held by pirates,
with a total of 477 hostages. The geographical area of
the attacks now stretches to 2.8 million square miles,
which is not easy for naval forces to patrol. The use of
overwhelming force by pirates to overcome security
personnel on board merchant ships and the use of
hijacked crews as human shields are also matters of
serious concern.
Piracy is not only a threat to the freedom of
maritime navigation; it has destabilizing effects on
global and regional trade and on security and is

jeopardizing the lives of seafarers, who are the
lifeblood of the international economy.

To combat this menace, this Council has adopted
a multilateral and multidimensional approach that as a
first step led to the establishment of the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, in January 2009, of
which India is a founding member. Though naval ships
deployed in the Gulf of Aden have successfully
thwarted several piracy attempts and have provided
security escorts to the merchant marine in those waters,
the growing scope and expanding area covered by the
problem indicate that naval operations alone may not
be sufficient and that there is an urgent need to adopt a
comprehensive counter-piracy strategy.

In that connection, I would like to mention the
issue of seafarers, who are the lifeline of merchant
shipping. India contributes around seven per cent of the
world's merchant marine and thus has an abiding
interest in their safety and security. So far, the main
focus of our concerted efforts has been to protect the
ships from pirate attacks and on issues related to
prosecution and punishment of pirates. Keeping in
View the increasing incidences of seafarers being taken
as hostages and the intensity of the violence used
against them, there is a need to pay special attention to
the safety, security and well being of seafarers taken
hostage and to their quick release by whatever means
appropriate.

In addition to a naval solution, this Council is
also focusing its attention on ways and means to
effectively apprehend, prosecute and punish those who
engage in piracy. Capacity-building, not only of
Somalia but of other States in the region, is an essential
component of such mechanisms. India has welcomed
efforts to counter piracy by enhancing regional
cooperation and capacity-building of States in the
region. The international community needs to
recognize that any effort to prosecute and imprison
pirates cannot succeed without the effective
involvement of the States in the region.

The issue of imprisonment of convicted persons
can be best addressed by building prison infrastructures
in the region, ideally in Somalia. It is also important to
ensure that sustained and predictable financing is
available to the host States to handle the financial
burden of prosecuting and imprisoning convicts over
periods of long duration.

Ensuring sound and prompt prosecution of piracy
suspects and their imprisonment subsequent to trial is
critical to prevent impunity and deter further attacks.
We fully support strengthening the ongoing United
Nations assistance programmes and extending them to
regional States to build capacities for prosecution and
imprisonment of pirates. United Nations assistance
could focus on the three main components of legal
reform: capacity-building for prosecution and trial of
piracy cases, effective law enforcement, and
improvement of prison infrastructure in Somalia and
regional States.

We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), which has
contributed significantly to strengthening the law
enforcement, prosecutorial and judicial capacities in
Puntland and Somaliland. We are very encouraged by
the number of piracy cases successfully prosecuted in
Somalia, and we urge UNODC to continue its good
efforts.

We also appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations Development Programme in increasing prison
capacity and improving safety and security in Somalia
so that those held responsible for committing acts of
piracy can undergo imprisonment in their own country.
This would also help in the smooth rehabilitation of
convicts once they are released after completing their
sentences. Establishment of more such prisons would
also enable the transfer of convicted persons from
other countries to undergo the remainder of their
sentence in Somalia.

We welcome the volunteering by States in the
region to cooperate in the prosecution and punishment
of suspected pirates. We support the establishment of
any extraterritorial court outside Somalia in which
Somalis have an ownership, the courts that are manned
by Somali judges and prosecutors in accordance with
Somali law. We are happy to note from the Secretary-
General's report that the requisite expertise may be
available in the Somali diaspora and that they are
willing to contribute to the Somali cause.

Participation of an international component as
judges and prosecutors in anti-piracy courts may not be
a pragmatic and long-term solution to the problem.
Anti-piracy courts cannot be equated with specialized
international tribunals set up for dealing for cases of
war crimes or crimes against humanity. Pirates belong
to an ordinary class of criminal, and they should be
treated like any other criminal who commits similar
offences on land.

Besides being cost-effective, the approach with
Somali ownership will be relatively easier to
implement, as it would utilize an existing jurisdiction
with established crimes and procedures. The regional
proximity would be useful for the purpose of the
transfer of suspects by patrolling naval States and of
those convicted to third States for imprisonment.

We fully support the finding in annex IV of the
report that steps to disrupt land-based pirate activities
and the associated financial flow are necessary in a
multidimensional counter-piracy approach. Therefore,
it is essential to investigate and prosecute individuals
who provide the leadership and financial flows that
sustain piracy. That would require broader criminal
legislation to include crimes of extortion, kidnapping,
conspiracy, money-laundering and financing of pirate
activities.

Given the limited capacity of the Transitional
Federal Government and other countries in the region,
there is a strong need for capacity-building in this area
too, with the active collaboration of UNODC.

In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that
with the increased presence of international naval
forces off the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf ofAden,
pirates have moved to other areas. There has been an
increase in piracy activities in the larger Indian Ocean
area outside the IRTC. India has a strong and abiding
interest in ensuring the security of maritime traffic off
the Somali coast and in the Gulf of Aden. We stand
ready to contribute to any international effort to
increase effective cooperation among States to tackle
the threat of piracy and armed robbery at sea and the
safety and release of hostages taken by pirates.

