Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the adoption of resolution 2440
(2018), renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) until 30 April 2019. However, we would
have preferred for the mandate to have been renewed for
one year in order to enable MINURSO to work towards
the long term. My country believes that six months do
not sufficiently match our shared goal of helping to
build a dynamic of peaceful coexistence in the region.

In that regard, I take this opportunity to commend
the Secretary-General and his Personal Envoy for
Western Sahara for their initiative, which has led to
the organization of talks on the basis of direct dialogue
among all parties.

The resolution that we have just adopted clearly
defines the framework and objectives of the mandate
accorded by the Security Council to the Secretary-
General to enable him to make concrete progress,
through negotiations, towards ending the political
deadlock in the dispute over Western Sahara, which has
lasted too long. That necessarily requires the renewed
and determined commitment of stakeholders to taking
ownership of the political process. In that regard, Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the decision of the stakeholders and
neighbouring States to take part in a round table, to be
held in Geneva on 5 and 6 December at the initiative of
the Secretary-General's Personal Envoy.

We also welcome the serious and credible efforts
of the Kingdom of Morocco to work towards a final
dispute settlement. The Moroccan autonomy initiative
constitutes a good basis for discussion, as does the
commitment of the Secretary-General and his Personal
Envoy, whom we strongly encourage to continue to
work for the promotion of a framework for dialogue
that could lead to peace in Western Sahara.

We also note that, in accordance with resolutions
1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015), and as sought by the
Council, the involvement of women and young people
in the talks is crucial.

The Council has reaffirmed MINURSO's central
role, particularly with regard to respect for the ceasefire
and pre-existing agreements and the maintenance
of security throughout the region. Ultimately, cote
d'Ivoire hopes that, on the basis of the terms of the
new resolution, frank negotiations will begin among
the parties, who must be willing to compromise with a
view to reaching a final settlement of the dispute.
In conclusion, I reaffirm my country's faith in the
success of those initiatives, which will ultimately lead
to the development of the Arab Maghreb Union and,
above all, to the happiness of the people of the region.

