Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians of
3 May 2011 identifies some contentious issues that
have emerged during discussions at the United Nations.
Is military force the best way to protect civilians? Does
the Security Council truly resort to the use of force
only as a last resort to protect civilians? Has the
Security Council acted selectively when choosing
which civilians deserve protection and which do not?

These issues must be discussed in the United
Nations, where some are using the noble purpose of
protecting civilians as a pretext to occupy sovereign
countries and promote national interests. Humanitarian
reasons are invoked while war crimes are committed.
Civilians are being killed, including women and
children, allegedly in the defence of civilians.

The boundless avarice and neo-colonialist
ambition of some countries are the greatest threats to
civilians, human life and nature in the world.
Venezuela stresses the need to address the broader root
causes of conflict, including inequality, poverty,
unemployment and domination by a foreign power,
which would make it possible to contribute to the
prevention and peaceful resolution of conflicts and the
genuine protection of civilians.

Venezuela has consistently condemned attacks
against civilians, regardless of the perpetrator. Attacks
on civilians and civilian targets are banned under
international law; however, indiscriminate attacks
using missiles and bombs are being launched on
Libyan territory, killing civilians and even troops of the
opposition forces, in places that have no connection
with the no-fly zone or the protection of civilians.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela condemns
the killing of the son of leader Muammar Al-Qadhafi,
Saif Al-Arab Muammar Al-Qadhafi, and three of his
grandchildren, the victims of one of the bombings that
day after day massacre civilians in that sister African
nation. The Bolivarian Government demands that the
United Nations condemn such illegal acts.

The Fourth Geneva Convention and the Rome
Statute define as war crimes the indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of force; attacks against civilians,
regardless of their perpetrator; and the imposition of
collective punishment.

It is deplorable that some of the countries
members of the Security Council should provide
weapons and military advice and be part of the military
structure of the opposition to the Government of
Muammar Al-Qadhafi, when they should, as members
of this body, maintain impartiality in an internal
conflict, one that the Libyan people must resolve
independently.

It is deplorable that NATO forces are acting as an
army in the service of an insurgent group against the
Government of Libya, thereby detracting from the
humanitarian character of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

It is regrettable that certain countries are seeking
regime change in Libya, in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations. Those actions contravene
resolution 1973 (2011), which calls for respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Libya.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela calls for
the creation of independent and impartial international
mechanisms for monitoring a ceasefire and promoting
a dialogue between the parties as well as a peaceful
solution to the conflict that would preserve the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Libya.

The Security Council not infrequently acts
selectively when deciding which civilians deserve
protection, and it also implements sanctions regimes in
a biased fashion so as to punish Governments of
developing countries.

ll-33lll
How is it that Israel has not been sanctioned for
its massive violations of the human rights of the
Palestinian people? Why have the massacres of
innocent civilians in Iraq and Afghanistan not been
condemned?

Venezuela believes that powerful countries are
manipulating the concept of the responsibility to
protect, when they are seeking solely to impose their
strategic interests on the world. The responsibility for
protecting civilians lies solely with States. The
assistance that the international community can offer in
this regard should be in support of national efforts at
the request of the State concerned.

Venezuela believes that in situations of internal
conflict, diplomacy and dialogue are the only means of
protecting civilians. It is of great concern, therefore,
that the Security Council, instead of promoting peace
and security throughout the world, could become a
mechanism for war.

