Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank India for its initiative to organize this open
debate on piracy, a historic challenge that has resurged in
recent years to become a significant and direct threat to
the stability and security of many States, especially in
Africa. Our consideration of this topic today has been
aided by the concept note prepared by the presidency
of the Council (S/2012/814, annex) and by the briefing
of Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, for which we
thank him.

Piracy is a source of concern to the international
community due to the high human cost it exacts in terms
ofhostage-taking, the threat it poses to the security and
economic development of countries, and the havoc it
wreaks on international navigation and trade. Acts of
piracy are on the increase, especially in regions where
countries in fragile political situations face major
challenges in enforcing respect for and application of
the rule of law, and in ensuring the security of national
territory. As a result, tackling piracy at sea must begin
with a focus on the internal challenges on land.

While primary responsibility for the fight against
piracy falls to the States concerned, shouldering that
responsibility requires the means and capacity to face
the scourge, with the support of international partners.
Clearly, a legislative framework that penalizes acts
of piracy in line with international law, the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 1982 and
international standards for the protection of human
rights is indispensible for ensuring effectiveness in
meeting these challenges.

The building of national capacities - whether in
enacting legislation, prosecuting and incarcerating
pirates, or monitoring national waters - is of crucial
importance for any strategy for combating piracy.
Stepping up international and regional cooperation
and coordination, in particular involving the United
Nations and the International Maritime Organization,
as well as exchange of information among all actors
and services engaged in combating piracy, are further
indispensible elements ifthis scourge is to be combated
effectively. Finally, counter-piracy activities must also
target the persons who finance, plan and organize
acts of pirac,y given the major role they play in this
continuing problem.

Despite the substantial reduction in acts of piracy
noted in the report ofthe Secretary-General (S/2012/783)
and their reduced success rate off the Somali coast in
2012, the scourge remains cause for concern due to
the number of hostages still being held, the threats
posed to stability and safe navigation in the region, and
the destabilizing consequences thereof on Somalia's
society and economy. With the assumption of power by
legitimate authorities in Somalia, the liberation of many
areas of the country from Al-Shabaab control, and the
gradual extension of State authority to other parts of
Somali territory, conditions are now in place to combat
piracy more effectively, with the adequate support of
the international community. The political stabilization
under way in Somalia should promote respect for the
rule of law and more effective national action for the
pursuit and imprisonment of pirates in order to end
impunity. That stabilization will also allow for the
extension of Somali State authority and its application
throughout its maritime zone, in accordance with the
Convention on the Law of the Sea.

I take this opportunity to commend the assistance
provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the United Nations Development Programme
to support the efforts of Somalia and other States of the
region in their work in the legislative, judicial and penal
spheres. Efforts to improve economic development in
Somali society, the creation of job opportunities for
young people and the provision of basic services to the
population will all help to mitigate the intensity of this
scourge.

Coordination and cooperation at the international
and regional levels to combat piracy off the coast of
Somalia have produced encouraging results and should
be stepped up. In that respect, we welcome the efforts
of the Contact Group on Piracy offthe Coast of Somalia
and its working groups, which have worked tirelessly to
find a coordinated and comprehensive solution to this
problem.

In recent years, the international community has
been alerted to the developments and dangers posed
by piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and to the danger that
the phenomenon could spread throughout the African
Atlantic region. My country has striven to establish
and strengthen cooperation at the cross-regional and
interregional levels among the Atlantic coastal States of
Africa, in particular to confront the challenge of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea and transnational organized
smuggling. Indeed, those two themes were at the origin
of the establishment of the Ministerial Conference of
African Atlantic States in Rabat in 2009, and are the
pillars of its plan of action on security, adopted in 2010.

That African Atlantic spirit was bolstered by
the decision taken by the countries of the region to
hold a summit among the leaders of the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission in order to forge a mechanism for
heightened interregional dialogue and cooperation.

In order to extend this dynamic of action-oriented
cooperation and coordination, in the coming weeks
Morocco will host a conference of security ministers of
African States bordering the Atlantic Ocean at which

we will discuss, inter alia, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea

and ways to enhance synergies with a view to ensuring

the stability of that shared space and to strengthening

regional cooperation and coordination. All these efforts

seek to enhance sustained and vigorous international

cooperation to end piracy and its multidimensional

consequences.

