Mr. Pashovski (Bulgaria): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate Ambassador Cardenas of Argentina on his
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and to wish him success in his activities. I
would like also to express our appreciation to last
month's President, Ambassador Bakuramutsa of Rwanda.

Let me take this opportunity to express our high
esteem for the delegations of all the members of the
Council whose term expired at the end of last year. I
would like also to congratulate the new members, which

 

have already started performing their important
responsibilities with commitment and dedication.

This debate is being held at an important time in the
life of the United Nations. We are on the eve of the fiftieth
anniversary of the Organization. In this regard, the report
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali,
presented as a supplement to "An Agenda for Peace", is a
timely and very useful document. We welcome the ideas
and proposals put forward in it. They will, without doubt,
serve as a necessary impetus to the consideration of the
problems the Organization is facing today.

For the past several years, we have no longer been
living in a world marked by the characteristics of the cold
war. The new realities have brought with them the need for
new approaches by the international community and the
United Nations as its universal representative body. The
report entitled "An Agenda for Peace" was a truly
innovative and constructive document. It played the role of
a catalyst for reform of the Organization, adapting it more
adequately to its new mission and arming it with a whole
array of instruments for conflict prevention, crisis
management and peace-building.

As we gain more and more experience in coping with
the existing threats to peace and security, it is becoming
increasingly evident that the trend towards expanding the
involvement of the United Nations in preventive diplomacy
and crisis management should be encouraged. Bulgaria has
traditionally acknowledged and supported the better use of
the instruments for prevention of conflicts and crises, and
we welcome the substantive progress made in that sphere.
Therefore, we share the prevailing opinion that conflict
prevention and peace-keeping should be given priority over
peace enforcement after conflicts have already broken out.
At the same time, we are concerned at the problems that
the Organization is facing in this area, some of which have
been outlined by the Secretary-General in his paper. Further
efforts should be exerted by the whole membership to
overcome these impediments to the capacity of the United
Nations to prevent and forestall conflict.

A major component of the Organization's efforts in
conflict resolution is the growing involvement of the United
Nations in peace-keeping throughout the world. Peace-
keeping operations nowadays are more complex, dangerous
and expensive than they were in the past. Special attention
should be given to such pressing issues as enhancing the
Organization's institutional framework in the area of peace-
keeping, improving the planning process, searching for
ways and means to solve the financial problems related to
peace-keeping operations, and ensuring greater safety and
security for peace-keepers - which is an imperative
need.

Significant progress has been made in these spheres.
We support the development of the system of so-called
stand-by arrangements. Bulgaria has already committed
national resources for use in United Nations peace-
keeping operations. My Government is in the process of
defining further possibilities for wider participation in
United Nations peace-keeping operations, including
through contributing military, police and civilian
personnel.

We share the growing concern over the existing
problems in the financial aspects of peace-keeping.
Therefore, we join those who call for redoubling the
efforts to find answers to these questions. In this respect,
more attention should be given to the necessity to ensure
the financial basis of new peace-keeping operations before
they are established.

We find it very encouraging that there is an
increasing awareness of the paramount importance of the
issue of training in peace-keeping. It is clear that training
is essentially the responsibility of national Governments.
Nevertheless, we believe that there is a great potential,
and indeed a need, for cooperation and assistance among
Member States in this field. The United Nations
Secretariat - the Department of Peace-keeping
Operations in particular - also has a role to play. As for
Bulgaria, we would welcome assistance from it for the
establishment and operation of a national peace-keeping
training centre for military, police and civilian specialists.

The Secretary-General has rightly pointed out the
significance of adhering to a set of basic principles in the
peace-keeping activities of the United Nations. Traditional
rules and guidelines in this respect should continue to be
upheld and reinforced. At the same time, new experiences
prompt the need for innovative approaches, which should
also be studied.

My country has repeatedly championed the
improvement of consultation and coordination
mechanisms for a more active involvement of Member
States in the process of decision-making on peace-keeping
operations, especially at its earlier stages. In this respect,
we welcome the significant progress reflected in the
Security Council statement of 4 November 1994. We
would be glad to see this process continue with a view to
introducing further necessary measures.

 

While on the topic of the comprehensive array of
preventive and enforcement measures to solve conflicts, let
me recall that Bulgaria attaches extreme importance to the
issues related to devising an overall mechanism for the
implementation of Article 50 of the United Nations Charter.
We uphold the position that such a mechanism should
guarantee equitable sharing of the economic burden by the
whole international community.

The Republic of Bulgaria observes the decisions of the
Security Council in good faith and to this effect has
undertaken internal measures for strict implementation of
the Security Council resolutions imposing sanctions. As a
result of the application of the sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), Iraq and
Libya, my country is suffering serious economic difficulties
and enormous financial losses. To cite a specific example
in this regard, suffice it to point out that Bulgaria's losses
as a consequence of the sanctions against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) alone
amounted to $6.139 billion as of 30 September 1994. Our
special situation in this respect has contributed to the
heightened concern and sensitivity of the Bulgarian people
to the so-called collateral or side effects of sanctions as an
instrument of crisis management.

It is therefore with justified interest and appreciation
that we have considered the Secretary-General's ideas
outlined in his report. Indeed, the need for consultations
with States that are not members of the Council but are
directly concerned is most strongly felt when economic
sanctions and other similar preventive and enforcement
measures are considered. We note the steps taken in this
direction during the past year as well as the proposals of
the Secretary-General for further action. We cannot help but
recognize, though, that there is still a lot to be desired with
regard to addressing the existing problems in an adequate
manner.

We, too, uphold the position that an institutionalized
mechanism should be set up to provide a realistic
possibility of offsetting the unfavourable effects of
sanctions on third States and compensating them for their
losses. This mechanism should involve the advance
assessment of potential negative effects on their economies
and the definition of ways and means for dealing with such
unfavourable effects. Along with the United Nations
Secretariat, the international financial institutions and other
components of the United Nations system should assume
greater responsibility.

Judging from our previous experience in this regard,
it would be realistic to expect that the process of
elaborating and putting into effect such a mechanism
would take some time. Therefore, taking into account the
fact that the problems of affected countries persist and are
worsening, we deem it appropriate that the Security
Council should in the meantime focus more actively on
exploring ways of assisting them on a case-by-case basis.
My country expects that the Security Council will address
the need to render concrete assistance to Bulgaria in this
regard.

The Republic of Bulgaria believes that the States
which are potentially most affected should by all means
be consulted regarding the implementation of economic
measures taken in pursuance of Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter. It is our view that greater transparency
in the work of the Security Council in its decision-making
on sanctions-related issues will have great importance for
increasing the effectiveness of the measures taken. At the
same time, we deem it necessary to bring about a real
improvement in the efficiency of the work of the
sanctions committees. We hope that our proposals of 22
June and 15 December 1994 will meet with favourable
consideration. The budgetary and personnel difficulties
experienced by the United Nations Secretariat with regard
to the services provided to these committees should also
be speedily resolved. This is of concern not only to us but
to other Member States as well.

The cooperation of the United Nations with regional
organizations is an essential element of the evolving new
international system of security and stability. Some very
promising avenues for joint activities have already been
revealed. My delegation is of the opinion that the meeting
of regional organizations convened by the Secretary-
General in New York on 1 August 1994 provided an
ample opportunity better to understand and address the
problems and challenges facing the international
community today. As a European country, Bulgaria
attaches particular significance to the coordination of
efforts between the United Nations and the European and
trans-Atlantic arrangements and security structures, such
as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the
Western European Union.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore once again
our appreciation of the dedication of the Secretary-
General to the overall reform and adaptation of the
Organization to the new challenges of our time. In this

 

connection, allow me to reaffirm our commitment to this
process as well.

