Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation is
pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over the Security
Council during this month. Under your able leadership
we are confident that the Council will handle its
matters with great honour and a sense of purpose.

Before I proceed with my speech, let me really
thank the Security Council for making us proud today.
As you know, Mr. President, it has always been a
source of concern for us that when our ministers come
to the Security Council they are always speaking very
late in the debate, and their words no longer add to the
debate on the issues under consideration. But today my
delegation was very pleased that you were able to
accommodate the Ministers early so that their words
could really contribute to our work. We truly appreciate
it.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is of great concern to my Government. For
many years, South Africa has been engaged in peaceful
efforts to resolve the conflict in that country. My
Government provided a neutral venue when the late
President Mobutu Sese Seko negotiated the transition
of government with the late President Laurent Kabila.
We have continued to encourage the people of the
Congo to resolve their differences through peaceful
means. Next year, South Africa will host the inter-
Congolese dialogue, and, as the Council knows, Mr.
President, South African troops continue to serve with
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

South Africa is appearing before the Security
Council with the aim of clarifying statements contained
in the addendum to the report of the Panel of Experts
on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and
Other Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which was released on 13 November 2001.
Our intention is to put the record straight so that we
can build confidence and trust, not so much among
ourselves but among the Congolese people, always
with the aim of contributing to peace.

My delegation truly recognizes the scale of the
task that confronted the Panel of Experts and the
impact that it will have on the peace process. However,
we feel compelled to express the South African
Government's concern at the Panel's assertion that it
received less than the fullest cooperation from South
Africa. Such a claim is simply inconsistent with the
facts.

As the Security Council knows, never has it been
alleged, at any time, that the South African
Government was in anyway implicated in wrongdoing
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, a
number of allegations have been made against South
African citizens or entities operating from our territory,
and our own law enforcement agencies have
investigated many such cases.

It was in this spirit that the Panel was on every
occasion afforded both access to and complete
cooperation from Government representatives,
including law enforcement officials, most recently on
10 and 12 September 2001. In addition, the South
African Government transmitted detailed reports in
April and September 2001 in response to questions
raised by the Panel. Additionally, my Government has
continued to investigate and collect information on
subjects raised by the Panel in its second questionnaire
dated 20 September 2001. To further its own
investigation, South Africa also requested additional
information from the Panel in October 2001.

It is for this reason that my delegation is
surprised at the claims by the Panel that there is
"credible" information implicating individuals or
entities of using South African territory and facilities to
conduct illicit commercial activities involving the
Congo's natural resources. This information was not
mentioned, nor did the Panel offer to share this
evidence, during its meetings with the South African
authorities.

Already, South Africa has in place a
comprehensive legislative framework that covers illicit
activities of this nature. My country is not lacking in
legislation, but in credible information and evidence. It
stands to reason that my Government's ability to
investigate and initiate legal proceedings against
alleged offenders is dependent on obtaining
information. In this regard, we would appreciate
receiving from the Panel of Experts the names of
individuals and/or businesses, as well as supporting
evidence of their alleged activities - dates, places,
routes, time frames and associates in South Africa and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My delegation would therefore humbly advise the
Panel to be more willing to exchange detailed
information with Member States. Any perceived
unwillingness by the Panel of Experts in this regard
constitutes a serious impediment to its own mandate.
Until such time that the Panel provides South African
law enforcement agencies with adequate information in
substantiation of the allegations against individuals or
entities, our own national capacity to thoroughly
investigate, prosecute and monitor such activities will
remain undermined, thus compromising the
effectiveness of the work of the Panel of Experts.
Meanwhile, we would hope that this perceived
unwillingness by the Panel - and I pause here to say I
am struck by the fact that all the ministers who spoke
here referred to being "perceived to be unwilling" - to
share relevant information is not and will not be
construed as lack of cooperation.

My delegation is also concerned at the
inconsistency in the references by the Panel of Experts
to legal trade and illegal or illicit exploitation. In
paragraph 15 (a) of its first report (A/2001/357), the
Panel defined illegal activities as "all activities -
extraction, production, commercialization and
exports - taking place in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo without the consent of the legitimate
government". The current report, however, is
inconsistent in this regard. It is the understanding of
the South African Government that it was never the
intention of the relevant Security Council resolutions to
prohibit all trade with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. And many, many countries trade with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including some
that are represented around this table.

South Africa chairs the Kimberley process, which
has developed detailed proposals for an international
certification scheme for rough diamonds with a View to
breaking the link between armed conflict and the trade
in rough diamonds. It is indeed our hope that early in
the new year the Kimberley process will report to the
United Nations on how Member States are making sure
that diamonds from conflict areas are not used to
perpetuate wars such as the one we have witnessed in
the Congo.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to assure
you that the Government of South Africa will continue
to provide its fullest cooperation to the Security
Council and the Panel of Experts. No nation is more
aware of how important the work of the Expert Panel is
to the quest for durable peace and security in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

