Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting.

We have today adopted an important resolution
(resolution 2170 (2014)) that was eagerly awaited by all,
particularly those of us in the Syrian Arab Republic,
in the shadow of the growing threat posed by the two
terrorist groups, the Islamic State and the Al-Nusra
Front, as well as other groups and terrorist organizations
related to Al-Qaida. Those organizations have adopted
a violent and extremist doctrine that, in recent years,
has tried to promote an obscurantist culture that has no
connection with Islam or the Mashreq in general and
no connection with the society, history or civilization
of Syria.

For more than three years, Syria has been engaged
in an exhausting war against the terrorism of Takfiri
organizations, in the name of humankind in its entirety.
During this difficult and bitter period of Syrian history,
the Syrian Government has tried by all possible means
to draw the attention of the States Members of the
United Nations to the threats that the region and the
world are facing as a result of the practices of those
organizations. However, States with influence on the
Arab, regional and international scenes have dedicated
huge efforts to covering up the facts and have pursued
their support for and arming of terrorist groups, and
have offered safe harbour, financing, media and
political coverage, making those organizations pass at
times for a moderate armed opposition and for a jihadist
opposition at others.

Hundreds of letters and supporting documents,
photos, videotapes and other forms of communication
have been transmitted by the Syrian Government to the
Security Council and other entities and bodies of the
United Nations in order to draw attention to the crimes
committed by numerous terrorist groups such as the
Islamic State, Jabhat Al-Nusra and the Islamic Front.
Those organizations have committed the worst forms
of murder, torture and intimidation against innocent
Syrians. They have targeted civilians and committed
genocide against certain categories of both Iraqi and
Syrian society, in addition to undertaking the organized
destruction of the infrastructure of different sectors in
Syria.

Those organizations are also pillaging the wealth
of the Syrian people and are engaging in the stealing,
trafficking and selling Syrian oil through European and
Turkish brokers. I would like to ask the Council about
its adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2014/14,
which was submitted by the Russian Federation.
Specifically, I would like to ask the Council about the
identity of those who buy Syrian oil from the Islamic
State and how stolen Syrian oil makes its way to Europe
through Turkey. I would also like to know why the
members of the Security Council have not responded
to our repeated complaints for over three years about
Takfiri organizations' exportation, initially from
Libya, of terrorism and weapons to my country through
Turkey and Lebanon, despite the reports of the Panel
of Experts created in accordance with resolution 1973
(2011), on Libya, which clearly revealed that issue.

The official documents that have been sent by Syria
have been deliberately ignored, with an incredible lack
of political seriousness. If those important documents
had been taken into account and ifthe past resolutions of
the Security Council had been implemented, especially
those touching on the fight against terrorism, we would
not be obligated today to adopt a new resolution. We
hope that resolutions adopted will be implemented in
a non-discriminatory and non-selective manner, and
fairly, and that they do not harm the sovereignty of the
States concerned or undermine their independence and
territorial integrity, with the cooperation of various
Governments. That is especially so as today we are
witnessing a fight against terrorism that is being waged
with duplicity and selectivity, as those same countries
are offering all kinds of support to the terrorists
themselves.

The fight against terrorism is one of the highest
priorities for the Syrian Government. We have asked
the Security Council several times to take Syria's
concerns in that context into consideration. The issue
has not been discussed with the Syrian Government
despite the fact that Syria is a key player in the fight
against terrorism. Today's resolution 2170 (2014) was
not discussed with Syria during its drafting phase.

It is crucial that the Security Council promote
serious dialogue with the States concerned in order
to find adequate means for fighting terrorism before
the adoption of these resolutions so that their concerns
and the needs of their peoples are taken into account,
putting special emphasis on the fight against Takfiri
philosophy that allows terrorism to grow in certain
regions and undermines religions, which can only
strengthen terrorists.

