Mr. fiimonovic': The Security Council was briefed
this weekend on the latest political developments in
Ukraine. As the Council requested, my briefing today
will address the human rights situation in Ukraine and
give an update on developments since my last briefing,
on 19 March (see S/PV.7144). I will highlight key human
rights issues, taking into account the most recent events
in the East. My remarks are based on the findings ofmy
two recent missions to Ukraine, as well as on the first
few weeks of the activities of the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine. At the outset, I
wish to emphasize the strong interlinkages between the
chronic human rights violations in Ukraine, the Maidan
protests and the current situation in the east.

Almost a third of the population in Ukraine
reportedly lives under the poverty line. Huge
disparities in standards of living and inadequate access
to basic social services, attributed to corruption and
mismanagement, were among the underlying factors
that led to the Maidan protests. The protests that started
in Kyiv and swept across the rest of the country from
November 2013 to February 2014 revealed a deep-
rooted sense of dissatisfaction among the people of
Ukraine.

The violence by the security forces against
pro-European peaceful protesters in Kyiv on
30 November 2013 created outrage and led to the
radicalization of the protests and to clashes between
the protesters and police. Legislation that curtailed the
freedoms of expression and assembly and enhanced a
sense of impunity on the part of the police was rushed
through the Rada in mid-January and led to violent
action by some radical protesters, as well.

Progress is still to be made in bringing to justice
the perpetrators of serious human rights violations
committed during the period of the Maidan protests.
During the protests, 121 persons were killed and
more than 100 persons are still unaccounted for. The
Office of the Prosecutor-General has initiated criminal
proceedings, and it is important to ensure accountability
for the perpetrators.

During the Maidan protests, there were some
expressions of national, racial or religious hatred by
certain groups and individuals. Some attacks against
the ethnic Russian community, in particular ethnic
Russians affiliated with the former Government,
were also reported. However, those attacks were
neither systematic nor widespread. They were isolated
incidents, which were then exaggerated through biased
media reporting, fuelling fear and insecurity among the
ethnic Russian community.

There have also been some cases of incitement to
hatred from right-wing extremists' groups, such as the
so-called Right Sector. Fear and insecurity proliferate
when incitement to hatred, discrimination and violence
are not curtailed. It is therefore crucial that that issue
be addressed as a matter of priority. I welcome the
steps already undertaken by the Government and the
Office of the Prosecutor-General of Ukraine to publicly
condemn and investigate any such instances. In that
context, it is clearly unacceptable that one presidential
candidate calls his followers to arm themselves to
defend the east of the country, while another is beaten
because of his political views. Monitors are verifying
those serious allegations.

My visit from 21 to 22 March was the most recent
visit to Crimea by a senior United Nations official.
During my mission, I interacted with a wide range
of interlocutors, including local authorities and civil
society, and especially the victims themselves. That
allowed me to obtain a first-hand impression of the
situation.

The media manipulation significantly contributed
to a climate of fear and insecurity in the period
preceding the referendum. The presence ofparamilitary
and so-called self-defence groups, as well as soldiers
in uniform without insignia, was not conducive to an
environment in which voters could freely exercise their
right to hold opinions and to freedom of expression
during the referendum on 16 March. There were
credible allegations of harassment, arbitrary arrests and
torture by those groups, which targeted activists and
journalists who did not support the referendum.

In reiterating General Assembly resolution 68/262,
on the territorial integrity of Ukraine, I stress the
obligations of the authorities in Crimea to respect
international human rights norms. It is also of concern
that, on 11 April, the authorities in Crimea rushed
through the adoption of a new Constitution. The
Crimean Tatar Majlis has raised important human
rights concerns about the complete lack of public
debate, as well as the exclusion of the Crimean Tatars,
from the drafting process of the new Constitution.
Concerns over citizenship issues also continue to be
raised, in particular with regard to the fact that those
who do not accept Russian citizenship will reportedly
face many obstacles in guaranteeing their property and
land rights, access to education and health care and the
enjoyment of other civil and political rights.

When I visited eastern Ukraine in March, the
situation was already very tense. Meanwhile, the
situation has significantly deteriorated. Reportedly,
armed pro-Russian activists established the People's
Republic of Donetsk, taking control of a number
of Government buildings in several cities of the
Donetsk region, using violence, including against
law enforcement officers. In Luhansk pro-Russian
protesters continue to occupy the local building of
the security services. In Kharkiv participants in a
pro-Ukrainian rally were attacked and beaten by pro-
Russian demonstrators, who broke through the police
cordon, resulting in some 50 persons being injured.

Ongoing incidents and clashes among various
groups of protesters, as well as with security forces,
are of serious concern. While reports indicate that the
number of protesters, including some allegedly from
outside the region, has not significantly increased- and
we are speaking of a couple of thousand - the level of
violence and the proportion of armed protesters have.
That has significant human rights implications.

While protest-related human rights violations
need to be investigated and verified urgently, security
forces must play their role in maintaining public order
in accordance with human rights standards. There are
clear lines between what can be considered the exercise
of the right to peaceful assembly and the violent
behaviour of armed protesters. However, in all cases,
security forces should not use force unnecessarily or
excessively.

The situation in the east, ifnot adequately addressed
as a matter of priority, risks seriously destabilizing
the country as a whole. Those who exercise influence
over the situation should take immediate action to halt
the violence. The arming of the protesters and their
transformation into quasi-paramilitary forces must be
stopped. Anyone inciting violence and providing arms
to protesters can be held accountable for the resulting
tragic consequences.

In order to de-escalate tensions across the country,
all parties should be encouraged to start an inclusive,
sustained and meaningful national dialogue based on
respect for the legal obligations of Ukraine under the
international human rights treaties already ratified.
Such a process should take into consideration the
concerns of all those who live in Ukraine, including
minorities, and address issues such as language rights
and the decentralization of the country.

Finally, I cannot stress enough the important
role that accurate human rights reporting can play in
preventing violence and defusing tensions. Yesterday,
we issued our first report on the human rights situation
in Ukraine on the basis of my two visits and the first
month of human rights monitoring. We intend to issue
our second report on 15 May. Anyone with relevant
information on human rights violations should share it
with us, so that we can verify it, further investigate if
necessary and include it in our next report.

