Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi) (spoke in French): I
welcome the British presidency's initiative of convening
this open debate, which is clearly of interest to everyone
and offers them the opportunity to speak about the situation
in Africa and the best way of achieving cooperation among
the various actors in Africa.

Why does the United Nations find it difficult to act
quickly and effectively in the area of conflict prevention
and resolution in Africa? No doubt this is primarily because
of procrastination, which itself results from ignorance about
Africa or a lack of credible information about situations.
Sometimes the reason is too much conflicting information,
because there are so many different parties involved. A
wait-and-see attitude can also hinder the prevention or
resolution of an African conflict. That attitude often springs
from the existence of one or more actors that also wish to
take action, as in the case of competition with another
country or within a region. All of this leads to a vicious
circle and a worsening of the situation, which makes
conflict inevitable.

The second cause of difficulties is the lack of interest
among certain members of the Council about the situation
in Africa. There has been a lot of talk about double
standards, as if the goal of saving human lives, regardless
of nationality or place of origin, is less noble than the
objective of protecting one's own interests. We understand
that some prefer to act only when their own interests are
threatened.

The third category relates to errors in assessing the
situation in Africa. There is a desire to generalize or
resort to stereotypes instead of gaining an in-depth
understanding of the specifics - the nature of the
problem, the historical roots, the culture of Africa. Often,
therefore, the focus is on the political dimension - or,
since this is Africa, on the ethnic dimension - even
though, in some situations, economic or social factors are
dominant.

What, then, can be done? The idea of partnership is
an excellent one. It must be applied in a way that leads to
coordinated and wise action. The partnership between the
United Nations and Africa must be built on certain
foundations.

The first of these is collaboration with the States.
First and foremost, States must be consulted, whether or
not they are democratic, and whether or not they respect
human rights. Coercive action must be taken only when
all efforts at consultation have been exhausted. We must
avoid the tendency to teach lessons.

Secondly, in the case of internal conflicts, we must
take the time to help Africans to move beyond the
psychological barriers and the burden of their past. For
example, the Great Lakes region has been hit with
recurrent Violence and genocide, and we must approach
the situation with great care. The delicate nature of
situations of internal conflict requires that great
importance be accorded to discreet diplomacy, without
overlooking the resident representatives of the United
Nations, special envoys, mediators, investigative missions
and good office missions.

Thirdly, there must be cooperation with the
recognized regional mechanisms. In this context, a
somewhat contradictory situation is prevailing. The region
wants to play the primary role - and it is encouraged to
do so - up until the point at which it decides for itself
how other international actors can take part. That is the
best approach to take if all the regional players are acting
in good faith. However, the United Nations, acting
through the Security Council, must remain vigilant. If we
want to resort to the partnership between the United
Nations, the OAU and the regions, we must do so from
the ground upwards; otherwise we might find ourselves
violating the Charter and international law.

The Security Council must endorse all major
interventions - only the Council has this mandate - such
as sending a regional peacekeeping force or imposing

 

economic sanctions. Otherwise, it will have to take later
and more difficult corrective action.

Fourthly, we must pay more attention to economic and
development issues in resolving conflicts in Africa. Here,
the role played by the Bretton Woods institutions, the
United Nations Development Programme and other United
Nations agencies and funds is important. Often, regional or
international solutions can make situations worse by
freezing aid or imposing economic sanctions on a country
that is already in difficulties, a country which is poor, land-
locked and lacking resources. Imposing sanctions and
freezing aid can have a disastrous impact on the population
and not on the Government. Rather, durable solutions
should be advocated, such as viable economic integration.

Fifthly, the working methods of the Security Council
must be adapted accordingly. Open debates such as this
should be encouraged, as they enhance transparency and
provide for mutual enrichment. Informal consultations must
be organized in New York between the representatives of
various interested parties. Africa should have permanent
representation in the Security Council so that its voice can
be heard more clearly, and so that African problems can be
better understood.

Finally, we hope that this great exercise of reflection
on the part of the Security Council on the best way to
contribute to conflict resolution and prevention in Africa
will lead to concrete, concerted measures which strengthen
both partnership and mutual respect.

