Ms. Wisborg (Denmark): At the outset, Denmark
would like to thank the Egyptian presidency of the
Security Council for the taking the initiative to convene
today's open debate. The topic is highly relevant and at
the top of our shared agenda. Today's meeting is also
very timely in the light of the upcoming review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in
June.

I align my statement with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the observer of the European
Union.

Terrorism and violent extremism seek to threaten
not just our collective security and stability but our
very way of life. The unacceptable acts of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other groups,
resulting in unimaginable suffering, devastation and
senseless loss of life, run counter to basic norms of
human decency and rights and the very values and
principles on which the United Nations was built. They
require a strong and determined collective response.
Denmark remains a resolute and active partner in global
efforts to fight terrorism, in particular the acute and
real threat posed by terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida,
Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab and, not least, ISIL.

The global framework for countering violent
extremism and terrorism should be firmly anchored
at the United Nations. We must continue to implement
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy through a
comprehensive approach, and one that embraces core
recommendations in the Secretary-General's Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674) and
its all-of-United Nations approach. We must remain
focused on turning this common framework into
concrete actions and results on the ground.

Denmark introduced a national countering
violent extremism action plan in 2014, from which
we have benefitted greatly. It is a tool for developing
multi-agency approaches and partnerships with local
communities. Our experience has shown us that while
we are managing the imminent threats of terrorism, we
must at the same time be able to focus on prevention.
We know that violent extremism is more likely to
take root when we fail - for example, through local
communities - to offer attractive alternatives to the
distorted narratives offered by violent extremists.

Countering extremism by fostering a sense of
purpose and identity for our youth - through investing
in preventive measures, education andjobs - is key. In
our societies, we must continue to focus on ensuring that
fundamental notions of citizen participation, human
rights and democracy are passed on and reinforced.
The strongest counter-narrative against terrorism and
violent extremism is open and inclusive societies. The
Nordic countries have initiated a Nordic Safe Cities
Network, in line with the global Strong Cities Network,
exchanging experiences and innovative methods to
strengthen our work, in particular on prevention and
rehabilitation, and on the close collaboration among
social services, schools, police, religious communities
and civil society at the local level.

I wish to also mention that Denmark has recently
initiated a new regional programme to counter violent
extremism, with a focus on assisting Jordan, Lebanon
and Iraq. It includes a focus on counter-messaging,
countering illicit financing, as well as exit support and
forms part of the comprehensive Danish engagement
to help counter violent extremism and promote peace
and security in the Middle East region. I should also
mention that in order to reduce ISIL's appeal to potential
foreign terrorist fighters, we are supporting initiatives
to investigate and document war crimes and human
rights abuses in Iraq and Syria committed by ISIL and
other extremists.

Let me conclude by affirming Denmark's
continuing commitment to our shared effort and to
supporting the United Nations in countering the threat
of extremism and terrorism. Denmark welcomes the

Security Council's continuing active role in addressing
that common challenge.

