The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/665, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for the period from
29 May to 3 September 2014.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council reaffirms the
importance of maintaining the 1974 Disengagement
of Forces Agreement between Israel and the Syrian
Arab Republic. The Security Council stresses
that, despite the latest security challenges and
the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force's (UNDOF) temporary relocation of the
majority of its personnel across the Alpha line,
both parties must remain committed to the terms
of the disengagement agreement and scrupulously
observe the ceasefire and the separation of forces.
The Security Council also urges both parties to
continue to offer support to UNDOF during this
period of heightened security threats, and to offer
UNDOF and the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization (UNTSO)-Observer Group Golan
safe passage and resupply when requested.

"The Security Council also reaffirms its
unconditional support for UNDOF and the
importance of maintaining UNDOF as a Vital
contributor to peace and security in the Middle
East. The Security Council notes with concern the
deteriorating security situation in UNDOF's area
of operation due to the ongoing Syrian conflict
and the activities of several non-State armed
actors, including the Al-Nusra Front, and the risk
it poses to the disengagement agreement and to
United Nations peacekeepers serving there. In this

connection, the Security Council recognizes the
necessity of efforts to flexibly adjust UNDOF's
posture to minimize risk to United Nations
personnel as UNDOF continues to implement its
mandate, while emphasizing that the ultimate goal
is for the peacekeepers to return to their positions in
UNDOF's area of operation as soon as practicable.

"The Security Council condemns recent
hostile acts against United Nations peacekeepers in
UNDOF's area of operation by Security Council-
designated terrorist groups and non-State armed
actors and stresses that there can never be any
justification for these attacks on and detention
of United Nations peacekeepers. The Security
Council is deeply concerned that firing in close
proximity to United Nations positions and camps
also significantly increases risk to United Nations
personnel. To this end, the Security Council
demands that all groups other than UNDOF must
abandon all UNDOF positions and the Quneitra
crossing point, and return the peacekeepers'
vehicles, weapons and other equipment. The
Security Council reiterates that UNDOF's mandate,
impartiality, operations, safety and security must
be respected. The Security Council calls upon all
parties to allow UNDOF to operate freely and
to ensure full security of its personnel and full
implementation of the 1974 agreement.

"The Security Council commends UNDOF and
UNTSO-Observer Group Golan peacekeepers for
their bravery in facing the threats and challenges in
their area of operation, and extends its appreciation
to the troop-contributing countries. The Security
Council notes the importance of maintaining
UNDOF's force strength and self-defence
resources to the level necessary to carry out its
important mandate, and to retain its quick reaction
and counter-IED capabilities, which have proved
indispensable in the face of a changing security
environment.

"The Security Council urges Member States
with influence to convey strongly to non-State
armed actors in this area the need to halt
immediately all activities that endanger United
Nations peacekeepers on the ground and impede
them in the implementation of their duties as
mandated by the Security Council. The Security
Council recalls the obligation of all Member States
to ensure that any person who participates in the
financing, planning, preparation or perpetration
of terrorist acts or in supporting terrorist acts is
brought to justice and notes the importance of this
obligation with respect to terrorist acts directed
against United Nations peacekeepers.

"The Security Council requests that the
Secretary-General provide an update within
30 days on steps necessary to maintain UNDOF's
ability to carry out its mandate, including options
for monitoring the ceasefire and the separation of
forces even under circumstances when security
conditions constrain UNDOF from fully operating
in the Area of Separation and the Area ofLimitation
on the Bravo side, and to keep the Security Council
updated on ways it can support the continuation of
this vital mission."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/20l4/l9.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.30p.m.
