Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
excellent briefing to the Security Council.

The Council is meeting today at a time when we
genuinely hope that its work will be results-oriented
and will revive the peace process in the Middle East.
As all members are well aware, since the beginning of
the Arab-Israeli conflict there has been no shortage of
diplomatic initiatives or resolutions of international
legitimacy - embodied by the Security Council and
the General Assembly - aimed at a settlement. What
we have lacked is the political will necessary to
achieve peace.

Today, after all those efforts, the crisis in our
region remains at the highest level of intensity and
continues unabated. We are witnessing the bloodshed
of innocent people and the destruction of their homes,
which in turn are causing further frustration and
despair. The logical outcome of that situation is a
deepening feeling of hatred and resentment, which
takes the form of an ongoing cycle of Violence.
07-31853

Some believe that Palestinian violence is the
reason for the continuation of the crisis and that ending
it is the way to achieve peace. Such an approach is
extremely simplistic and could not be further removed
from reality. The root causes of the violence must be
addressed. To that end, we should approach the issue
from an inclusive perspective, avoiding selectivity and
prejudgements. Restoring rights to those legally
entitled to them is the most Viable and effective way to
extinguish the fires of hatred and to eliminate the main
pretext used by extremists.

We in the State of Qatar believe that a lasting and
comprehensive settlement is within reach but that it
can be achieved only through concessions. It is only by
making those concessions that we can ensure security
and prosperity for the peoples of the region. We have
adopted a comprehensive and integrated approach to
the crisis in the Middle East by calling for an end to
the hostilities and mitigating their impact on the
peoples of the region, including by launching high-
level diplomatic efforts at both the Arab and
international levels and by calling on the Security
Council to revive the dormant Middle East peace
process on all tracks, within the previously agreed
frameworks.

Through their recent support for the path of
peace, Arab leaders have shown a sincere intention to
reach a just settlement in order to bring security to all
States of the region. Forming the Palestinian
Government of National Unity will remove one of the
obstacles to the resumption of the peace process and
will create a political climate conducive to pushing the
peace process forward. It is therefore in everyone's
interest that such a Palestinian Government be able to
carry out the vital function of providing its population
with security and basic services. We call here on the
Government and the people of Israel to take advantage
of these positive developments and resume direct and
serious negotiations on all tracks. We also call on the
States and other parties concerned to lift their embargo
against the Palestinian people so that the Palestinian
Government can carry out the functions required by the
peace process.

Preserving the stability, security and sovereignty
of Lebanon is of the utmost importance if we are to
achieve peace and stability in the Middle East as a
whole. Lebanon still needs support from the
international community in order to overcome the
devastating effects of the latest war waged against it by
Israel. We in the State of Qatar believe that respect for
Lebanon's sovereignty, non-interference by all parties
in its internal affairs, an end to Israel's almost-daily
Violations of Lebanese airspace and a withdrawal by
Israel from the remaining occupied Lebanese territories
would ensure the stability of the security situation in
accordance with resolution 1701 (2006).

We continue to look forward to a settlement of
the status of the Golan Heights, occupied by Israel
since 1967. That issue is a very important component
of the Middle East situation, and resolving it would
decrease the tensions in the region. Resuming the
negotiations between the parties concerned is the best
way to implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions and to resolve that issue.

