Mrs. Khoudaverdian (Armenia): First of all,
allow me to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mexico for the initiative to convene us today to launch
a discussion on such an important issue. Allow me also
to commend the Secretary-General for the report
(S/2009/158) he has submitted on an issue that leaves
none of us indifferent. We would also like to express
our gratitude to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Radhika Coomaraswamy for her
detailed presentation of the report.

I join all previous speakers in their determination
to ensure children's right to live and grow in peace and
dignity, which is a primary responsibility of any
Government and any society. Today's discussion and
the moving testimony of Ms. Akallo are tangible
evidence of how unprotected many of those who
constitute the most vulnerable segment of our societies,
children, continue to be.

I come from a region that has experienced a
number of armed conflicts in recent decades. The
problems and concerns mentioned here are therefore,
unfortunately, not purely humanitarian in nature for us.
Today, a final resolution to the conflicts in the South
Caucasus is still pending. A no-war/no-peace situation
cannot ensure a safe and decent future for children and
young people who have already witnessed all the
atrocities that wars bring. It is our belief that only a
fundamental and comprehensive political settlement of
the existing disputes can bring long-lasting peace and
stability to the region, thereby securing the rights of
our children to a peaceful future.

Armenia has more than once reiterated its
commitment to the peaceful resolution of the existing
conflicts, for the benefit and progress of the entire
region. In that regard, I reserve the right to respond to
the statement of the delegation of Azerbaijan, which
has once again used this high forum to misled Member
States with its unchanged rhetoric. It is well known
that it was Azerbaijan that, two decades ago, unleashed
a full-scale war against what was at that time its own
peaceful population of Nagorny Karabakh, forcing tens
of thousands of people, including children, to quit their
homes and become refugees and internally displaced
persons, and leaving thousands of them orphaned and
maimed.

The military actions undertaken by our neighbour
have had unpredictable consequences for Azerbaijan
itself. Today, it is in everyone's interest to take decisive
steps to move the peace process forward in order to
protect our children from renewed violence. Instead,
we continue to hear militaristic rhetoric from high-
level Azerbaijani authorities, which is not only
detrimental to the establishment of the confidence that
is so badly needed between our two peoples, but also
creates an atmosphere of hostility and hatred in which
new generations of Azerbaijani youth are being
brought up.

Armenia strongly believes in the need to achieve
a comprehensive settlement to conflicts through the
negotiating process. We are grateful for this
opportunity to reiterate our commitment to
guaranteeing the protection of children.

