Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, for his detailed briefing. We are also grateful
to the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Ms. Ursula Mueller, for her equally thorough, concise
and clear briefing.

I would like to begin my statement today by
expressing our deep concern about the escalation of
attacks and clashes in Yemen this month, first in Aden
and, until recently, in Sana'a. All those clashes kill and
harm civilians. The destruction of basic infrastructure,
such as schools, hospitals and shopping centres, as
we have seen, only worsens the living conditions of
the citizens, who are have been suffering through the
conflict since it began almost five years ago.

We call on all the parties concerned in Yemen not to
unleash new attacks and to continue with the settlement
tracks proposed by the Council and the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, in respect of all resolutions,
especially resolution 2216 (2015) and the AI-Hudaydah
Agreement, by taking urgent steps to bring such attacks
to an end.

The Government of Yemen and the Houthi
movement must continue to work towards advancing
the goals of the Stockholm Agreement. In that regard,
we welcome the successful meeting that the parties held
last month on a United Nations vessel in the Red Sea,
under the leadership of Lieutenant General Lollesgaard,
during which they were reached an agreement on the
operational details of the entire redeployment envisaged
in the Stockholm talks. We hope that in that same spirit
they will subsequently be able to address the agreement
on local security forces, as well as the issue of revenue
and governance. Similarly, significant progress
should be facilitated on the other dimensions of the
results reached in Stockholm, such as the exchange of
prisoners, which would foster trust between the parties.

Our delegation laments the terrible humanitarian
situation that the Yemeni people have long been
enduring. Civil society is increasingly affected,
especially by hunger. Three-fourths of the Yemeni
population require humanitarian assistance, given that
the country has been suffering a blockade, which has
left more than 22 million people without access to food,
medicine and other basic products for their survival.

There are 2.3 million people who have been
displaced from their homes, and, in more than four
years, 65,000 civilians have been killed or injured,
according United Nations data. Powerful data from the
International Committee of the Red Cross indicate that,
owing to the events that have occurred in Aden this
month, the city's hospitals are experiencing significant
difficulties and urgently need basic items.

We therefore reiterate our full support for the
humanitarian workers and their efforts in that difficult
context. They must also be protected. Commercial
and humanitarian access, which must be guaranteed,
is obstacle-ridden by the closure of key access points
and other challenges that have plunged the country into
chaos. That is why we urge the parties to do their utmost
to facilitate the implementation of the humanitarian
response plan and ensure that measures are adopted
that fully respect international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.

Lastly, as we have reiterated on several occasions
here in the Chamber, and in agreement with the other
delegations, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes
that the only way to resolve the conflict in Yemen is
through political means, and we hope to always have
the full support of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths.

