Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express my gratitude for the briefing by
Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman on the fourth
report (S/2017/97) of the Secretary-General on the
threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering that threat.

The report provides us some encouraging
information, although it also gives us serious cause for
concern. We are pleased to learn that, following the
military defeats suffered by Da'esh in Iraq and Syria,
which were mentioned in the third report (S/2016/830)
of the Secretary-General, that group remains militarily
on the defensive in various areas, especially in Iraq,
Syria, Libya and Afghanistan. The bad news is that the
group is constantly seeking new ways to adapt to the
new circumstances and updates its modus operandi,
while continuing to poke holes in State and regional
security systems.

We are also informed that Da'esh communications
and recruitment systems are moving towards more
covert methods, such as the so-called dark web,
encryption messages and messengers. Furthermore,
it carries out attacks using local terrorist cells or by
calling on its followers to perpetrate attacks in third
countries. All of this points to an organized ability to
act with the support of transnational networks, which
gives a new dimension to attacks by pseudo lone wolves.
Dismantling such terrorist networks will require
joint, coordinated efforts that go beyond the work of
national authorities, as well as inter-State, regional
and international coordination and cooperation. In that
regard, we welcome the work done by INTERPOL and
regional agencies such as EUROPOL.

As Under-Secretary-General Feltman just said, the
fourth report focuses on Europe, the Maghreb and West
Africa and tells of the various initiatives and projects
being carried out by the United Nations in various
areas, as well as by regional organizations and some
States. We trust that they will produce good results and
we encourage continuing along that path.

We reiterate our belief that cooperation and
coordinated actions in various areas and at various
levels are needed to combat the different facets of the
complex phenomenon of terrorism - its financing,
contact networks and recruitment methods; the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters; migration control and
the problem of returnees, to cite just a few. However,
we also believe that the main responsibility lies with
States. That is why we support initiatives to provide
technical and financial assistance to countries that
lack the necessary means to prevent and combat such
a complex and changing phenomenon, especially to the
most affected countries. We also call on all States to
show genuine political will to combat terrorism and its
sources of financing without ambiguity or doublespeak.

We are particularly concerned about the systematic
use of sexual violence as a terrorist tactic and about its
link to human trafficking. In that regard, we commend
the adoption of resolution 2331 (2016) last year. The
report also mentions the recruitment of children by
terrorist groups and the physical and sexual abuse that
some migrant, asylum-seeking and refugee women are
subjected to. Those practices deserve our strongest
condemnation and are issues about which we would
like to have further information.

We were moderately pleased by the information on
the deterioration of the financial standing of Da'esh,
because, despite the deterioration, the group still has
enough resources to continue fighting and is calling for
new forms of financing in order to increase the number
of extortions and kidnappings, in particular through
non-profit organizations and fundraising websites.

We are also concerned by the use of improvised
explosive devices and the growing use of the Internet
and information technologies to spread propaganda,
identify potential recruits and incite individuals to
commit acts of terrorism. In this second aspect, we
encourage greater interaction among public and private
actors and we note with satisfaction the joint initiative
of some private companies to develop a database of
images intended to promote terrorism.

Before concluding, I must emphasize that we
are pleased to know that efforts are also being
made to prevent and combat violent extremism and
radicalization. Preventing and combating terrorism is
the duty of all members of the international community.
Although my country belongs to a region where the
threat of terrorism is fortunately minor, we are aware
that no State is exempt from it. Uruguay believes that
it is in everyone's interest that the United Nations be
a linchpin among States and international, regional
and subregional organizations. Inter-State cooperation
and collaboration will make us much more effective in
this struggle.

Lastly, I must mention that national counter-
terrorism strategies must bear in mind States'
obligations, in accordance with the Charter ofthe United
Nations and international law, including international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.

