Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I thank the Chairs
of the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004) for their briefings today. We appreciate the
coordination among the three Committees and their
efforts in promoting greater transparency and dialogue
with Member States concerning their respective areas
of focus.

We agree with the Chair of the Al-Qaida Committee

that the threat of global terrorism to international peace
and security is both potent and serious. It is such a
global phenomenon that the current 306 entries in the
Al-Qaida sanctions list contain addresses ofindividuals
and entities from different continents. The diverse
nature of the complex global and evolving threat of
terrorism has taken new forms. Individuals and groups,
for instance, have been radicalized by extremists using
the Internet and websites in various parts of the world.

In that context, it is important to ensure that the
list of targeted individuals reflects the changing nature
of the threat. We appreciate the Committee's efforts to
undertake various reviews of list entries of reportedly
deceased individuals and defunct entities. The problem
of insufficient identifying information for the effective
implementation of the sanctions regime has yet to be
satisfactorily resolved. We hope that regular reviews of
such entries will be useful to add adequate information.

Sanctions will be more effective if they are
implemented with transparent, fair and clear procedures.
The introduction of the institution of the Ombudsperson
is a step in the right direction. Instead of casting doubts
regarding that institution, we need to strenthen it by
expanding its powers related to the listing process. The
demonstrated effect of the Ombudsperson's positive
contribute should lead the Council to introduce a similar
institution in all other sanctions regimes, to ensure due
process and transparency.

Visits to States by the Monitoring Team and
experts' groups should be used to promote international
cooperation and provide technical assistance. Post-visit
briefings and reports have been useful in enhancing the
Committee's understanding ofissues faced by Member
States.

The most serious challenge to the sanctions regime,
however, is the litigation relating to the individuals on
the sanctions lists. Many listed individuals and entities
have initiated cases against listings in various courts
of the world, including some in Pakistan. Decisions
by many national and regional courts against the
sanctions regime have been publicized. We have yet to
see and determine if courts are satisfied with the recent
measures of the Committee, including the introduction
of the Ombudsperson. The questions of due process and
effective remedy should therefore be at the heart of the
Committee's work.

Global cooperation against terrorism has been
highly successful. Determined and collective action has
disrupted and contained the violent agendas ofterrorists.
The immediate and short-term anti-terrrorism response
must, however, be accompanied by a clear, long-term
strategy for success in ensuring an end to the scourge of
terrorism. Such a strategy must include addressing the

root causes of terrorism. Counter-terrorism activities
must conform to international law and must respect the
sovereignty of States and fundamental human rights.

We support the Counter-Terrorism Committee's
efforts to promote the implementation of resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). We commend the
Committee's identification of thematic issues such as
the role of central authorities in enhancing international
counter-terrorism cooperation.

We have noted the global survey of the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005). The issue of
the prohibition of incitement to commit terrorist acts
is very complex. We should continue to prohibit and
prevent incitement to terrorist acts. At the same time,
we must not lose sight of the imperative to ensure
freedom of expression. That said, all efforts to counter
incitement must be undertaken in the light of the
agreed principle that terrorism and extremism cannot
and should not be associated with any religion, race,
ethnicity, faith, value system, culture or society.

The delegation of Pakistan appreciates the efforts
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) to facilitate technical assistance
for countries that need it. The CTED's seminars in
various regions of the world on specific themes have
been useful. Pakistan has been regularly participating
in regional workshops organized by the CTED. Pakistan
is planning to hold the sixth regional workshop on
counter-terrorism in Islamabad for police officers,
prosecutors andjudges in South Asia in the near future.

Pakistan endorses the globally agreed objectives of
disarmament and non-proliferation, including that of
resolution 1540 (2004). The 1540 Committee is playing
a role complementary to that of the established treaty
regimes and international organizations in the area of
weapons of mass destruction.

It is essential for all States to undertake effective
national measures to prevent non-State actors from
acquiring and using materials and weapons of mass
destruction, including the means to deliver them.
All States parties to multilateral treaties with similar
objectives also need to fulfil their obligations.

Pakistan has filed four comprehensive
implementation reports with the 1540 Committee since
2004 outlining details of comprehensive legislative,
administrative and organizational measures taken to
promote non-proliferation objectives.

The composition of expert groups in the Committees
needs rationalization and reform, as the work of these
Committees is now mainly focused on assistance and
capacity-building. It would be useful to broaden and
diversify the pool of experts, particularly to include
experts from developing countries. Such an effort
would be helpful in promoting an even better level of
understanding and ownership of these important issues
by a large number of Member States.

To conclude, I would once again underscore the
evolving nature of the counter-terrorism challenges
and the usefulness of these briefings. These briefings
increase the level of confidence of all Member States
in the three Committees. Acts of terrorism negate
and violate the rule of law. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee's work and proceedings must set the
highest standards of adherence to the rule of law.
The implementation of the three resolutions on which
the Committees work can be made most effective by
ensuring transparency, due process and fair and clear
procedures.

