Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Mr. President, I should
like at the outset to extend my delegation's heartiest
congratulations to you on Singapore's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January and to express my pleasure at seeing you
preside over the meeting of the Council today. We
commend you and your delegation for organizing this
timely debate as a useful follow-up to previous
deliberations in the Council on this subject. I should
also like to pay tribute to Ambassador Lavrov of the
Russian Federation for his effective leadership of the
Council last month. I am equally pleased to greet the
new members of the Council, as well as, of course, my

former colleagues on the Council, and to wish them
every success.

I should like to thank Ambassador Kishore
Mahbubani for providing the extremely useful
background paper to assist us in preparing our
participation in the debate. I also appreciate the fact
that we, the non-members of the Council, are being
heard before the members of the Council. We commend
the Singapore presidency for pushing through this
welcome, innovative approach. As Ambassador
Mahbubani pointed out in his letter to the Secretary-
General of 8 January 2001, the need was clearly felt for
greater consultation between troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), the Security Council and the
Secretariat and that more could be done in this area.
Indeed, this issue had been addressed on a number of
occasions, both in the Council and the General
Assembly. The Brahimi Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations underscored this need for enhanced
consultations and made a number of recommendations
which had subsequently been endorsed by the Security
Council and the General Assembly through Council
resolution 1327 (2000) of 13 November 2000 and
General Assembly resolution 55/135 of 8 December
2000.

Among these recommendations is that regarding
the importance of continuous, focused and in-depth
consultations between the Council and the TCCS that
go beyond the regular TCC meetings presided over by
the President of the Council. Like other countries that
have participated in peacekeeping operations, Malaysia
has always believed in the need for a formalized
mechanism of consultations between the Council and
TCCs to give effect to Article 44 of the Charter, which
provides for the participation of TCCS in the decisions
of the Council pertaining to peacekeeping operations in
which their armed forces are involved. We have in the
past referred to specific areas for further consultations,
including, first, when the mandate of a new
peacekeeping operation is being formulated; secondly,
when the concept and/or plan of operation of a
peacekeeping operation is being considered; thirdly,
when the extension of the mandate of a peacekeeping
operation is being considered; fourthly, when a
substantive modification of the mandate of an existing
peacekeeping operation - including the broadening or
narrowing of its scope, changes in the rules of
engagement and the introduction of new functions or
components - is being considered; fifthly, when
significant developments occur which, in the opinion
of the Secretary-General, members of the Security
Council or troop contributors, are likely to affect
materially the functioning of the operation and/or its
ability to fulfil its mandate; and, finally, when the
withdrawal, in whole or in part, of an operation is
being considered.

While we continue to believe in the need for a
subsidiary organ of the Council to coordinate
consultations with the TCCs, we welcome the recently
established mechanism of the so-called "private
meetings" between the Council, the Secretariat and the
TCCS as a step in the right direction. It is to be hoped
that these meetings will be not merely briefing
sessions, but serious discussions between Council
members, TCCS and the Secretariat on the whole gamut
of issues pertaining to specific peacekeeping
operations. They should be held as often as necessary,
but especially on those occasions which I enumerated
earlier. We hope that this new mechanism will not be
just an ad hoc arrangement, but will be formalized to
give substance to the spirit of Article 44 of the Charter.

Notwithstanding the mechanism of the private
meetings, there may be a need to maintain the
mechanism of the regular TCC meetings to supplement
the private meetings. However, the TCC meetings
could be made more interactive and useful and less
ritualistic if they were convened well ahead of the
renewal of a peacekeeping operation, not just before, as
is often the case. There should be, for the sake of
greater transparency, an increased willingness to share
information with troop-contributing countries about the
situation on the ground. While the need for
confidentiality is well appreciated, a lack of
information very often leads to misinterpretation and
even a distortion of events, with often negative
reactions in the capitals of troop-contributing countries,
especially in tense situations, as was the case in Sierra
Leone. The situation is made worse when unconfirmed
reports come directly from the ground from non-United
Nations Secretariat sources. As in the case of the
private meetings between the Council and troop-
contributing countries, the challenge to make the TCC
meetings more meaningful lies not only with the
Council and the Secretariat, but also with the troop-
contributing countries themselves.

On the issue of the commitment gaps in the
contribution of troops to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, there are several reasons for these, not the
least of which is the tardiness in reimbursing the costs
of peacekeeping operations to developing countries,
which creates difficulties, both economic and political,
for the TCCs from the developing world. There is also
the issue of the safety and security of troops in the
peacekeeping areas of operation and the politically
sensitive issue of acceptable risks, which potential
troop-contributing countries have to grapple with
before making a decision to commit troops. The
problem is sometimes compounded by the very fluid
situation on the ground. There is also the issue of the
lack of adequate equipment and, sometimes, of
training, which stands in the way of a quick and
positive response to requests by the United Nations for
troop contributions, particularly on the part of the
developing countries.

More thought should be given to overcoming this
problem of commitment gaps. Clearly, reimbursements
should be made early and on time so as to generate the
necessary political support in the potential troop-
contributing countries concerned. Perhaps, with the
resolution of the issue of the new scales of assessment,
the problem will soon be resolved. As regards security,
clearly, no Government would want to send its troops
into harm's way and any Government would want
assurances of an acceptable level of security before
troops are committed. We trust that, under this new
format of enhanced consultations, there will be a
greater appreciation by the potential troop-contributing
countries of the mandate for the peacekeeping
operation in question, which can be facilitated by their
more intimate involvement in the planning of that
mandate.

On the issue of training and equipment, we feel
that more could be done by the developed countries, in
partnership with their counterparts in the developing
world, which may have resources in terms of
manpower but lack the wherewithal. Such logistical
and training support from the developed countries
could well enable developing countries to make their
contribution to peacekeeping operations. However, this
does not argue for a strict division of labour between
the developed and developing countries, whereby the
former provide the economic means for peacekeeping
operations while the latter provide the manpower.
United Nations peacekeeping is an international
responsibility to be shared by all States Members of the
Organization in all its aspects, but a case can, and has
in fact been made, for logistical, training and other
technical support from the developed countries for
potential troop contributors from the developing
countries, even as the former participate actively
themselves in peacekeeping operations.

There should be greater utilization of the stand-by
arrangement between the United Nations Secretariat
and potential troop-contributing countries. This
arrangement should be strengthened, not only by
involving more countries, but, more importantly, by
tapping the resources available in those countries for
current and future peacekeeping operations. The
exercise undertaken by the Secretariat to audit and
evaluate these assets is a welcome move in the right
direction.

To fully utilize this standby arrangement,
countries that have entered into such an arrangement
should be given priority to participate in peacekeeping
operations and their offers considered first before being
turned down for specific reasons, which should be
explained to the potential contributing countries. This
would further bolster, rather than dampen, commitment
to the stand-by arrangement. We would suggest that,
following the ongoing auditing and evaluation exercise
of these assets, serious efforts be made to evaluate and,
where necessary, upgrade them to minimum United
Nations standards through training and technical
support from both the Secretariat and/or developed
country partners so as to ensure their readiness for
deployment for peacekeeping operations at the
appropriate time. Perhaps, in this regard, serious
consideration should be given not only to upgrading
the United Nations Staff College in Turin, but also to
establishing regional United Nations staff colleges to
provide the necessary training to military officers of
the TCCs, in addition to the ongoing support given to
national peacekeeping centres. There are creative ways
of establishing these staff colleges, in collaboration
with Member States, without necessarily having to start
from scratch. If appropriately provided with trained
staff and utilized, these stand-by arrangements would
be a good and relatively inexpensive substitute for that
much-desired, but still elusive United Nations standing
army that Brian Urquhart and others dreamed about.

My delegation would like to stress the importance
of ensuring proper command and control as
indispensable ingredients of the success of a
peacekeeping operation. For this purpose, it is essential
for troop-contributing countries, without exception, to
accept the doctrine of unified United Nations command
in peacekeeping missions authorized by the Security
Council. Malaysia's experience in various
peacekeeping operations, especially in the United
Nations Operation in Somalia II, which it had the
honour to command, tells us that only effective
command and control, backed by trained and
professional staff, can guarantee the success of a
peacekeeping operation. Any compromise on this all-
important principle would be a recipe for disaster. In
this regard, the selection of a highly qualified force
commander with the right attributes is as important as
the selection of a competent civilian head of a United
Nations mission. To enable the force commander to
fully appreciate the complexity of commanding United
Nations troops on the ground, it is important that he,
like his civilian head of mission, be given the
opportunity to interact with Council members and the
representatives of the troop-contributing countries
through briefing sessions in New York.

Finally, my delegation wishes to underscore the
need for objective and impartial assessments of
situations on the ground and hence the importance of
allowing the Secretariat to provide unvarnished and
professional reports to Council members as well as to
the TCCS. The TCCs, which provide the peacekeepers,
have as much right as Council members to be
adequately informed of developments that affect their
personnel. It is important for the Council to send a
message to the TCCS that their views are important in
all matters pertaining to peacekeeping and that they are
not taken for granted by the Council.
