Mr. Wali (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open meeting of the Security
Council to review the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). Permit me to also use this
opportunity to express appreciation to the Chairman of
the Committee for his briefing on the work of the CTC,
as well as to commend the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), Ambassador Javier Ruperez, for the efforts
made to implement the mandate of the Directorate.

Terrorism remains a serious threat to national,
regional and international peace and security. It
constitutes a deliberate violation of the fundamental
principles of law, order and human rights and seeks to
destroy both physical and economic infrastructure.
Terrorism poses a grave threat to the territorial
integrity and stability of States. The scope of this
danger is captured in the following words of Secretary-
General Kofi Annan,

"Terrorism is a global threat with global
effects. Its methods are murder and mayhem, but
its consequences affect every aspect of the United
Nations agenda - from development to peace, to
human rights and the rule of law. No part of our
mission is safe from the effects of terrorism, and
no part of the world is immune from this
scourge." (S/PV4618, p .3)

No effort should be spared, therefore, to confront
and eliminate this scourge from our world.

In that connection, we commend the CTC for its
work in fulfilling its mandate of monitoring the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001).

It is noteworthy that, in the slightly more than
two years since its creation, the Committee has been
able to mobilize Member States in a sustained fight
against terrorism. Indeed, as a result of its efforts, a
growing number of Member States have either acceded
to or ratified the various relevant multilateral
conventions and protocols on the subject. In addition,
the improved collaboration between the CTC and the
Committee on Al Qaeda and the Taliban has generated
confidence among Member States, which now share
information, thus enabling the Committee to assess
country-specific needs. Nigeria is particularly pleased
that our country, along with two others in our
subregion, just last week received the Monitoring Team
of the Committee, with which valuable information
was exchanged. We believe that this will enhance
cooperation between the Committee and Member
States.

The fight against terrorism is a daunting
challenge. Despite our resolve, terrorists have
continued to cross international boundaries and to
wreak havoc in their victims' societies. The series of
heinous attacks following the 11 September 2001
tragedy in New York - in Indonesia, India, Turkey,
Kenya, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Spain - as well as
the dastardly murder of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and 21 others in Baghdad, show
how depraved terrorists are. It is therefore necessary
that we not let down our guard as far as terrorists are
concerned.

We urge all Member States to sign and ratify the
main anti-terrorism multilateral treaties and to
implement the relevant resolutions, particularly the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism and Security Council resolution
1267 (1999) imposing sanctions on Al Qaeda and the
Taliban. Such action would send a powerful message as
to the resolve and unity of the international community
to fight terrorism and would lead terrorists of whatever
stripe to realize that they have no safe haven.

We believe that the CTC must be adequately
funded and staffed in order to continue its work. We
should also ensure that adequate technical assistance is
extended to States, especially developing countries,
which are largely ill-equipped to meet the reporting
needs of the Committee. Of no less importance is the
need for Member States to close those loopholes that
enable terrorists to acquire arms.

We commend the workshops and training courses
on combating crimes related to international terrorism,
organized by the United Nations and other
organizations, including the International Civil
Aviation Organization, the International Maritime
Organization and the International Atomic Energy
Agency. We believe that this will strengthen the
capacity of Member States to contribute to global
efforts to combat terrorism.

We believe that the publication of the second
volume of the United Nations Legislative Series -
comprising national laws and regulations regarding the
prevention and suppression of international terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations - will serve as a
useful tool towards the same end. We urge the CTC to
explore further areas of collaboration, pursuant to its
mandate.

The disagreement on articles 18 and 2 bis of the
draft comprehensive convention on international
terrorism and on article 4 of the international
convention on the suppression of nuclear terrorism has
stalled efforts to finalize work on the two legal
instruments.

Nigeria is concerned that the apparent lack of
progress in reaching consensus on the draft
conventions might have the negative effect of sending
the wrong signal to the perpetrators of terrorist acts.
My delegation therefore calls on all others to
demonstrate the required flexibility and political will in
order to arrive at a consensus and finalize those
instruments without prejudice to respect for
fundamental human rights, the rule of law and other
democratic principles.

Our common endeavour to fight terrorism should
go hand in hand with determined efforts to identify and
eliminate those factors that fuel it. Its root causes
include festering conflicts exacerbated by the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons as well
as by illicit arms trafficking across borders, in addition
to pervasive poverty, particularly in developing
countries. We should deny terrorists any opportunity to
use or exploit those factors to further their causes.

Nigeria reaffirms its commitment to the full
implementation of the mandate of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and that of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate, and of the relevant
international conventions and protocols for combating
terrorism. In accordance with Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), we have established the
appropriate mechanisms to give effect to its provisions.

In our subregion, we have intensified
collaboration with other member States of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to confront the menace. In a few days'
time, ECOWAS will host a meeting on strategies to
combat terrorism and related crimes, such as drug
trafficking, trafficking in humans, and money
laundering. At the continental level, the African Union
has been engaged in effort to curtail terrorism in all its
manifestations. For example, at the second High-level
Intergovernmental Meeting on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism in Africa, held at Algiers from
13 to 14 October 2004, African countries resolved to
create an African centre for the study of and research
on terrorism.

In conclusion, Nigeria remains convinced that
international cooperation is indispensable to a
successful campaign to counter and neutralize this
transnational crime. I wish to reiterate Nigeria's
unwavering commitment and support towards that end.

