Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank the United Kingdom
for organizing this important debate on the role of
reconciliation in sustaining peace. I also thank the
briefers for their invaluable reflections.

Brazil has a long-standing history of advocacy
for the mainstreaming of peacebuilding in the United
Nations. While reaffirming our support for this agenda,
I would like to further explore two topics.

The importance of reconciliation was underscored
in the 2016 twin General Assembly resolution
70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016)
on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. The twin resolutions were the result of a
collective understanding that sustaining peace requires
more than the containment of hostilities through the
maintenance of fragile ceasefire agreements. Indeed,
the concept of sustaining peace entails a commitment
to broader stabilization and recovery, both of which
require the long-term engagement of the international
community. Lasting peace comes when we address the
root causes of conflicts and strengthen the drivers of
peace, including through prevention, mediation and
reconciliation efforts. By helping to mend the gravest
fractures in the social fabric of conflict-affected
communities, reconciliation plays an important role
in sustaining peace. The core of reconciliation lies
in promoting social unity and inclusion, based on
the common vision of society. Ensuring an equitable
distribution of peace dividends among all segments of
the population is also key for reconciliation.

Brazil has supported post-conflict reconciliation
efforts in countries across many different regions, from
Asia to Latin America. Those experiences have made
it clear that there is no single template for successful
reconciliation. National ownership is essential to
ensuring that reconciliation processes relate to the
unique circumstances of each country. That said, the
Security Council does have a responsibility to support
national-led reconciliation efforts, especially when
they represent a critical priority of transition settings
and a crucial threshold for stabilization and lasting
peace. It is also paramount that the Security Council
guarantee that the support of the United Nations for
reconciliation efforts is fully aligned with nationally
defined peacebuilding and development priorities.
There are inextricable links between reconciliation
and other peacebuilding elements, such as economic
revitalization, the reintegration of demobilized
combatants and vulnerable populations, security sector
reform and promoting and protecting the rights of
women, youth and children.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate once again the
growing importance of the peacebuilding architecture
to the effectiveness of United Nations efforts in terms
of peace and security. To mention but one concrete
example, last year the Peacebuilding Fund made a
decisive contribution to the achievement of peace in
the Central African Republic by financing the African
Union-led mediation initiative that led to the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic. While advising the Council during
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, the Peacebuilding
Commission also provided its own specialized
perspective, emphasizing the role ofthe political process
and the women and peace and security agenda. The
added value of the Peacebuilding Commission's advice
comes from its universal composition and capacity
to focus on the foundations of peace. Founded in the
twenty-first century, the Peacebuilding Commission
seems to be more adaptable to discussing peace
efforts from a broader perspective, seeking to achieve
nationally owned solutions to contemporary peace and
security challenges.

With that in mind, Brazil would like to strongly
encourage the Security Council to seek the specialized
advice of the Peacebuilding Commission during
discussions on the mandates of all peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. From our
perspective, greater coordination between these
institutions could bring about positive change in favour
of more inclusive peace and reconciliation processes.

