Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having given me the opportunity to address the Council
in my capacity as Chair of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.

The Central African Republic was included in the
Commission's agenda in June 2008, at a very
appropriate time. Since then, over the past eight
months, the configuration has systematically
encouraged and supported the considerable progress
that the Central African Republic has made in the area
of peacebuilding and stabilization. The inclusive
political dialogue, which was held in Bangui last
December and which brought together representatives
of the entire political class and all of Central African
society, as well as the positive results achieved, had
been virtually inconceivable last June.

The recommendations of the inclusive political
dialogue have begun to be implemented. Indeed, a
broad-based Government has been established, including
members of the political opposition and former rebels.
A steering committee has been formed for the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process, and an Independent Electoral Commission has
been created to prepare the 2009 and 2010 municipal,
legislative and presidential elections. Those steps attest
to the genuine desire of all parties concerned to work
in a new atmosphere of peace and understanding. After
decades of internal tension and a dramatic deterioration
in living conditions, the population of the Central
African Republic yearned for such developments.

The Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in the
Central African Republic will very soon be finalized
and will serve as the basis for long-term engagement
between the Central African Republic and the
international community. That framework was
formulated in close cooperation with all national
parties in the Central African Republic and thus enjoys
broad national ownership.

However, several major challenges remain, and the
Peacebuilding Commission recalled them in a statement
that was made public today. The first challenge is
security. The resurgence of violence in the north of the
country has led in recent weeks to a new displacement
of thousands of civilians and gives rise to great concern.
That is why it is important to ask all parties to show
restraint and avoid reprisals. That is why it is also
important to urgently meet the needs of the thousands
of civilians displaced and affected by this conflict.

While the first challenge lies in the field of
security, the second is political. Given these alarming
developments, the Peacebuilding Commission
encourages all parties that participated in the inclusive
political dialogue to implement as quickly as possible
and in a spirit of reconciliation the recommendations
resulting from that dialogue. The Commission calls on
all political-military groups, in particular the Front
democratique du peuple centrafricain, to adhere to the
Libreville Comprehensive Peace Agreement and to
become involved in implementing the recommendations
of the inclusive political dialogue.

09-2601]

The Peacebuilding Commission believes that the
most critical step to preserve the momentum of the
inclusive political dialogue is the finalization and
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programme. However, the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
which is responsible for drawing up that programme,
cannot finalize the programme document within every
political-military group provides a complete list of its
combatants. The initial deadline for submitting those
lists was 25 February. It has already been postponed to
16 March. At this stage, no further reports can or
should be accepted. We cannot waste any more time.

With regard to the financing of the disarmament,
DDR process, it is necessary to raise the awareness of
the international partners to the urgency of pledging
funds to the trust fund that will be set up by the UNDP.
Once the DDR programme document has been
finalized, the remaining balance of the funds already
allocated to the Central African Republic by the
Peacebuilding Fund could quickly be available for
DDR. On 30 January in Libreville, 8 billion CFA francs
were also pledged by the Economic and Monetary
Community of Central Africa to finance DDR activities
in the Central African Republic. We call on the
Government of the Central African Republic and
UNDP to finalize arrangements to transfer those funds
to the UNDP trust fund as soon as possible.

The third challenge is economic. Like other
countries in the region, the Central African Republic is
particularly affected by the consequences of the world
economic crisis. The Peacebuilding Commission is
committed, together with the international financial
institutions, to seeking mechanisms to respond to those
impacts that affect a Central African population that is
already very weak.

As Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
country-specific configuration, I advocate the
establishment of an United Nations integrated mission
in the Central African Republic. Moreover, I welcome
the recommendations to that end made by the
Secretary-General in his letter of 3 March addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/2009/l28). A
rapid implementation of those recommendations is
necessary given the urgent need for a consolidated
approach by the United Nations during this crucial
phase in the political history of the Central African
Republic, which the Secretary-General described as
"perhaps the most genuinely inclusive attempt to foster
national reconciliation in the Central African Republic
to date" (5/2009/128, p. 2).

Before concluding, I would like very warmly to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ambassador Francois Lonseny Fall, for the
outstanding work that he has carried out within the
framework of his mandate in the Central African
Republic. I wish him success in his future projects. I
cherish the hope that his successor be appointed as
soon as possible so as to ensure a strong United
Nations presence in the field during this pivotal time.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the commitment
of the Peacebuilding Commission to support the
Central African Republic's efforts in national
reconciliation and reconstruction.

