Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): On
previous occasions, we have said that neither Israel's
security concerns nor the political aspirations of the
Palestinians can be fulfilled through violence. The
military operation unleashed by Israel, in which it has
reoccupied the territories controlled by the Palestinian
Authority, has not been able to stop terrorist attacks in
Israeli territory. Moreover, those attacks, which have
provoked the violent Israeli reaction, have contributed
to the erosion of the Palestinian Authority, which is the
institutional basis of a future Palestinian State.

I should like to say very clearly that Colombia
rejects the terrorist attacks carried out by extremists on
Israeli territory, which are causing deaths and injuries
among the civilian population. In that regard, we
should like to express our sympathy to the families of
those who have fallen victim to such attacks. At the
same time, we reject Israel's excessive use of force and
its reoccupation of territories that had been under the
control of the Palestinian Authority. Israel's actions are
causing destruction and death among the Palestinian
population, to whom we also express our sympathy at
this time of suffering. I should like to reiterate our
appeal to all the parties to bear in mind the security of
the civilian population as well as the need to respect
the norms ofinternational humanitarian law.

Resolution 1402 (2002) called upon both parties
immediately to implement a true ceasefire. Regrettably,
that has not been complied with. The resolution also
called for the withdrawal of Israeli troops from
Palestinian cities, including Ramallah. Regrettably,
Israeli forces continue carrying out almost daily
incursions into various Palestinian cities and have
imposed a system of controls that has had the effect of
virtually isolating Palestinian cities. Ramallah remains
under continuing occupation, and the headquarters of
President Arafat have been attacked once again and
remain under siege.

All of these actions are cause for humiliation
among the people of Palestinian. They provide
arguments to the partisans of violence and incite them
to continue their actions. It is also clear that the
resolutions of the Security Council have not been
complied with.

The efforts of the Security Council and those of
other actors have been designed, on the one hand, to
stop the violence and the terror, and, on the other, to
start to create conditions for the parties to return to the
negotiating table. My delegation still cannot
understand why the Israeli Government did not
cooperate with the fact-finding team called for by
resolution 1405 (2002), and, in this respect, we await
with interest the report of the Secretary-General on the
events in Jenin, in keeping with the request of the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly.

In recent months, the Security Council had
managed to achieve an important consensus on the
situation in the Middle East. That consensus was not
easy to achieve, and, as non-permanent members of the
Council, we had actively worked to achieve it.
However, non-compliance with the Council's decisions
compromises its authority and its credibility.

Next Friday there will be a meeting in
Washington of the members of the "quartet". We
continue to support the group's work and its diplomatic
efforts in the search for a just and lasting solution, and
we trust that the international conference will become a
reality in the near future.

It is necessary to act simultaneously in three
areas: security, humanitarian activities and economic
rehabilitation, and the political process. A partial
solution to only one of these aspects that does not take
the other two into account cannot produce a lasting
solution.

We would like also to state once again that the
Arab Summit's peace proposal represents an
opportunity that should be given due consideration,
along with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 1397 (2002) and the principle of land
for peace.

