Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
today on behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.

We thank the Lithuanian presidency for arranging
this timely open debate and appreciate the opportunity
to share our views on the important topic of the rule of
law. We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
to the Council on the rule of law in conflict and post-
conflict situations. In particular, we wish to highlight
the reference in the report to the Declaration ofthe High-
level Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of
Law, in 2012 (General Assembly resolution 67/1), which

emphasizes the importance of the rule of law as one of
the key elements of conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding. The Declaration
stresses that justice, including transitional justice, is
a fundamental building block for sustainable peace in
countries in conflict and post-conflict situations.
In that context, we would also like to welcome
the work of the Secretary-General on furthering the
linkages between the rule of law and the three main
pillars of the United Nations.

The Nordic countries are pleased to note that the
promotion of the rule of law is now established as a
core United Nations task across the three pillars of
the United Nations: international peace and security,
development and human rights. It is both a goal in itself,
encompassing democracy, good governance and human
rights, and an indispensable means for the achievement
of other goals, including the promotion of peace and
security.

The New Deal for building peaceful States
expresses a similar message. It is thus both logical
and essential that the strengthening of the rule of law,
including police, justice and corrections institutions, be
a key part of Security Council-mandated peacekeeping
operations.

The inherent link between freedom from violence,
respect for human rights, the rule of law and development
makes this a central theme also in the post-2015 agenda.

The effective implementation of the Security
Council mandates requires certain arrangements
within the United Nations. We welcome the emphasis
on system-wide coordination and coherence, and
encourage the genuine use of the "delivering as one"
model also for the area of the rule of law.

The global focal point for police, justice and
corrections matters, at Headquarters level, carries
promise and should be strengthened. But the real and
visible effect will materialize and be felt only through
implementation and impact at the country level.
Efforts to ensure coherence and coordination at the
country level need to be intensified. Furthermore, the
transfer of tasks must be carefully managed when a
Security Council-mandated peacekeeping operation is
withdrawn or downsized.

At the heart of efforts to rebuild and strengthen the
rule of law in the wake of conflict and crisis is the need
to ensure that there are reliable and sustainable national
institutions. However, the national political will and/
or capacity to build and properly manage them might
sometimes be insufficient. This political dimension of
the rule of law and approaches to address it require more
attention and financial support. Senior policy-makers,
United Nations mission leadership and country teams,
as well as bilateral partners and international financial
institutions, need to engage in a context-specific joint
dialogue to identify concrete challenges and ways to
support political commitment to reform. As part of
this, national constituencies should be included when
rule-of-law strategies and action plans are formulated.
This ought to be a matter of priority.

At the country level, the United Nations rule-of-
law indicators can be used by Governments to obtain
detailed information on their own law-enforcement
agencies, justice system and prison system, in support
of their rule-of-law reform efforts. As noted in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/341), the
indicators assist in measuring the transformation of
these institutions over time and in monitoring at the
country level.

Another important dimension of strengthening the
rule of law in post-conflict situations is to ensure that
mutually dependent sectors and actors can proceed in
joint processes in a mutually reinforcing manner. It is
obvious that courts cannot deliver justice without proper
investigation mechanisms, fair prosecution services
and functioning legal defence and prison systems.

For the Nordic countries, women's access to
justice, material rights and to courts is a matter of
particular concern and importance. Women falling
victim to violations of their basic right often have very
limited access to justice and continue to be subjected to
discriminatory laws or application thereof. This does
not only exacerbate their situation but prevents them
from exercising full and equal participation in the
development of their societies.

Another issue of concern is that of legal identity, or
lack thereof. Every year 50 million children are born,
some ofthem without birth certificates or other proof of
legal identity. Without legal identity, individuals cannot
exercise their rights.

Finally, it is important to consistently support
engagement to curb impunity by focusing on
mechanisms that ensure accountability. It is very
difficult to see how the rule of law and trust can be
restored in societies traumatized by atrocities and other

grave crimes without initiatives to reveal the truth and
hold those responsible accountable before the law. The
primary responsibility for this rests with States, and it
is vital that States be provided with sufficient support
for this purpose.

The international community can assist countries,
at their request, to develop capacities and institutions
that are sound, resilient and accountable, which can
help restore confidence and trust in the justice system.
The International Criminal Court plays a central,
complementary role in ensuring that those responsible
for committing war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide are brought to justice. The continued
involvement of the Security Council in the prevention
of such crimes, including in the fight against impunity,
is crucial. We urge the Council to assist the Court in
fulfilling its tasks, including through peacekeeping
mandates, following the example of those issued for
Mali and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

