Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to reiterate our congratulations to
you, Madame, as you prepare to conclude your
presidency of the Security Council for this month,
having organized a programme ripe with momentous
issues related to the maintenance of international peace
and security.

On behalf of the Government and the people of
the Sudan, I extend our condolences to the peoples and
Governments of Rwanda and Senegal for the three
soldiers who were killed in the attack carried out by the
Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi against a
convoy of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) near the Zam Zam
camp in a desperate attempt to stifle the positive
impetus and considerable support enjoyed by the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur.

I should also like to thank Mr. Herve Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his briefing on the situation in Darfur.

We are inspired with hope by the fact that today's
deliberations on the Secretary-General's report on
UNAMID (S/2011/643) are taking place only two days
after the appointment Mr. Eltigani Seisi, the head of
the Liberation and Justice Movement who signed the
11-56243
Doha Document, as Chair of the Darfur Regional
Authority. Earlier, Al Haj Adam Youssef, an
outstanding leader and son of Darfur, was appointed
Second Vice-President of the Republic of the Sudan.

The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, signed
on 14 July 2011, is not merely a traditional peace
agreement. Rather, it reflects an integrated vision to
address all of the Darfuris' demands and aspirations.
All the Council members have followed the heavy
turnout and broad participation by all sections and
factions of Darfuri society. The Sudanese stakeholders
conference was held in Doha in the framework of this
Document. In addition there was engagement by the
tribal chiefs as symbols of the civil administration,
civil society youth organizations and women in Darfur.

Immediately after the signing of the Document
we began with robust resolve the first phase of its
implementation by earmarking $2 billion annually
towards projects for recovery, development and
reconstruction, including rehabilitation of the villages
and to facilitate voluntary return and stability for the
internally displaced persons.

Contrary to previous times, the temporary Darfuri
authorities will now have their venue in Darfur and not
in Khartoum. By virtue of the provisions of the
agreement, the Authority enjoys a broad mandate with
respect to the needs and demands of its people, who are
a dear part of our people in the Sudan.

Despite the fact that all the citizens of Darfur
fully opted in favour of peace and agreed to the Doha
Peace Document, peace continues to have enemies
among those who prefer to profit from the situation of
their people in Darfur.

Although the Doha Document comprehensively
addressed the root causes of the conflict, as stated in
paragraph 2 of the report before the Council, leaders of
some movements have refused to accede to the march
of peace and have instead entered into conspiratorial
alliances with some parties that have nothing
whatsoever to do with the Darfur question. They have
stated their adoption of military action as the sole
option to topple the Government. That has showed that
the Government is more interested in achieving peace
and stability and in responding to the demands of the
Darfuris than are those movements that have appointed
themselves as custodians over the Darfuris, without
any right or any legitimate or national democratic
elections in the region.
11-56243

Yet despite that, the Doha Document did not
close the door in their face. Rather it called on those
movements to join the peace train and to sign the
Agreement. Rather than making use of the time limit
set for joining the peace train, those movements
entered into conspiratorial alliances with the outlawed
parties from the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
(SPLM)-North. In Kaoda, South Kordofan, they signed
an agreement in which they promised to topple the
Government by military action. That alone constitutes
a dangerous threat to the Government of the fledgling
sisterly Government of South Sudan, because the rebel
movements in Darfur are attempting to deter the peace,
stability and security so highly needed by the sisterly
State of South Sudan. We fear that this may lead to a
weakening of the State whose success we all hope for.

That was the response of the rebel movements to
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. Therefore, we
expect the Council to take the requisite measures
towards those who impede the achievement of peace
and stability. This is particularly so since the Council's
resolution emphasized its resolve to take such
measures.

With respect to UNAMID's important role in
Darfur, my delegation reiterates its full commitment to
cooperate with the mission and to facilitate its task in
the framework of its mandate, according to the
resolution by which it was established.

At the same time, we would emphasize the need
for coordination between the mission and the
provincial authorities in Darfur with regard to the time
and the manner of managing security, administrative
and logistical affairs in order to avoid the possibility of
such regrettable incidents as the one that happened in
the Zam Zam camp, where three or four peacekeeper
guests were victims. It was carried out by the rebel
faction led by Minni Arko Minawi. That incident
would never have taken place had there been
coordination with the mission under the agreement not
to run patrols at night and to abide by requirements of
prior notification to the relevant authorities.

The report before the Council has clearly
indicated in paragraph 20, in the section on the security
situation, that skirmishes between Government forces
and armed movements have decreased. From time to
time residual armed groups undertake certain
violations, plundering, armed robbery and theft in a
5
manner that requires our armed forces to intervene to
impose the rule of law and to protect civilians.

With respect to the contents of the report, in
particular the allegations of restrictions that impede the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to some areas, we
would like to clarify certain important elements to the
Council.

Some personnel of humanitarian organizations
have occasionally travelled directly to the site where
they intend to work without acquiring internal travel
permits beforehand. When they reach the site, they are
asked to show such permits. Security and police
officials then have no other option but to send them
back in order to obtain the required approval. That
must not be interpreted as impeding the movement of
personnel of humanitarian organizations. Rather, it is a
shortcoming that must be blamed on the personnel of
those organizations. A high-level committee that
includes Government, United Nations and
humanitarian representatives is the mechanism with
responsibility for ensuring the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and removing obstacles to that end.

In addition, from time to time, security
assessments are carried out and United Nations staff
and humanitarian personnel are instructed not to travel
to a given area. This is first and foremost in order to
ensure their safety and to prevent kidnappings, as have
taken place in the past. It is done out of my
Government's concern, which should be appreciated.

With regard to entry visas for mission personnel,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations is well
aware of the fact that in recent weeks we have asked it
repeatedly to provide us with a specific list of persons
requiring visas. We continue to await such a list.

I would now like to address an important issue
concerning visas. In consultation with the leadership of
UNAMID, we concluded that we should prioritize the
recruitment of Arabic-speaking police personnel. There
6

is a genuine communication problem between mission
police and the citizens of Darfur. Joint Chief Mediator
Ibrahim Gambari has made some progress in that
regard in the process of the periodic rotation of formed
police units. The Council has agreed on the need for
Arabic-speaking police personnel in a society whose
language is Arabic and with whom there is a need for
communication and to provide them services.

In conclusion, having begun the practical
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace, it is
our hope that UNAMID will pay greater attention to
the other aspects of its mandate pertaining to
development and reconciliation, with a view to
implementing the provisions of the Document.

The meeting between mission officials and
various Council members, the meeting of Darfur
representatives with many members of the Council and
the meetings held in Geneina, the capital of West
Darfur, with the Government of the Sudan from 19 to
20 October all point to the extent to which stability and
peace are entrenched in West Darfur. The meeting with
the Government of the Sudan illustrates its cooperation
in bringing an end to what remains of the conflict.

The development efforts we look forward to in
the next phase through the contributions of the
international community - in particular donors,
international financial institutions and United Nations
agencies - in support of the Doha Document will
enable Darfur's citizens to achieve stability and to live
normal lives.

Finally, I wish Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
every success on his upcoming trip to the Sudan to
meet with senior officials on all aspects pertaining to
the situation in Darfur and UNAMID.

