I thank Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya, and Ambassador Juergen Schulz, Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for their briefings. Let me begin by extending my Government's sincerest condolences to the families of the victims who have lost their lives as a result of the escalating violence in Libya. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines strongly condemns the incessant attacks against the civilian population and infrastructure, which only aggravate the suffering of the Libyan people. We are all the more dismayed to hear the terrifying and unbearable conditions underscored in Ms. Williams briefing this morning. It is extremely disturbing that approximately three months after the adoption of resolution 2510 (2020), the status quo in Libya remains. The security situation is extremely volatile, the humanitarian situation is grim, the economy is weak and the political impasse lingers. For the sake of the development aspirations of the Libyan people, the international community and all Libyan stakeholders cannot afford a continuation of the status quo. Accordingly, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines calls on all warring parties to de-escalate tensions, commit to a ceasefire and engage in inter-Libyan dialogue in order to resolve the conflict peacefully. The ceasefire is pivotal to ensuring unhindered humanitarian access to help combat the coronavirus pandemic and to restore stability by providing a space for dialogue and negotiation, including advancing the United Nations three-point initiative and the work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). We take solace in knowing that the Libyans support this initiative and strongly urge the warring parties to refrain from actions that may jeopardize those efforts. We also look forward to the appointment of a Special Representative of the Secretary- General for Libya. My delegation reiterates its support for the conclusions of the Berlin Conference on Libya and welcomes the progress made by its international follow-up committee. We call for strict adherence to international law, in general, and respect for the arms embargo, in particular, and urge all external actors to assist in that regard. We deplore the violence against groups in vulnerable situations, including migrants, refugees, internally displaced persons and women and girls. We call on the authorities to ensure their protection and safety, carry out the necessary investigations and hold the perpetrators of violence accountable. Finally, we stand in solidarity with the people of Libya and reaffirm our support for UNSMIL and the efforts being undertaken by the African Union, the League of Arab States and all other actors that seeks to bring a peaceful political solution to the conflict. To that end, we look forward to the convening of an African Union-led inter-Libyan reconciliation conference. In closing, I echo the acting Special Representative's plea - we must not let Libya slip away.
