Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia supported the adoption of resolution
2476 (2019), establishing the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti in accordance with the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's letter of 13 May
(S/20l9/387). We believe the resolution is an important
step towards stabilizing the situation in the country.
The United Nations has been supporting Port-au-
Prince on the basis of Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations for many years. The United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti will continue
that work for another four months. At the same time,
the Government and the Haitian National Police will
gradually gain greater independence. During the
Council's previous discussions on the situation in Haiti
on 12 April (see S/PV.8510), and despite concerns about
increased tensions on the eve of the elections, Council
members agreed with the Secretary-General's view that
by October Haiti's Government and police would be
ready to take national ownership of the responsibility
for ensuring the people's security. We also hope that
the accumulated experience and expertise passed on by
international advisers will enable Haitians to overcome
all the obstacles on their path to stability, although the
initial stage after the withdrawal of the United Nations
presence under Chapter VII will be absolutely crucial.

That is why it is the task of the new special political
mission to help to ensure the smoothest possible
transition from a peacekeeping mission to a political
one by supporting the efforts of the Government and the
Haitian National Police to promote the rule of law and
establish a national dialogue. We hope that the attention
of the United Nations and the Security Council will
enable Haitians to retain confidence in the support of
the international community.

In conclusion, I want to express our support to the
people and the Government of Haiti. In October they
will have the opportunity to take full and independent
national ownership of their country's destiny, stability
and development. Russia will continue to work to
ensure that the Security Council's work results in a
genuine normalization of the situation in Haiti and in
the strengthening of its sovereignty and self-sufficiency.

