The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
State of Qatar.

My delegation wishes at the outset to join
previous speakers in sincerely thanking Judge Fausto
Pocar, President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), Ms. Carla Del
Ponte, Prosecutor of the ICTY, Judge Erik Mose,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), and Mr. Hassan B. Jallow, Prosecutor
of the ICTR, for their reports and their briefings to the
Council today on the activities of the Tribunals over
the past six months.

We take this opportunity to commend the
Tribunals once more for their important work, for their
tireless efforts in the interests of peace, security and
national reconciliation and for the progress they have
made since they were established. Their completion
strategies - which, by its resolutions 1503 (2003) and
1534 (2004), the Security Council called upon the
Tribunals to implement - have been well received,
and steps at several levels have been taken to
implement the strategies.

But we must point out that it is necessary to
consider factors that could affect implementation of the
completion strategies and review them in a timely
manner in order to ensure that the trials are completed,
that international justice is served and that steps are
taken to counter impunity, all with a view to
consolidating peace. Here, we stress the importance of
the recommendations of the Working Group on
Speeding Up Trials, a number of which the Tribunals
have taken into account. These include a more
proactive role for judges; improved pre-trial
procedures; the launch of the e-Court system; and the
transfer of some cases to national jurisdictions. But
none of these initiatives must prejudice the right of
individuals to a fair trial or compromise the attainment
of criminal justice. Moreover, it is vital to ascertain the
capacity of national courts to try cases in accordance
with established legal norms and standards. Only after
such decisions have been reached on all major cases
can the trials be concluded by the deadlines that have
been set.

Once again the United Nations has demonstrated
its commitment to the administration of justice,
through the establishment of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, with the
purpose of bringing to justice those responsible for the
most hideous crimes against humanity. But justice
cannot be completely done so long as major
perpetrators remain at large. My delegation therefore
stresses how vital it is for States to intensify their
cooperation in transferring such fugitives to the
Tribunals. The failure to transfer individuals accused of
the most hideous crimes against humanity would
undermine the work of the Tribunals and would be a
stain on their legacy.

We therefore appeal to the States concerned to
meet their obligations to the international community
in accordance with resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534
(2004), in particular with respect to the arrest of
Mladic and Karadzic and their extradition to The
Hague so that justice can be done. We cannot fail also
to mention the 18 accused who must stand trial before
the ICTR. They must be arrested and transferred to the
Tribunal if international justice - still absent in that
part of the world - is to be upheld. The political will
of the international community should find expression
in the establishment of effective mechanisms to that
end, ensuring the extradition of those fugitives.
Apprehending those accused must be a high priority for
the international community, as must continued
complete cooperation in providing access to records
and to witnesses.

The two Tribunals must continue their
endeavours, irrespective of the circumstances, and they
must improve their management and their capacities:
the victims of these horrible crimes are pinning their
hopes on the Tribunals for the attainment of justice and
peace. Further, we urge the Tribunals to remain
committed to making every effort to contribute to the
development of the rule of law as a decisive element of
their completion strategies. But the Tribunals cannot
complete their tasks unless the principal accused are
brought to justice, and this requires complete
cooperation from all States. Those accused must be
extradited if security and stability are to prevail in the
two regions, if international justice is to be upheld and
if international peace and security are to be buttressed.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Serbia.

