Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his excellent
briefing.

Today I will focus on three topics, namely, Syria,
Lebanon and Middle East peace.

On 27 September, the Security Council confirmed
that the use of chemical weapons anywhere was a threat
to international peace and security (see S/PV.7038). In
so doing, the Council fulfilled its role as a guardian
of global stability by voting unanimously to require
the expeditious and total destruction of Syria's deadly
chemical weapons programme. That welcome vote
was a necessary response to the Syrian Government's
ruthless and repeated use of chemical weapons against
its own people. But to have meaning, resolution 2118
(2013) must be implemented immediately and with
great rigour. Under the joint leadership of the United
Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), implementation has
already begun. I commend the brave men and women
of both organizations for their courage and professional
dedication, and welcome the appointment of Special
Coordinator Sigrid Kaag.

Make no mistake, what we are attempting is without
precedent. Never before have international experts
been asked to locate, secure and destroy a vast quantity
of nerve agents, toxins and other chemical arms in a
country torn apart by conflict. The responsibility
for complying with resolution 2118 (2013) rests with
Syria's leadership, which built those weapons of mass
destruction, then lied about them, proceeded to use
them and promised, under international pressure, to
cooperate in eliminating them.

The Secretary-General has aptly pointed out that
a red light for one form of weapon does not mean a
green light for others. The vast majority of the human
carnage in Syria has been, and continues to be,
inflicted by Government bombs, mortars, shells and
bullets. As innocent people continue to be targeted, the
country is disintegrating. That has devastating human
consequences, and its repercussions are spreading
across the region.

My Government believes that the only viable way to
end the horrific violence in Syria is through a political
transition, based on the Action Group for Syria Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex), which calls for a
transitional governing body, with full executive powers
and chosen by mutual consent. As President Obama and
Secretary Kerry have consistently stated, given the role
of the present regime in the monstrous crimes of the
past two and a half years, Al-Assad has no part to play
in a political transition. The United States supports the
consultative efforts now being made by Joint Special
Representative Brahimi and will continue consultations
of its own with, among others, Mr. Brahimi, Russia,
the London 11 and the Syrian opposition, so that the
"Geneva II" conference can be convened urgently.

It is imperative to make diplomatic progress,
and it is beyond urgent to take additional steps to
relieve suffering both inside Syria and among the
more than 2 million Syrians refugees who sought
refuge in neighbouring countries. The United States
strongly endorses the Council's recent presidential
statement (S/PRST/2013/15) demanding secure
passage for humanitarian relief. But statements alone
are meaningless without changes in behaviour on
the ground. We on the Council must track progress,
report any and all obstruction and press urgently for
compliance with the basic standards enshrined in the
presidential statement. Winter is fast approaching, and
the despair of families across Syria is only growing
worse.
IfI may, I would like take this occasion to highlight
two alarming and time-sensitive issues that warrant the
Council's urgent attention.

First, in Moadamiya people have been under siege
and without access to basic necessities for almost one
full year. We have credible reports that residents are
eating leaves of trees and that people have died of
malnutrition-related causes. The regime continues to
trap an estimated 12,000 people, of whom 7,000 are
women and children. They are begging us - this week,
in fact, begging us -to save them from death. All
parties must allow humanitarian agencies unhindered
access to evacuate the remaining civilians and deliver
lifesaving treatment supplies in that area. The parties
have to respect their obligations under international
human rights and humanitarian laws to protect civilians
and to allow the safe access of neutral and impartial
humanitarian organizations to all people in need.
Again, the situation is urgent.

The second issue is the daily assault on medical
neutrality. This conflict is going to be remembered
even 100 years from now for the obliteration of the core
principle of medical neutrality. According to the recent
report of the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,

"[t]he denial of medical care as a weapon of
war is a distinct and chilling reality of the war"
(A/HRC/24/CRP.2, para. 3)"; "Government forces
have engaged in agonizing cruelty against the sick
and wounded." (ibid., para. 33)

The attacks against medical facilities and on those
requiring treatment is barbaric and must halt
immediately. The provision of emergency help and
necessary medical equipment should not be subject
to any sort of political litmus test. People in dire need
should be helped regardless of their sect or where they
come from in Syria.

The Syrian health-care system is shattered. The
World Health Organization (WHO) reports that, as of
June, in Al-Raqqa, Dayr Al-Zour and Homs more than
70 per cent of health centres had been damaged or are
out of service. Nearly 40 per cent of the 1,724 primary
health-care centres across the country are either badly
damaged or completely closed. Worse, nearly 70 per
cent of Syria's health professionals, up to 80,000, have
fled the country, according to WHO. Some members
have seen the statistics that of the 5,000 doctors in
Aleppo before the war, 36 remain. Many governorates
now lack qualified medical expertise for trauma,
anaesthesia and specialized laboratory personnel. In
two northern governates, there is hardly any female
staff to cope with reproductive health emergencies or
to respond to gender-based violence. The regime must
immediately lift any bureaucratic locks on the delivery
of urgently needed medical aid and seize targeting
medical workers. Non-State actors too must respect
medical neutrality and facilitate access.

In conclusion, we appeal urgently to Council
members that have influence on the regime to put
pressure on the regime to fulfil its obligation under
international humanitarian law as it relates to medical
neutrality. The United States will continue to urge
opposition groups to facilitate medical access in areas
under their control. For the sake of the Syrian people
and the sake of the sanctity of medical neutrality
everywhere, we have to do more to address that problem.

Lebanon is among the neighbouring countries most
affected by the Syrian civil war. Because of the nature
of that conflict and because of the influx of refugees,
Lebanon faces enormous humanitarian, economic
and security challenges. More than one fifth of the
population of Lebanon are now refugees from Syria. A
recent meeting in New York of the International Support
Group for Lebanon demonstrated that the permanent
members of the Council, the European Union, the
League of Arab States, the United Nations and other
international institutions shared a common agenda in
support of Lebanon as it faces current challenges and
promoted a policy of dissociation from the Syrian
conflict. At that meeting, Secretary Kerry announced
that the United States would contribute an additional
$30 million to help Lebanese communities cope with
the rising demand for public services, including those
related to infrastructure, education and health. That
is in addition to the $74 million in new humanitarian
assistance, which is Lebanon's share ofthe $340 million
in refugee-related aid announced by President Obama
during his visit to the General Assembly.

My Government commends Lebanon's cooperation
with the World Bank and the United Nations in
developing a plan to address its heightened needs.
We look forward to reviewing that plan and we hope
it will provide a firm basis, along with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 1701
(2006), for further internationally supported efforts to
maintain Lebanon's political progress, security, social
cohesion and economic well-being. In the meantime,
we call on the international community to help reduce
the extraordinary burdens that Lebanon, through no
fault of its own, has been compelled to bear.

Turning finally to the ongoing negotiations between
Israelis and Palestinians, Prime Minister Netanyahu
and President Abbas made clear in front of the General
Assembly their commitment to reaching an enduring
peace agreement that ended their conflict. President
Obama, Secretary Kerry and Special Envoy Martin
Indyk remain deeply engaged in achieving a final
status accord within the nine-month time frame set for
the negotiations.

In addition, the international community continues
to demonstrate strong support for the peace process,
most recently through several special events on the
margins of the General Assembly, including the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee and the Quartet principals
meeting, as well as the special meeting of supporters
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which conveyed
continued support for the Agency and its mission.

As a compliment to the political track,
international support for the Palestinian economy and
the Palestinian Authority is crucial. We also recognize
the need to address the humanitarian needs of the
civilian population in Gaza, and wish to highlight the
continued efforts we are making to promote economic
development in both the West Bank and Gaza, including
more than $348 million in debt relief for the Palestinian
Authority that the United States has provided just
this year. Private sector debt relief and direct budget
support to the Palestinian Authority are vital, and we
encourage donors to meet their existing commitments
in providing additional support. To stimulate short-
term economic growth, we work with the Palestinian
Authority to encourage immediate investment in high-
impact micro-infrastructure projects in the West Bank.
The United States has also provided $25 million in
funding for those projects.

The United States condemns in the strongest terms
any calls for violence. We are especially concerned
about the recent discovery of attack tunnels emanating
from Gaza into Israel. In addition, we remain concerned
about ongoing incidents of violence in the West Bank,
as well as recent clashes around holy sites in Jerusalem.
We stress the importance of maintaining calm in those
sensitive places. We urge restraint on the part of all
sides and call upon all parties to avoid taking actions
that undermine final status negotiations. Following
the bold lead of both Prime Minister Netanyahu and
President Abbas, it is essential that we all work to build
the trust and confidence necessary for lasting peace.

