Mr. Kim: I would like especially to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, who is the leader of the entire
multilateral system. His strong, visionary leadership on
this issue is what is giving drive and impetus to our
work together. We look forward to continuing to follow
his lead and playing our role.

As a long-time resident of Massachusetts, I would
like to thank you for your leadership over decades,
Secretary Kerry. I also want to thank you for your
extremely generous mentorship and support of me
personally. Quite literally, I would not be in this job
without your support.

I also especially want to thank the Secretary-
General for appointing Mary Robinson as his Special
Envoy.

For the people in the Chamber who do not know, I
want to make a special point to make it clear that United
States Special Representative Russ Feingold is a person
who has been deeply committed to Africa. I remember
warmly my years of working with Senator Feingold
as he championed increased funding and support for
AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria programmes. Senator
Feingold is a true champion and friend of Africa.

It is an honour and a pleasure to take part in this
briefing. I thank the Council for the invitation, as I
recognize that our work at the World Bank Group has to
be aligned with political realities at the global, regional,
national and local levels. I shall focus my remarks on
the development aspects of peace and security in the
Great Lakes region, and outline what the World Bank
Group is doing to support the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework.

As the Secretary-General noted, we visited the
Great Lakes region together earlier this year. It was
the first time in history that the President of the
World Bank and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations had travelled together on mission. The choice
of our destination and the timing of our trip was not
an accident. The Secretary-General's ground-breaking
work and the commitment of all the countries of the
region to the Framework Agreement provides all of us
with an opening to end violence, secure peace and lay
the foundations for more robust economic development.
Those foundations will make a difference in lifting
people out of poverty, creating jobs and providing
access to health and education.

The Secretary-General and I delivered one message
over and over during our trip, and I will repeat it now:
we cannot have development without peace, and we
cannot have peace without development. Conflict
not only stops development, it can reverse years of
development gains. The eastern provinces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are a good example
ofa tragedy with an immense human cost that has gone
on for far too long.

More than 3.5 million people are estimated to have
died since 1998. Another 4.7 million people lost their
homes. More than 2 million children cannot benefit
from education due to the destruction of schools. The
poverty rate is approximately 70 per cent. Overall access
to economic services, including energy, is very limited.
But let me also argue that long-term sustainable peace
and stability will not be achieved without addressing
the underlying key economic drivers of conflict and
instability. Those drivers of conflict spill across the
borders and therefore call for a regional approach to
address issues such as insecure and insufficient access
to land, population displacement and illicit exploitation
in the mining of high-value minerals and timber.

Moreover, those problems are compounded by rapid
population growth and a lack of economic opportunity.
On our trip together, the Secretary-General and I
demonstrated the commitment of the United Nations
and the World Bank Group to collaborate and bring
tangible benefits to the people of the Great Lakes
region and to pursue peace, stability and development
in a comprehensive manner within our national and
regional programmes. We were heartened by the
commitment of political leaders to implementing the
Framework. We were also heartened by the interest
in regional initiatives to promote development. That
leadership is essential for the success of the Framework
and for sustainable peace in the region. On our trip,
we committed to increase cooperation between our
institutions and with other partners, such as the
European Union, the African Development Bank and
the regional economic communities, to maximize the
impact of our efforts.

We will strongly support the Office of the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region and increase our collaboration with the United
Nations on the ground. We will use our convening
power to encourage greater investment, including from
the private sector in the region. I can also announce
that the World Bank Group will provide an additional

$1 billion over the next 24 months for cross-border
development issues. Of that, about $500 million will
be for hydroelectric power projects to increase energy
access in several Great Lakes region countries,
about $350 million for transport linkages and border
management, and about $100 million for agriculture
and rural livelihoods targeted at refugees and internally
displaced persons. That is extremely important, given
that the region has approximately 1 million refugees
and more than 2 million internally displaced persons in
a situation of protracted displacement.

I would like to add that all of our assistance will
be informed by a gender perspective. We will provide
additional resources for programmes to address sexual
and gender-based violence, as well as assistance for
basic health services for vulnerable women and children
through networks of health centres. The economic
empowerment of women, as well as the promotion
and protection of their rights and increased voice, all
have important roles in reducing violence. We will also
expand our assistance for networks of regional public
health laboratories to allow countries to develop and
share specific expertise. That has been very successful
to date. I am pleased to inform the Council that in two
weeks our Board of Directors will consider the first
project under the initiative, that is, the Rusumo Falls
hydroelectric dam.

I am sure that progress in the areas just mentioned
will create significant economic opportunities and
help to generate jobs. I am convinced that the regional
approaches outlined will help to promote greater
cooperation and integration within the region and bring
tangible benefits to all Great Lakes countries.

We are under no illusion that this support will be
enough. Our assistance fits into a larger mosaic of
development for the region and will focus on leveraging
private-sector investment. We also understand that,
while large energy projects will be critical for the
long-term development of the region, we also need
to move as rapidly and as efficiently as possible with
smaller projects so that the people of the region feel the
tangible benefits of peace. Indeed, in coming months,
delivering on our promises related to agriculture, jobs,
cross-border trading, education and health care will
help determine whether those efforts will succeed. We
must deliver on our promises, and we must move with
as much urgency as we can.

All that work will stem not from the priorities made
in the World Bank Group headquarters in Washington,
DC, or the United Nations Headquarters in New
York. It will be guided by the priorities set by African
stakeholders, and their emphasis on both quick wins
and medium- to longer-term results. I am pleased
that, last week, we were able to co-host a meeting
on regional approaches to development in the Great
Lakes countries with the African Union Commission
and the United Nations to further this agenda. At
the meeting, participants agreed on the importance
of those approaches. They also agreed to collaborate
immediately on several steps, including a mapping of
country priorities and partner assistance, as well as to
establish an accountability and follow-up mechanism.
A report of the meeting will be presented to the ll+4
summit in September.

Finally, when the Secretary-General and I travelled
to the HEAL Africa's hospital in Goma, to visit women
who have suffered from the violence, and the health-
care workers who care for them, we heard many
painful stories. Those women's stories must be heard
and must be remembered. Their words should steel us
for difficulties that are sure to come, and harden our
commitment to the Framework agreement, because
we must not let this continue. What happened to those
women has happened to the millions of people caught
in the web of conflict in the eastern regions of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and is a stain on all
of our consciences.

Outside the hospital, we also saw scores and
scores of women, and even girls, holding placards
with messages such as "We are tired of conflict", "We
have had enough", and "Peace, peace, peace, please".
I want to assure the Council, as I assured the women
and girls we met, that the World Bank Group is in this
for the long haul. With the Secretary-General's bold
leadership, we are determined to stay the course for
those women and all others who have been robbed of
economic opportunity by these years of conflict. It is
time for all of us to move together, to move quickly and
to deliver on our promises.

