Ms. Handaruningrum (Indonesia): At the outset, allow me to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui for her briefing. Two years ago, in the first month of our membership in the Security Council, we heard her briefing after the 2018 Democratic Republic of the Congo election (see S/PV.8443). Today, in the last month of our membership, we reflect on how far we have come. While we welcome the positive momentum, we are also committed to tackling the remaining challenges. To that end, we thank the Special Representative and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for their untiring efforts for the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also commend the Government for its excellent cooperation in joint efforts to secure a peaceful future for the country and the region. On that note, allow me to convey the following points. First, the United Nations and the region should continue to work together to maintain peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We carefully considered two recently published United Nations strategic documents - the joint strategy on the progressive and phased drawdown of MONUSCO and the United Nations strategy for the Great Lakes region. We should continue to hear from the Congolese people on what they need and proceed carefully on the future configuration of the Organization's engagement in order to avoid a relapse. To that end, peacebuilding efforts must continue. The multi-spectrum challenges that the country is facing requires close cooperation from all stakeholders. An individualistic and silo mindset will no longer work. We continue to call for more robust consultation with neighbours and regional organizations, as wellas withthe MONUSCO's troop- and police-contributing countries. Secondly, we need to increase humanitarian assistance in the country. That is an essential element for sustaining peace. We join the Secretary-General in commending the Government for taking swift and decisive action in ending the eleventh Ebola outbreak in the west of the country and limiting the spread of the coronavirus disease. Nevertheless, we also realize that other humanitarian challenges persist. Nearly 22 million people in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are now acutely food insecure, the world's highest. At the same time, 5.2 million people remain internally displaced because of the conflict. We call for all partners to increase their humanitarian support for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Access to humanitarian assistance is also crucial. Thirdly, Indonesia will continue to support the Democratic Republic of the Congo through our contribution to MONUSCO, which still plays a vital role in maintaining peace in the country, and we join the call of the Secretary-General to extend MONUSCO's mandate for another year in order to protect civilians and strengthen State institutions. To that end, we need to ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers, including from attacks by armed groups, such as the Allied Democratic Forces. Indonesia is contributing more than 1,000 personnel to MONUSCO, including 49 women peacekeepers. We will continue our efforts to save lives and protect civilians through community engagement by winning their hearts and minds and building trust. We also recognize the indispensable role of women in peacekeeping and continue to promote their participation and increased role in peacekeeping operations, as envisioned in resolution 2538 (2020). As the host of the 1955 Asia-Africa Conference, Indonesia is bound by the Bandung Principles to remain committed to peace and promote cooperation with African nations. We renew our strong commitment as a true partner to our brothers and sisters in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, even beyond our time on the Security Council.
