Mr. Leon Gonzalez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We
fully support the statement made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Security Council has convened yet another
open debate on the Middle East without having made any
progress on the path to peace. Far from improving, the
situation has deteriorated. The main problem remains
Israel's systematic aggression against Palestine, with
the ensuing crimes committed against its people. In
recent weeks, we have seen Israel, in grave violation
of the provisions of the four Geneva Conventions and
of human rights, step up its military attacks and the
bombardment of civilian areas and targets, killing
Palestinian civilians and destroying their homes and
property, especially in the besieged Gaza Strip.

Cuba vigorously condemns Israel's latest aggression
against the people of Gaza. Israel is using its military
and technological superiority to carry out a policy of
collective punishment, with a disproportionate use
of force that has killed innocent civilians and caused
enormous material damage. The figures for Palestinian
civilians are alarming. The number of dead is above
520 and the wounded number more than 3,500, many
of them with after-effects they will endure for the rest
of their lives.

We call on the international community to demand
that Israel put an end to the latest escalation of violence.
Only conversations on an equitable basis can lead to
a just peace that will enable the Palestinian people to
exercise its inalienable rights and allow the definitive
establishment of the State of Palestine, with its capital
in East Jerusalem. Until the Security Council plays
its designated role in defence of international peace
and security and adopts concrete practical measures
to ensure that Israel ends its aggression against the
Palestinian people, it will continue to encourage
the Israeli occupying force to persist in its arbitrary,
expansionist and criminal policy and to act with
impunity.

Israel's illegal occupation of Palestinian and other
Arab territories is the main obstacle to achieving peace
and a just, lasting, broad solution in the Middle East.
Israel's behaviour deliberately flouts United Nations
resolutions, threatens regional and international peace
and security, and violates the human rights of an entire
people. There will be no peace in the Middle East while
those aggressions persist and until the legitimate and
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people are taken
into account.

The General Assembly took a historic decision
when a majority of its members granted Palestine the
status of a non-member observer State in the United
Nations. We reiterate our support for Palestine's
accession to the United Nations as a full Member State.
It is imperative to continue supporting the Palestinian
people in its legitimate claim for the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

The Palestinian people are suffering under the
growing number of illegal Israeli settlements; the
construction of an illegal wall that isolates whole
communities and hinders the formation of the
Palestinian State; Israel's demolition of Palestinian
homes and the eviction of thousands of people; the
difficult and agonizing reality faced by Palestinian
prisoners; and the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Gaza Strip, which is exacerbated by
the ongoing and unjust blockade of the area, as well
as by nocturnal military air strikes, assassinations,
kidnapping and torture. In recent weeks, the Israeli
army has conducted hundreds of violent military raids
on Palestinian homes in the West Bank, arresting and
detaining hundreds of Palestinians who are being held
along with thousands of others already in Israeli jails.
Only the end of Israel's colonialist policy, the liberation
of Palestinian prisoners and the lifting of the blockade
on the Gaza Strip will allow for a meaningful political
process capable of bringing peace to the region.

We reiterate that a political solution through
dialogue and negotiations is the only alternative for the
conflict in Syria. The sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria should be safeguarded,
as well as the right of its people to self-determination
without any foreign intervention or interference of any
kind, including attempts to use the supposed protection
of human lives as a pretext for foreign intervention.

We cannot but reiterate the concern produced by the
loss of innocent lives as a result of the Syrian conflict,
and our condemnation of all acts of violence. Cuba
welcomes the successful conclusion of the operation for
the destruction and withdrawal from Syrian territory
of all chemical weapons under exceptionally difficult
conditions.

