Mr. Mano Queta (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): For Guinea-Bissau, the Basic Agreement
on Eastern Slavonia, signed on 12 November 1995,
represents a major step towards the reintegration of
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium into the
Republic of Croatia.
Nevertheless, the Agreement will come into force
only after the Council adopts the draft resolution before
us, which, inter alia, establishes a Transitional
Administration and authorizes the deployment of an
international force during the transitional period, as
provided by the Agreement and requested by the parties.

 

The establishment for an initial 12-month period of a
major operation with a significant military contingent could,
in our opinion, not only foster mutual trust and discourage
any thoughts of outside interference, but also, generally
speaking, ensure security throughout the region during the
transitional period and oversee the demilitarization process.

My country, Guinea-Bissau, therefore will welcome
with optimism the adoption of the draft resolution before
us, which is aimed essentially at guaranteeing a just and
lasting peace for all the inhabitants of Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium, thus making it possible for
that region to become an example of peaceful coexistence
between the various ethnic and cultural groups of the
former Yugoslavia.

None of this will be possible, however, if the parties
do not strictly abide by the commitments under the
agreements they signed and cooperate fully with the
Transitional Administration and all those institutions and
agencies participating in activities for the implementation of
the Basic Agreement, in accordance with the mandate of
that Administration.

As for the Prevlaka peninsula, my delegation believes
that the United Nations military observers should continue
to monitor demilitarization in the area, in accordance with
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
Secretary-General's report of 13 December 1995, for a
period of three months, with the possibility of an extension
for an additional period of three months.

We wish to express our appreciation for the role
played by the United States of America, the Russian
Federation, the European Union and particularly the United
Nations in the process under discussion. We wish to pay a
tribute to the Secretary-General of our Organization for the
excellent report he has submitted and for his personal
dedication to the matter under consideration. Guinea-Bissau
will thus vote in favour of the two draft resolutions before
the Council.

