Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to associate myself with the words of welcome that
have been extended to you, Sir, and to assure you that
you will have our full support during the month of your
presidency.

I would also like to thank once again Mr. Vieira de
Mello for the quality and clarity of his statement. The
written report submitted to us is extremely detailed and
has allowed us to get a clear and encouragingly positive
picture of the work of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET). At the same
time, we are certainly pleased that the person who is
responsible for this report and in charge of the United
Nations operation on the ground is here with us today to
confirm the indications given in the report and perhaps to
respond to our questions.

In fact, the situation is quite simple since a great
deal depends on our faith in Sergio Vieira de Mello. We
have complete confidence in him because we recognize
that he has the energy, the capacity and the dynamism to
successfully carry out his tasks, which he aptly described
as a mission of cooperative architecture. It is not simply
a question of filling a void or of temporarily
administrating East Timor; the mission is to work on the
ground with the East Timorese to create a new
architecture. Once again, I think that Sergio Vieira de
Mello is doing this work with all the efficacy for which
he is known.

Therefore, I have only a few questions to ask
Mr. Vieira de Mello, since he has done all that was
proposed. He is meeting with all the Timorese parties as
well as visiting Indonesia, and he is doing his utmost to
achieve what should be our common objective: the
national reconciliation that will allow all those who have
left to return. Furthermore, in this context I will limit
myself to a simple little question.

We make reference to those who are in West Timor,
we refer to those who are in the refugee camps, we refer
to the pace with which they are returning. However, since
the beginning of this long affair, many Timorese have
gone to other countries, much further away. Does
Mr. Vieira de Mello have an idea how many Timorese
have emigrated far from Timor, how many are not in

 

West Timor or in Indonesia, but rather in other countries,
and yet hold out hope of returning to their country?

As Mr. Vieira de Mello has noted regarding the
possibilities for re-integration and for integration into the
civil service - the foundation of all this depends on his
efforts to promote national reconciliation, and I have no
doubt that he and his team have already made progress,
since the National Consultative Council has been created.
But I believe he has stressed the two keys for absolute
success: One is the question of human rights and justice,
and the other is whether economic conditions will give all
the Timorese people some assurance that they can work and
live harmoniously in a reconstructed country.

As regards the first element, to be brief, I endorse
everything that Ambassador Eldon said. We recognize and
appreciate that this duty of remembering what has happened
and of seeing that justice is, fortunately, understood not
only in Timor but also in Indonesia itself, as the report of
the Indonesian authorities' inquiry indicates. This gives us
real reason to hope. We want impunity to be rooted out and
justice to be done, and we have noted with interest the
voluntary effort that the Indonesian authorities are making
in this regard. I believe that this gives us grounds for hope
that we will be able to discharge that duty to ensure that
justice is done - justice which is hoped for by the
Timorese and desired by the international community - in
a way that conforms with the aspirations of both the
Indonesian authorities and the population of Timor. This, it
seems to me, is a satisfactory recent development. As
Ambassador Eldon said, we shall be discussing it again in
our consultations, under the authority of the President of the
Security Council.

The second condition, the second key, is the economic
situation. We must be able to provide some immediate
prospects for acceptable living conditions for the inhabitants
of Timor. In this context, we must acknowledge that there
has been a succession of recent incidents, which Mr. Vieira
de Mello has witnessed - indeed, he almost fell victim to
them; I think he has had some difficult experiences - and
which are the result of the deterioration of the economic
situation. There will be no genuine return or reconciliation
if those who are in camps are not clearly assured not only
that they can be reintegrated, but that they can return to
normal living conditions.

The Special Representative referred to and welcomed
the volume of contributions promised during the
contributors' meetings. But he also emphasized that there
have been delays in the disbursement or payment of funds,
and he raised the issue of the need to be able to rely on
United Nations contributions. If he has the time, I would
like Mr. Vieira de Mello to be a little more specific and
tell us what needs to be done, beyond making simple
appeals. In financial terms, how does he see the ways and
means for transfers of funds which would allow his
administration to function?

In this financial context, everything that could be
done to decrease the financial burden on the United
Nations force would be useful, as the savings could be
channelled or redirected towards the civil adminstration,
and the improvement of general security conditions would
perhaps make it possible to reduce the size of the United
Nations force itself and enable savings to be made. States
could then direct their funding towards his administration.

Those are my questions and comments to Mr. Vieira
de Mello. Once again, I would like to thank him for his
contribution and to reiterate once again our full
confidence in him and in you, Mr. President.

