Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Mr. Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing on the work
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). China welcomes the statement of
Mr. Ivica Dacie, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and his presence at
today's meeting. I have also listened attentively to the
remarks of Ms. Vlora Citaku.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia, and we understand Serbia's
legitimate concerns regarding the question of Kosovo.
Resolution 1244 (1999) is the principal legal basis for
resolving that question, and it is vital that in doing
so we adhere to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and engage in dialogue
and negotiations within the framework of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in order to reach an
appropriate settlement that is acceptable to all the
parties. We appreciate Serbia's positive efforts in the
search for a political solution to this issue, and welcome
the significant consensus that has been reached in the
high-level dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
on mutual recognition of academic credentials and
personnel integration. China supports both parties in
their efforts to continue their pragmatic and constructive
dialogue, implement the agreements that have been
reached and seek a lasting solution acceptable to both,
so as to safeguard peace and stability in the Balkans
and, for that matter, in Europe as a whole.

The recent security situation has remained
generally stable, but Kosovo is still dealing with
complexities and uncertainties in its efforts to achieve
social development. The parties concerned should
work to effectively protect the legitimate rights of all
of Kosovo's ethnic groups, actively promote national
reconciliation and avoid acts that might complicate
or escalate the situation. China appreciates the work
being done by UNMIK under Special Representative
Tanin. We support its continued efforts to carry out
the Security Council's mandate, and we hope that the
international presence in Kosovo, including UNMIK,
the European Rule of Law Mission and the Kosovo
Force, will improve their coordination with a view to
playing a positive and constructive role in achieving an
appropriate settlement of the Kosovo issue.

