Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation is grateful to Mr. Prendergast,
the Under-Secretary-General, and to Ambassador
Olhaye, the Permanent Representative of Djibouti, for
their briefings. We would also like to express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
convened this public meeting. This is the first open
debate in the Security Council in recent years on the
question of Somalia. We hope that this debate will give
an impetus to efforts for an early resolution of the
question of Somalia.

The past few months have witnessed a series of
new developments in the peace process in Somalia.
The Somalia National Peace Conference has recently
moved into its second phase, and the progress achieved
so far is the result ofjoint efforts by all sides and is a
reflection of the various Somali clans' strong desire for
peace. We hope that the Somalia National Peace
Conference will bear fruit as soon as possible and that
the participants in the Conference will soon reach an
understanding on core questions, such as the
establishment of a transitional government and a
transitional parliament.

We greatly appreciate the strenuous efforts of
President Guelleh and the Government of Djibouti to
attain peace in Somalia. The entire population of
Djibouti supports the peace process in Somalia, and has
made very valuable contributions to the process. We
appeal to the international community to provide all
necessary assistance to Djibouti so as to help it
successfully implement President Guelleh's initiative.
At the same time, we strongly urge the leaders of the
main Somali factions who have stayed away from the
National Peace Conference to manifest the necessary
political courage and political wisdom to take part in
the peace process. Any action detrimental to the
attainment of peace in Somalia will be rejected by the
Somali people.

The effective implementation of the arms
embargo against Somalia will doubtless promote the
peace process there. However, for too long the relevant
sanctions have not been implemented. We hope that
this situation will be rectified as soon as possible. In
this regard, we would like to express our appreciation
for the commitment of the Chairman of the sanctions
Committee, Ambassador Ben Mustapha of Tunisia. We
fully support his work and hope that the countries and
regional organizations concerned will cooperate
actively with him.

As a result of the prolonged civil strife, the
humanitarian situation in Somalia remains very grave.
We appreciate the efforts made by the humanitarian
personnel who have been providing aid in Somalia for
many years. We urge the armed groups to ensure the
freedom and safety of humanitarian personnel and to
provide the necessary guarantees for their access to the
population.

The United Nations has experienced setbacks in
Somalia. It should avail itself of this window of
opportunity and increase its input with regard to
Somalia, help Djibouti achieve success in its peace
initiative as soon as possible and make a substantial
contribution to the resolution of the question of
Somalia.

