Ms. Adamson: The situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory continues to deteriorate and the
prospect ofa two-State solution for Israel and Palestine
continues to be dismantled piece by piece, as mentioned
by High Representative Federica Mogherini at the third
Regional Forum of the Union for the Mediterranean
in Barcelona on 8 October. The European Union (EU)
is deeply concerned by the situation in Gaza. Gaza is
home to 2 million people who struggle to access basic
services, sufficient water and electricity supplies.

In the past few weeks, as living conditions continue
to worsen, the ongoing protests and violence at the
Gaza border fence, fuelled by Hamas and Palestinian
Islamic Jihad, have intensified and expanded in nature.
They have further worsened the already volatile
situation in and around the Gaza Strip. The launching
of incendiary kites and balloons has now continued for
more than half a year. It has caused severe damage in
Israeli communities near Gaza and must stop. During
the same period, more than 200 Palestinians have been
killed and over 21,000 have been injured, most injuries
coming from live ammunition and gas inhalation. That
raises serious questions about the proportionate use of
force, which must be addressed through independent
and transparent investigations.

We expect the de facto authorities in Gaza to do
their utmost to prevent further escalation. The EU urges
all actors concerned to act with the utmost restraint
to avoid further loss of life, prevent any escalation,
discourage recourse to violence and not exploit the
demonstrations for other means. While recalling Israel's
right to self-defence, we expect the Israeli authorities to
respect the principle of necessity and proportionality
in its use of force. Serious questions have arisen about
the proportionate use of force, which must be addressed
through independent and transparent investigations.
The European Union takes note of the fact-finding
assessment mechanism established by the Israel Defense
Forces to review its own actions and specific incidents
that have taken place on the Israeli-Gaza border since
30 March. The facts must also be established regarding
reports about violent attacks against Israel under the
guise of the protests.

The European Union will continue its support for
the work undertaken by Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process Nickolay Mladenov. We
commend his efforts to alleviate the humanitarian
crisis in Gaza, including the fuel-delivery deal reached
last week thanks to his engagement. We call on the
parties to cooperate with the Special Coordinator and
the wider international community to support him in
the operationalization of the proposed humanitarian
and economic interventions for Gaza, in continued
close coordination with the Palestinian Authority, in
order to secure and coordinate, among other things, the
provision of lifesaving health care, increase access to
clean water and energy supplies, improve the overall
economic conditions and promote conditions that enable
intra-Palestinian unity. The immediate priority must be
to reduce tensions and avoid another conflict in Gaza.
The return of the Palestinian Authority to the Gaza Strip
is indispensable if we wish to improve the conditions
and humanitarian situation in a sustainable manner.

Additional financial efforts by the international
community are needed. But in order to ensure lasting
results, a fundamental change in the situation in Gaza
is critical. That should include an end to the closure and
the full opening of crossing points, while addressing
Israel's legitimate security concerns. In that light, we
welcome the continued opening of the Rafah crossing.
In the meantime, the EU will continue to support United
Nations and Egyptian efforts towards the reunification
of Gaza and the West Bank under one single and
legitimate Palestinian Authority. The EU will continue
to work towards that end with our partners, the Israelis
and the Palestinians, regional actors and our partners
within the Middle East Quartet. We hope that the
United States peace plan for the Middle East will
provide another contribution in that regard.

Indispensable humanitarian assistance must
overcome political divisions. Stopping the important
activities of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) could well cause instability and create a
vacuum that would only serve the extremists. That is
why the EU and its member States have collectively
been the largest contributors to UNRWA's budget.
We are and will continue to be strong, reliable and
predictable supporters of the Agency. Just a few weeks
ago the EU increased its financial support to UNRWA
by €40 million, raising the total contribution to the
Agency to €146 million since the beginning ofthis year.

In the ministerial meeting that the EU co-chaired
along with two EU member States, Sweden and Germany,
and other partners on 27 September, participants
underlined the importance of fully supporting the
ability of UNRWA to implement its mandate effectively,
namely, to assist and protect Palestine refugees, while
continuing to ensure transparency and accountability
in its programmes. Next year will be an even tougher
year for UNRWA. In that context we need to stress once
again the crucial importance for UNRWA and donors to
intensify efforts to put the Agency on a stable financial
footing while maintaining a focus on its mandate. We
will continue to do our utmost to ensure that UNRWA
and its dedicated staff continue to operate until a
just, fair, agreed and realistic solution to the plight of
Palestine refugees is finally reached.

Twenty-five years after the signing of the Oslo
Accords, a just and lasting peace among Israelis and
Palestinians is still sorely missing. While the Oslo
Accords have not accomplished their overall goal, one of
their major achievements is that Palestinian institutions
are in place. It is in the interests ofboth the Palestinians
and the Israelis that their stability be preserved.

The EU will continue to urge both parties to refrain
from unilateral actions that undermine the relaunching
of the negotiations or imperil the viability of the two-
State solution. There is no justification for incitement
and violence. We follow with great concern the situation
on the ground, in particular the pending demolition of
the Bedouin village of Khan Al-Ahmar, including its
school, in a location of strategic interest for preserving
the contiguity of a future Palestinian State, as well as
the decision taken last Sunday by the Israeli authorities
to move forward plans for settlement expansion in
Hebron. The EU has repeatedly urged Israel not to
execute its decision to demolish the Khan Al-Ahmar
community or displace its citizens and today reiterates
its strong opposition to Israel's settlement policy and
actions taken in that context, including demolitions and
confiscation - including some EU-funded projects -
evictions and forced transfers. Settlements are illegal
under international law, constitute an obstacle to peace,
and threaten to make a two-State solution impossible.

We must work together to reverse the current
negative developments on the ground, which are
leading us away from a negotiated two-State solution
with Jerusalem as the future capital of both States. A
two-State solution based on the 1967 borders that meets
Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian
aspirations for statehood and sovereignty, ends the
occupation, and resolves all final-status issues remains
the only viable and realistic way to end the conflict and
achieve just and lasting peace. The EU will continue to
work towards that end with both parties and its regional
and international partners, starting with the Middle
East Quartet.

The conflict in Syria has continued for more than
seven years and has caused immense suffering. Millions
of people have been forced to find refuge in other
countries or have faced starvation, sieges and armed
offensives within their country, along with blatant and
ongoing violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, in particular by the Syrian regime. The
Syrian regime bears the overwhelming responsibility
for the catastrophic humanitarian situation and the
suffering of the Syrian people.

The EU acknowledges the signing of the
memorandum to establish a ceasefire in Idlib and calls
on the Astana guarantors to ensure that that ceasefire is
upheld and to safeguard the last remaining de-escalation
zone in Syria. The EU expects that they will follow
through on their commitment and also guarantee the
protection of civilian lives and infrastructure, as well
as safe, unhindered and sustained humanitarian access
across Syria.

The EU expresses its full support for the mandate
and efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy for
Syria aimed at establishing a constitutional committee
that will serve as the first step towards an inclusive,
credible and sustainable political solution in Syria, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communique (S/20l2/522, annex). The EU commits
itself to remain at the forefront of international efforts
for accountability and justice in Syria. All those
responsible for breaches of international law and human
rights law, some of which may constitute war crimes
and crimes against humanity, must be held accountable.
We reiterate our condemnation of the repeated use of
chemical weapons in Syria by the Syrian regime and
Da'esh, as confirmed by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism. We are deeply
concerned by continuing reports by the OPCW Fact-
finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic pointing
to the use of chemical weapons in various locations in
Syria in recent months.

The EU welcomes the recent decision by the
Conference of States Parties to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction to enhance the OPCW's capacity to
identify the perpetrators ofthe use of chemical weapons
in Syria. The EU has imposed restrictive measures
on Syrian high-level officials and scientists and has
adopted a new global sanctions regime for the use of
chemical weapons.

In the meantime, we reiterate our calls upon all the
parties to the conflict and those actors with influence
over them, especially the Syrian regime and its allies,
to ensure unhindered sustained humanitarian access
and medical evacuations for all Syrians in need. The
situation in Rukban camp is particularly appalling. The
EU calls on all stakeholders to facilitate immediate
humanitarian access.

The EU supports the rights of Syrians to return to
their homes voluntarily and in safety and dignity, in line
with international humanitarian law, when conditions
allow. The EU calls for safe and equal access to civil
documentation on housing and property rights so as to
ensure that the rights of Syrians are preserved and that
those displaced are provided with the basic conditions
to be able to return to their homes in a dignified, safe
and voluntary way when conditions allow.

However, the EU agrees with the assessment of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) that conditions for non-coercive
and safe repatriation are not yet in place. It is critical
that work undertaken to build those conditions be
well coordinated with all relevant actors, in particular
UNHCR. The EU will organize a third Brussels
conference on supporting the future of Syria and the
region in the last week of March 2019, so as to support
the United Nations-led political process for a solution
to the conflict, provide a platform for the voices of
Syrian civil society, and seek pledges by EU member
States and international donors.

Finally, the EU reiterates that it will be ready
to assist in the reconstruction of Syria only when
a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political
transition, negotiated by the Syrian parties to the
conflict, on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
2012 Geneva communique, is firmly under way.

