Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to start by welcoming the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto
Zannier; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Vuk Jeremie; and the Acting Foreign Minister of
Kosovo, Mrs. Vlora Citaku, to the Council Chamber
today.

I would also like to express the United
Kingdom's gratitude for the role played by the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in promoting stability and reconciliation in
Kosovo and for Mr. Zannier's continued leadership and
hard work.

Kosovo has now achieved 75 recognitions, held
its first national election since independence and
tomorrow will celebrate its third anniversary as an
independent State. I congratulate Kosovo on these
achievements.

The national elections in December in Kosovo
were widely recognized to have been conducted in a
peaceful and stable manner. There were a number of
irregularities and allegations of fraud. Acting Foreign
Minister Citaku has herself recognized this. But the
efficient and responsible manner with which the
Central Elections Commission and the Constitutional
Court addressed these complaints, in line with the
electoral code, is a further sign of Kosovo's maturing
democracy.

The results have now been confirmed by the
Central Elections Commission. We welcome the
increased participation by the Kosovo Serbian
population. This is reflected in the fact that there will
be 25 minority members of Parliament in the Kosovo
Assembly, which is five above the 20 seats reserved.
The United Kingdom looks forward to supporting the
incoming Kosovo Government.

Three years after Kosovo's declaration of
independence, the challenges it faces are changing.
Increasingly, they are the same as those of other States
in the region: to foster economic development, to
improve the lives of its citizens and to drive forward
reform in pursuit of European standards. The new
Government should seize the opportunity to address
these challenges and commit itself to the task of
preparing for European Union (EU) membership.

In September, the General Assembly welcomed
the prospect of an EU-facilitated dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade. All parties are committed to
starting the dialogue as soon as possible. Like the
Secretary-General, I am pleased that the European
Union representatives appointed to facilitate the talks
have held preparatory meetings with both sides. My
Government continues to believe that the dialogue is
essential to improving practical cooperation between
Serbia and Kosovo and for making progress towards
both countries' European perspective. I urge both sides
to engage quickly, in a spirit of cooperation and
compromise.

Some cooperation is already taking place. The
Secretary-General rightly highlights the good work that
is being taken forward on issues such as missing
persons and religious and cultural heritage. I would
like to thank UNMIK and the International Committee
of the Red Cross for their role in this. The United
Kingdom has long supported the work of the United
Nations and the Government of Kosovo to ensure that
returnees feel able to go home. So I am particularly
pleased to see that the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees has recorded an

1 1-23 603
increase in the number of voluntary minority returns,
with the 2010 figures almost double those of 2009.

In January, the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe adopted a report by Special
Rapporteur Dick Marty on inhuman treatment of
people and illicit trafficking in human organs in
Kosovo. The United Kingdom Government expects
allegations such as these to be treated seriously. I
therefore welcome the decision by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) to open
preliminary investigations into the allegations, and the
public commitment by the Governments of Kosovo and
Albania to cooperate fully with the investigation.

EULEX has the mandate, authority and
jurisdiction to take forward a full and independent
investigation. In the light of this, we do not believe that
a Security Council-mandated investigation into these
allegations is necessary.

Progress in Kosovo is irreversible. The world's
youngest country is a viable, independent State with a
clear future in the European Union. But that future
belongs not just to Kosovo, but also to Serbia and the
other countries of the Western Balkans. The United
Kingdom supports all of them.

