Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
welcome you to the Council today, Mr. President, and to
thank France for its work in facilitating the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2409 (2018).

I would like to concentrate on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) itself, which has a
vital job to do. This is a crucial time in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It stands poised on the verge
of hope. With nine months to go before the elections,
the country is facing increased insecurity and a
deteriorating humanitarian situation in many areas.

MONUSCO needs the strong backing of the
Security Council now more than ever, so our
unanimous adoption today of resolution 2409 (2018)
is all the more important. We particularly welcome
the resolution's clear focus on two priorities for the
Mission - protecting civilians and supporting the
implementation of the 2016 political agreement. As
outlined in its strategic review, a whole-of-Mission
approach will be needed to successfully deliver on
those objectives. We also welcome the strategic
review's focus on enabling MONUSCO to evolve so
that it is flexible and agile and can respond to emerging
protection threats. We welcome the proposals to unlock
the Intervention Brigade. At the same time, we should
keep these changes under review and make adjustments
where necessary, including dealing with the question of
temporary reinforcement.

The resolution is clear that the elections must go
ahead on 23 December and lead to a peaceful transfer of
power in accordance with the Constitution. All parties
must ensure that the conditions are in place for credible
elections to take place, which means sticking to the
electoral calendar and ensuring full implementation
of the December 2016 political agreement, including
ensuring respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. The Security Council should closely
follow progress against these benchmarks in the
coming months.

Finally, I would like to stress that the United
Kingdom strongly welcomes the language in the
resolution on sexual exploitation and abuse. We fully
support the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy
and urge the United Nations to keep the Council fully
informed on its progress in implementing that policy.

