Liechtenstein is grateful to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for continuing Security Council discussions on the contemporary drivers of conflict in an open format. The systematic negligence of human security in the Council's work limits its ability to meaningfully implement its mandate, even on the most restrictive reading, and makes the Council an irrelevant actor in increasingly prevalent crises of human security. Attempts by some members to restrain the Council to the so-called "hard" security issues of war and armed conflict point to an outdated paradigm of peace and security with a myopic focus on militarized causes and solutions. The Council first considered the link between climate and security in 2007 (see S/PV.5663). Yet, the five years since the conclusion of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change have been the hottest on record, and it is increasingly possible that the next five will see the world's temperature rise by 1.5°C - a threshold deemed the point of no return during the Paris negotiations. Liechtenstein is pleased that the Council increasingly recognizes the value of addressing the secondary impacts of climate change, such as involuntary migration, poverty, the loss of livelihoods and tensions between farmers and herders. Liechtenstein also continues to support efforts to tap into expertise across the United Nations development system, such as the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs-United Nations Development Programme-United Nations Environment Programme Climate Security Mechanism. Systematic references to the impact of climate change on Council situations, particularly those outside of the African continent, are necessary and long overdue. But the Council must also address the root cause of these impacts. A small number of its members combined are responsible for more than half of global carbon dioxide emissions, and must urgently work to reduce them. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has led to wide-ranging human rights restrictions and increased risks of mass poverty and hunger, massive negative impacts on education, rising inequality and heightened social tensions - and, as such, generated a considerable human security cost. The 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are our blueprint for building back better and a road map for sustaining peace based on international law, human rights, cooperation, solidarity and multilateralism. Liechtenstein is pleased that the Council has addressed COVID-19, albeit in a limited manner, and encourages it to build on this precedent by taking on a human security-centred approach. This could include a Council contribution to system-wide discussions on the negative security impacts of the pandemic, including, but not limited to, the areas of climate and biodiversity, poverty and hunger, health, education, gender, freedom of expression and information and privacy. The pandemic has exacerbated what the Secretary-General has identified as the main threat to our societies - eroding trust in our institutions. Challenges to the rule of law and attacks on democratic processes, even in societies with long-held democratic traditions, must be met with responsible leadership, long-term policy thinking, stronger commitments against corruption and organized crime and an honest discussion about information and the role of social media. The fulfilment of SDG 16 is key to achieving sustainable development and ensuring that the Council lives up to its mandate.
