The President (spoke in French): I am pleased to
welcome the ministers and other distinguished
representatives participating in this meeting of the
Security Council, together with the Secretary-General.
Their presence is an affirmation of the importance of
the subject matter to be addressed by the Council. I
would also like in particular to welcome the presence
of the Secretary-General.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Canada, Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, India, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Liechtenstein, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand,
Norway, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea,
Singapore, Spain, Sri Lanka and Turkey, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

It is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of the aforementioned countries took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2008/738, which contains the
text of a letter dated 26 November 2008 from the
2
Permanent Representative of Croatia, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.

The Republic of Croatia has decided to propose
the theme for today's meeting for two main reasons.
First, we believe that only a global response can
provide a solution to the global threat posed by
terrorism and that this is the sole forum within which
to formulate that response. Secondly, we believe that
the level of solidarity between nations is not the same
as it was in September 2001 and, also, is undoubtedly
less than we need today. If anyone questions that, the
most recent attacks in Mumbai should have dispelled
such a notion.

I now invite the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor.

