Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): On
behalf of my delegation, I would like to congratulate
you, once again, Mr. President, on your accession to
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December and for the initiative you have taken to
organize this meeting on the important question of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

I also wish to thank Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his very detailed
briefing that provided a wealth of updated information.
Indeed, his briefing refers to some recent situations and
highlights progress achieved since our open Security
Council debate on 20 June. He also highlighted the
challenges we must now face in our resolute
commitment to protect civilians in armed conflict. I
wish to express my delegation's great appreciation to
the Under-Secretary-General for the quality of the
work done since he recently took over his new
functions and to assure him of Cameroon's full support
as well.

My country welcomes the concept of a regular
Security Council discussion on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Such a dialogue, in which
the entire United Nations family can participate, is, in
my delegation's View, the best way to promote and
develop a culture of protection of civilians, as
recommended by the Secretary-General in his 2001
report (S/2001/33l).

On 10 December 2002, in this Council Chamber,
we heard a poignant account by Mr. Angelo
Gnaedinger, Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), of the
unspeakable suffering inflicted during armed conflicts
on civilians. It is civilians who are often the main
targets in such conflicts of acts such as genocide,
ethnic cleansing, forced displacement, starvation,
sexual violence against women, child recruitment, and
the separation of families, among others. To that
sombre picture, I think it is worth adding, as
Mr. Egeland did, other challenges such as the
commercial exploitation of conflicts, difficulties faced
by humanitarian organizations in obtaining access to
conflict zones and deliberate attacks on humanitarian
personnel.

The protection of civilians is the cornerstone of
international humanitarian law and that law is in a
perpetual state of evolution. That state of evolution is
dictated by our need to constantly adapt ourselves to
new and complex forms of conflict; we must adapt to
our new environment. In that regard, Mr. Jan Egeland's
briefing was comforting, because, despite the tragedy
facing the Iraqi people, the Congolese, the Colombians
and many others from all over the world where conflict
has broken out, it opens a new window and offers a
new outlook for mankind. Indeed, he clearly outlined
an overall strategy that looks at conflicts as a whole.
He also spoke of the scope of international
involvement to elaborate a framework for improving
the security situation of civilians and humanitarian
personnel in armed conflict.

My delegation welcomes the progressive
establishment of those international norms and
principles, which will complement or further reinforce
the various Geneva Conventions and the Additional
Protocols on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. That protection calls for coordinated and
consistent efforts on all fronts. It calls, therefore, for
close cooperation and continual consultation among the
permanent bodies of the United Nations system,
concerned humanitarian organizations, parties to the
conflict, civil society and regional organizations.

Drafting and adopting norms and principles for
the protection of civilians in armed conflict is certainly
a noble task, but to apply them effectively and
irreversibly, that is the major concern that we must
address. And that was perhaps what the Director-
General of ICRC meant in his statement before the
Council, when he said that the greatest challenge
facing us now is not the development of new norms,
but rather ensuring respect for existing ones. Moreover,
that concern is reflected in the updated aide-memoire,
which is an important reference document for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

My delegation also welcomes the updated road
map, which includes elements that will enable us to
determine obligations and reinforce implementation,
but it goes without saying that this road map, like the
aide-memoire, must constantly be updated if it is to be
truly effective.

In that framework, my delegation feels that the
prevention of conflicts, the promotion of a culture of
respecting human rights and humanitarian law, and the
elimination of impunity deserve the greatest attention
by the international community. On this point,
Cameroon supports an approach based on advocacy to
Member States implemented through a series of
regional workshops, which has proven to be a useful
basis for identifying the main regional concerns in
protecting civilians and for making the various actors
in armed conflicts more aware of the complexities and
the interdependence of problems posed by the
vulnerability of civilians in armed conflict.

And finally, in order to ensure genuine political
will, my delegation agrees with the ten points outlined
by Mr. Egeland and we welcome the consultative
process he intends to set up for a useful dialogue on
these points.
The question of protecting civilians in armed
conflict is a concern that the international community
must steadfastly and tirelessly pursue. According to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, the success of
our efforts depends on our will and determination to
make this protection an absolute obligation for all
parties involved in conflict.

