Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I wish to thank Special Envoy
Sellassie for her briefing.

The Sahel region continues to face many complex and
interconnected challenges in its political, humanitarian
and security landscape. Concerning security, which is
one of the three pillars of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, considerable challenges still
remain. Terrorist groups, such as Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb and Boko Haram, are active in the
region. These groups pose a grave threat to the peace
and security of the region and beyond. Fighting them
should remain a top priority for all Sahelian countries,
and indeed for the international community.

In that regard, the States members of the Lake
Chad Basin Commission and the Republic of Benin are
in the process of deploying a multinational joint task
force with the aim of combating and ultimately booting
out Boko Haram. The French Operation Barkhane has
gone a long way towards complementing our efforts at
combating terrorist networks in the Sahel and denying
them safe havens in the region. A sustainable solution
for countering terrorism in the region is of prime
importance. We therefore call on the international
community to continue to support initiatives that will
put an end to terrorism in the Sahel.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
remains a core contributor to insecurity in the Sahel.
Criminal networks have taken advantage of the porous
borders and large uninhabited spaces to traffick in arms.
To address this, the Nigerian Government is actively
engaged in cross-border intelligence sharing to monitor
the flow of weapons within our region. Combating
terrorists and criminal elements requires denying
them access to the weapons that fuel their activities.
We encourage genuine cooperation among States in
the region and beyond in order to develop a permanent
mechanism to address the illicit proliferation of small
arms and light weapons in the Sahel.

In terms ofgovernance, which is the second pillar of
the integrated strategy for the Sahel, it is essential that
countries of the region address the roots and triggers of
instability in order to minimize the potential for violent
conflict and strengthen the institutional framework
for peace, security and the rule of law. Exclusion and
marginalization are among the root causes of conflict.
In order to prevent conflict, therefore, political leaders
should do more to promote inclusion and foster a sense
of belonging among all groups and communities.
Inclusiveness is an attribute of good governance, and
where good governance prevails, the likelihood of
conflict is reduced. This is a challenge that countries
in the Sahel need to address in order to strengthen
national cohesion and lay the foundations for peace,
stability and progress.

In terms of resilience, the third pillar of the
integrated strategy for the Sahel, the region is still
faced with considerable challenges. The humanitarian
situation in the Sahel remains fragile, with millions
facing food insecurity, malnutrition and displacement.
Addressing these challenges will require sustained
engagement on the part of the international community.
We commend the efforts of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and other international humanitarian non-governmental
organizations, such as the Red Cross, Oxfam and
Medecins Sans Frontieres, for the admirable work they
are doing on the ground to bringi relief to the millions
of people in need of assistance.

While these efforts have helped to strengthen
resilience among communities in the Sahel, much more
needs to be done. We therefore urge the international
community not to relent in support of efforts to address
the humanitarian needs of the people in the Sahel.

