Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
and its Executive Directorate (CTED) have unique
experience and authority in the area of counter-terrorism.
Their job is to ensure the effective monitoring of the
implementation of the Security Council's decisions
on counter-terrorism. My delegation supported the
Council's adoption today of resolution 2395 (2017), on
the review and extension of CTED's mandate. We are
pleased that the document reflects the outcomes of the
September briefing of the Council (S/PV.8059) ahead
the review, organized at the initiative of the delegations
of Russia and Ethiopia, and supports the proposals
we presented during the preparations for it and at the
meeting itself.

First and foremost, this is about improving
CTED's mechanisms for interacting with States when
assessing their counter-terrorism potential. It is vital to
ensure that the independent expert monitoring of the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1373
(2001), 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014) remains a key
function of the Directorate, as is affirmed in the text
adopted today. It is also essential to focus on the States
that are most vulnerable to the threat of terrorism. In
many cases, the monitoring documents are an important
indicator of States' needs for technical assistance, the
provision of which is one of the key functions of the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism. That is
why the review resolution outlines the parameters for
cooperation between CTED and the Office of Counter-
Terrorism. For our part, we will be ready to provide
the necessary support for the implementation of their
joint programmes.

With the adoption of a highly specialized Security
Council resolution on various aspects of counter-
terrorism, the demands on States and the corresponding
volume of work for the Committee have significantly
increased. In the circumstances, there it will be essential
to set clear priorities, including where the development
of thematic subjects that accord with CTED is
concerned. In that regard, we note the emphasis that the
resolution puts on priority tasks related to countering
terrorist propaganda, combating the use of the Internet
for terrorist purposes, cutting off financial and arms
support to terrorists and developing cooperation in the
area of criminal law.

In conclusion, we would like to express the hope
that the work of CTED, on the basis of this renewed
mandate and under its new Executive Director, will be
effective and fruitful in the coming period.

