Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
country's accession to the presidency of the Security
Council. I am sincerely grateful for the ongoing
support provided by you and the members of the
Security Council.

(spoke in Arabic)

I am grateful for this opportunity to brief the
Security Council once again on progress in the Kuwait
talks and on the prospects for Yemen's return to peace.
Today, I am providing this briefing from Kuwait, two
months after the launch of the peace talks, which have
been characterized by a positive spirit at times, and
also by a certain apprehension. Progress has been made
in some cases, while further efforts are still needed
in others.

Over the previous period of the talks, the parties
unanimously agreed on the need to reach a peaceful
solution to put an end to the conflict in Yemen. The
parties have met directly in several sessions and agreed
on solid foundations to build on. A number of prisoners
and detainees, including children, have been released.
The cessation of hostilities has allowed humanitarian
aid to reach areas that were previously not accessible.

Participants in the Kuwait peace talks have held
a number of important sessions characterized by an
extraordinary openness, and they have discussed the
most sensitive issues, including military withdrawals,
security arrangements, the hand-over of weapons,
sensitive political issues, ways to improve the economic
and humanitarian situation, and the release of prisoners
and detainees.

After intense talks with both parties, during
which I listened carefully to their respective views and
concerns, I presented a road map outlining a practical
plan to put an end the conflict in Yemen and return
the country to a peaceful political process. The road
map provides for the implementation of the security
arrangements specified in resolution 2216 (2015) and
the establishment of a national unity Government that
would ensure the delivery of basic services and address
the recovery of the Yemeni economy.

According to the proposed road map, the national
unity Government would also be responsible for
preparing a political dialogue to define the remaining
steps for a comprehensive political solution, including
an electoral law, the mandates of the institutions
that would oversee the transition period, and the
completion of the draft constitution. It is essential that
this political dialogue also find ways to ensure the
more effective participation of women, young people
and representatives from the south of the country
in determining Yemen's future. I note that the road
map also addresses the need to establish national and
international mechanisms to monitor and support the
implementation of an agreement between the parties.

The delegations have responded positively to the
proposals, but have not yet reached agreement on the
sequencing of the different steps provided for in the
road map. When would the Government of national
unity be created? What if particular provisions of the
road map were implemented and others were not?
These are important concerns that need to be addressed
carefully and wisely in order to ensure a comprehensive
solution with solid foundations. I look forward to the
support of Member States of the region and the Security
Council to encourage the parties to overcome their
differences quickly, strengthen their common ground
and demonstrate good faith. Yemen is on the path to an
agreement and each day of delay needlessly extends the
country's agony.
The cessation of hostilities that was declared on
10 April 2015 has continued to provide relief from
violence in many parts of Yemen. The de-escalation
and coordination committee, which is based in Kuwait,
and the local disengagement councils have continued
to play an important role in de-escalating outbreak of
violence and reducing violations of the cessation of
hostilies. Unfortunately, the work of the committees
has not been able to end serious violations, such as the
shelling of a popular market in Ta'izz that resulted in
18 civilian deaths and dozens of injuries. In addition,
there have been violations in Al-Jawf, Ta'izz and
the areas bordering Saudi Arabia. I encourage the
Security Council to call on all parties to fully cease all
hostilities, respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law, and protect civilians.

My team has pursued several initiatives to support
and incentivize the members of the de-escalation
and coordination committee and the disengagement
councils, with the support of the Kingdom ofSaudi
Arabia, the European Union, the United States,
Germany, the United Kingdom, Turkey and the
Netherlands. This has included training workshops
to build the capacity of members of the councils in
several governorates. This training will be repeated
and broadened over the coming weeks to cover all
remaining disengagement council members. I note that
Prime Minister Mr. Ahmed Obaid Mubarek Bin-Dagher
and members of his Cabinet retuned to Aden on 4 June
in order to support the resumption of basic services and
the reinforcement of security and stability. His efforts
enjoy our support. I also acknowledge the ongoing
work to counter terrorism in the south, which has led to
a relative improvement of security.

While progress in the Kuwait talks raises hope for
the future, we must be mindful of the severe decline
in the living conditions throughout the country. The
failure to provide basic services over the past year has
had a devastating impact. High temperatures and the
lack of electricity in Aden, Hudaydah and elsewhere
have exacerbated the health crisis in these areas and
caused a number of preventable deaths. In this regard,
I welcome the efforts of the United Arab Emirates to
urgently provide fuel and emergency power to Aden.

In recent months, the Yemeni economy has seen
a dangerous deterioration. Since early 2016, Yemen's
gross domestic product has shrunk by more than 30 per
cent. To address this alarming situation, the Central
Bank has continued to ensure the import of such basic
commodities as rice, wheat and medicines. Such support
will become more difficult in the weeks ahead , however,
leading to a deterioration in the living standards of
Yemenis, especially vulnerable groups. In this regard,
my Office is coordinating with the Government of
Yemen, the Central Bank and certain Member States
to fmd quick solutions to the rapidly deteriorating
economic situation. I recently met with the Minister
of Finance and the Governor of the Central Bank, who
are playing a very constructive role, and we discussed
practical initiatives that can be rapidly implemented in
order to help prevent the economic and humanitarian
situation in the country from deteriorating further.

The humanitarian situation in Yemen is alarming
and there are credible warnings from humanitarian
organizations of a humanitarian catastrophe should
the situation not be addressed forthwith. I welcome
the release of prisoners that took place at the
beginning of the holy month of Ramadan, based on
the recommendations of the committee for prisoners
and detainees established within the framework of the
Kuwai talks, which communicates data on the names
of the prisoners released. In this regard, I welcome the
release by the Government of Yemen of 54 children
to their families, in coordination with UNICEF
and the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Furthermore, more than 400 detainees, including
prisoners of war, have been released by Ansar Allah in
recent weeks. I emphasize the obligation of the parties
to immediately and unconditionally release all children
and to prioritize the release of vulnerable detainees,
such as the elderly, sick and wounded, as well as those
individuals identified in resolution 2216 (2015).

On the other hand, the limited release of prisoners
has been accompanied by the continued and systematic
persecution of civilians, including journalists and civil
society activists in Yemen. These acts of intimidation
and harassment are clear violations of international
human rights instruments. I call on all parties to
halt these acts and to fulfil their obligations under
these instruments.

In short, the general atmosphere remains
positive, although difficulties persist that need to be
addressed. The Kuwait talks have progressed slowly
yet constructively over the past two months. We count
on the commitment of the parties and appeal to them
to speed up their negotiations in order to reach a
comprehensive settlement as soon as possible.

The support of the Security Council has been a key
factor in supporting progress in the talks. The parties
have received the international community's clear and
consistent message that a solution must be reached here
in Kuwait. I appreciate the encouragement and support
of Member States in reaching a negotiated and peaceful
end to the conflict, and remain profoundly grateful
to the General Secretariat of the Gulf Cooperation
Council and the League ofArab States. I also extend my
sincere and utmost gratitude to the Amir of Kuwait, His
Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah,
for his generous and steadfast support, and for the
staunch efforts of the Government and the people of
Kuwait in hosting the talks, as well as for all the facilities
they continue to provide. We expect nothing less from
that State, which has always sponsored initiatives in the
service of peace and humankind.

Yemenis are watching the developments in the
peace talks in Kuwait with great hope and impatience.
The people of Yemen have experienced the indignity
and suffering of war for too long. I am confident
that the unprecedented international support for the
ongoing process will encourage the different parties
to overcome obstacles and difficulties and reach a
comprehensive political agreement. Over the past
weeks, the delegations of the Government of Yemen,
the General Popular Congress and Ansar Allah have
demonstrated a true commitment to make peace, as
well as political wisdom in the negotiations, which did
not shy away from broaching sensitive and complicated
issues. We have to recognize that any agreement that
emerges from the Kuwait peace talks will do so in a
very difficult context, and its implementation will
pose a serious challenge. Yemenis should listen to
their patriotic and political conscience and ensure
implementation for the sake of the national interest.

Within the next few days, I will provide the Yemeni
parties with a written proposal for the upcoming stage.
The peace agreement we seek will restore security
and stability for Yemen and will constitute a sign of
hope for the Middle East, which is beset by a series
of regional and international disputes. The parties to
the negotiations now have the responsibility to find a
political solution for the pending issues, which mainly
concern the timeline and the sequencing of the different
steps. I call on all parties to show political courage
and make their national interests prevail by making
the necessary concessions to reach a comprehensive
agreement that safeguards the safety and security of
Yemen and its citizens and ensures the well-being of
the country.

