Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): As
so often, Mr. President, you have demonstrated your
commendable habit of focusing our discussion on
things that really do need to be talked about; I thank
you for that. Our three leading speakers - the
Secretary-General, the President of the General
Assembly and the President of the Economic and
Social Council - have all given us a lot to think about.

The principles to be followed in this general area
will be well expounded upon by the representative of
Greece when he speaks later on behalf of the European
Union. I want to cover some points and try to look
forward, rather than backward, to what the Security
Council, with its partners, should be doing in this
whole area.

After a conflict there is always a fragile situation,
and the agencies of the United Nations and civil
society do extraordinarily well in bringing immediate
relief. But the humanitarian-to-reconstruction phase
still remains weak in many situations where the United
Nations has a role. We have all recognized the dangers
of a transition gap, and we have tried to point to that in
the recent past by encouraging efforts to get the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council
to talk about complementary approaches to post-
conflict peace-building, because none of us can deny
that peace and development are inextricably linked.
The Security Council cannot cut itself off into an area
of peace and security alone and fail to recognize the
seamlessness of events on the ground between security
and economic and social issues. We, as an inter-
governmental organ, have more to do on that. I think
that, with the Secretary-General here, it is also fair to
ask whether the structure and working methods of the
Secretariat truly respond to the need for this seamless
approach.

I think that in the near future we ought to look
particularly at the situations in Timor-Leste and Sierra
Leone. The Secretary-General has rightly said that no
two situations are the same. But every situation can
benefit from lessons learned from others, and every
situation has certain common factors, which I do not
think we have been successful in drawing together.

I hope that when we come to look at the periods
after the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor and after United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone, we will take them as a test of how to set a basic
model - a template - for how we, as the United
Nations, are going to handle the post-conflict period.

There are questions about disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and about the role of
agencies on the ground and the roles and capacities of
implementing partners, including the regional players,
as well as international donors and civil society. Where
is the coherence? Where is the operational structure to
take forward the things that need to be done? We have
a lot of experience of things going both right and
wrong, but I am not sure we have drawn them all out
into lessons for the future.

I think there are three requirements in drawing
out those lessons. One is about expectations - what
the United Nations can be expected to do and what it
cannot be expected to do. Here I think the role of
public information is very important in order to avoid
misunderstandings.

Secondly, structure - the structure of the United
Nations presence after a peacekeeping operation has
gone - needs much more attention. We tend to walk
away from it and not leave a structure on the ground -
except the traditional one of inter-agency coordination
through, for instance, regional coordination efforts.
Sometimes that works well, but in more fragile
situations it can easily go wrong. Here, liaison with the
relevant regional players - the regional groups - is
also very important.

Thirdly, the exit strategy for the United
Nations - even from the post-conflict period - is
important. We have exit strategies for peacekeeping
operations. But if we have an exit strategy for a peace-
building operation, we will then have objectives for a
peace-building operation - objectives which it will
have to achieve before it leaves - and we will then
have greater clarity, better leadership and greater
competence on the ground.

Then, there are three factors that we must always
bear in mind as an adjunct to all of that. Although we
talk about the first of these, we still do not necessarily
develop the operational response to it: the rule of law
and the importance of justice and reconciliation on the
ground still constitute a haphazard objective. This is
something that we have got to talk about; there is a lot
of good analysis now about transitional justice systems,
which we can feed into our work.

Secondly, the role of women, not just in bringing
about peace, but in reconstructing society, needs to be
implemented on the ground from the lessons we have
learned. I am very pleased to note that the next biennial
meeting between the Development Assistance
Committee network on gender equality and the United
Nations Inter-Agency Network on Women and Gender
Equality will take place at Paris in July. Let us make
that an operational meeting, not just a re-analysis of the
role which we hope women can play. There is a role
that we can structure them to play in United Nations
activity.

Thirdly, economic and social development more
generally has to be part of the equation on the ground.
Having a Deputy Special Representative in Sierra
Leone for economic and social issues was a good
experiment - one that worked - and I hope that it
will be applied in other areas. I think the Great Lakes
region is one that could benefit particularly from an
improved structure in that area as we move forward.

So yes, we as the United Nations have played key
roles in Sierra Leone, Kosovo, East Timor, Afghanistan
and other missions, and we must not underestimate the
benefits of drawing on the expertise gained in these
operations as we plan future ones. Too often I think the
United Nations experience has been that we re-learn
our lessons in each new operation; and mistakes are
made accordingly.

There are elements of previous missions that are
relevant and can be applied in the future to the
situation on the ground, and we must apply them. The
Secretary-General is absolutely right to remind us of
the fundamental criterion: the interests of the people of
the country concerned. They should be the guiding
spirit of what we are doing, within an acceptable
political framework for them on the ground. We need
to apply that experience, and the potential of the United
Nations, more effectively to those ends.

