Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Deputy Secretary-
General, Mr. Jan Eliasson, to the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
Mr. Maurer, and to Mr. Karokhail for their participation
in today's meeting and their substantive briefings.

The protection of humanitarian personnel
is an important aspect of protecting civilians in
armed conflict. Today, as we commemorate World
Humanitarian Day, once again we would like to pay
tribute to the bravery and self-sacrifice of personnel
from international humanitarian agencies who
are carrying out the crucial function of providing
assistance to and easing the suffering of civilians in
trying conditions.

Against the backdrop of ongoing armed conflicts,
the provision of humanitarian assistance has gained
the distinction of being one of the most dangerous
types of activities. In that regard, the Council has
repeatedly called upon the parties to armed conflicts
to scrupulously comply with the provisions of
international humanitarian law, to respect and protect
humanitarian personnel and humanitarian cargoes
and to take all the necessary steps to ensure the safe,
rapid and unimpeded movement of humanitarian cargo,
equipment and personnel.

Despite the measures undertaken by the
international community, efforts to ensure the safety
of humanitarian personnel and United Nations
personnel remain hampered, and their lives and
health are still threatened. We are seriously concerned
about information contained in the latest report of the
Secretary-General (A/68/489) on the safety and security
of humanitarian personnel and the number of killed and
wounded humanitarian workers in 2013. That number
is a record figure compared to all previous periods.
Eleven staff members of the United Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East died in
July in the course of the bloody conflict in Gaza, which
has yet to be ended.

The international community was shaken by
incidents involving the bombing of United Nations
schools sheltering Palestinian civilians. Dozens of
volunteers from the Red Crescent died in Syria while
implementing their humanitarian functions. All of
that serves to underscore the need for the additional
mobilization of efforts by Member States, the United
Nations and humanitarian organizations aimed at
strengthening mechanisms to ensure the safety of
humanitarian workers. We support the activities of the
Secretariat to strengthen the new system of security
levels in effect since 2011 and the implementation of the
United Nations work aimed at protecting humanitarian
personnel via the concept of standing and delivering.

Our position is that each incidence of violence
against humanitarian workers must be carefully
investigated and the guilty brought to justice. Of
course, the imperative must be strict compliance by
humanitarian organizations of the guidelines laid out
in General Assembly resolutions with respect to the
provision of humanitarian assistance.

One of the priorities today must be the adoption of
urgent measures to provide humanitarian assistance to
the people of south-eastern Ukraine. One would recall
that certain members of the Council have admired the
"restraint" of the authorities in Kyiv, as if encouraging
them to undertake more reckless military actions. Now
that posture has led to hundreds of civilian casualties.
The Government forces and mercenary punitive units
continue to carry out indiscriminate artillery shelling
against cities and other localities in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions, including using incendiary munitions.
It is obvious that the only truly effective way to protect
civilians in that conflict is an immediate, unconditional
ceasefire, which we have repeatedly called for.

At the meeting of the Council on 8 August, the
Ukrainian representative stated that there was no
humanitarian crisis in Ukraine (see S/PV.7239). As it
has done previously, Kyiv would prefer to ignore the
plight of hundreds of thousands of people in Donetsk
and Luhansk who, through Kyiv's own fault, have
been left without water, electricity, medicine, medical
assistance and food. The continuing deterioration of
the situation and the increase in humanitarian needs
has been noted by the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Based on its
data, just for the period from 10 to 15 August, more
than 22,000 people have left Donetsk and Luhansk.
Given those conditions, we attach great importance to
the successful implementation of the effort to deliver
Russian humanitarian assistance to the combat-weary
areas of south-eastern Ukraine, in conjunction with the
International Committee of the Red Cross.

How many unfounded political insinuations have
we had to listen to in that regard. The authorities in Kyiv
responded in their own way, ratcheting up hostilities
with the clear aim of cutting off the route negotiated
with them for the humanitarian assistance from the
Russian-Ukrainian border to Luhansk. The intensity of
the shelling of Luhansk and its suburbs has increased,
precisely in those places where it was planned to deliver
humanitarian assistance. Nevertheless, the efforts
taken by the Russian leadership have borne fruit. All
the technical issues have been resolved, which was
confirmed in a recent meeting of the Foreign Ministers
of Germany, Russia, Ukraine and France in Berlin.
We hope that no one will renew attempts to obstruct
the delivery of humanitarian assistance from Russia,
and that in the next few hours that effort can begin. At
the same time, there remains an urgent need that the
Ukrainian side guarantee the safety of humanitarian
personnel.

In conclusion, I would like to express our gratitude
to the President of the ICRC, Mr. Maurer, for his
personal active involvement in organizing the delivery
of the Russian humanitarian assistance to the people in
eastern Ukraine, who urgently need it.

