Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on a topic of paramount
importance to the United Nations in general, and
the Security Council, in particular. United Nations
Members need to be fully aware of the constant
evolution of peacekeeping operations in practical and
conceptual terms, and it is appropriate, in that sense,
that Security Council members maintain a regular
exchange of views with the broader membership on a
matter of such strategic importance. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

Brazil renews its strong commitment to United
Nations peacekeeping operations and its readiness
to work with a view to their improvement. In Haiti,
Lebanon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in many other locations, Brazilian military and police
uphold the noble principles that continue to preside
over United Nations peacekeeping operations.

War between States continues to be the most
dangerous and potentially destructive form of conflict,
as we can observe from the widespread resurgence of
geopolitical tensions in sensitive regions of the world.
This new "old" trend is all the more worrisome when
we consider that many countries continue to stockpile
weapons of mass destruction.

Civilians are the main victims of conflicts today.
They are victims not only of the collapse of State
structures and the ensuing violence, but also of the
unauthorized use of force or the provision of weapons
by third parties. As a result, we bear witness to the
proliferation of cases of humanitarian emergencies
with a corresponding increase in the demand for the
institutional building of capacities, which in the absence
of other capable institutions, must be provided by
peacekeeping missions - particularly in the domains
of security and justice.

Peacekeeping is destined to remain one of the main
tools at the disposal of the international community
to address international threats to peace and security.
United Nations peacekeeping has become more
complex and dangerous. Nowadays, there is more to
peacekeeping than military patrols along a ceasefire
line or the observation ofthe parties to ensure separation
and compliance with agreements. United Nations
peacekeeping operations have recently been deployed
in areas where no peace agreements are in place and
where Government authority is weak or non-existent.

The implications of being a troop- or
police-contributing country, therefore, have been
changing quickly. The evolution of peacekeeping
missions entailed the renewed commitment of troop-
contributing countries in deploying their citizens in
riskier and more demanding operations. Enhanced
efforts in predeployment training, high standards for
equipment and the contribution of a large array of
specialized units are nowadays common features.

In keeping with those developments, the
strengthened peacekeeping partnership will be
possible only if we adopt a fair reimbursement rate.
As discussions on that issue take place in the Fifth
Committee of the General Assembly, we expect all
partners to adopt a responsible position regarding that
matter. There can be no question that United Nations
peacekeeping efforts are cost-effective and that, despite
constraints, the United Nations does a lot with very
little. For evidence, one need look no further than to the
stark contrast between the United Nations peacekeeping
budget of around $8 billion a year and the nuclear
Powers' defence expenditure in 2013, which totalled
$991 billion, according to the Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute.

In spite of that, regrettably the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has been grappling with
the contradictory dynamics of ever-more complex
mandates, on the one hand, and increasing pressure
for budget reductions, on the other. Whereas there is
no contradiction in trying to ensure that all resources
in any given mission are spent in the most effective
manner, efforts to impose artificial caps to overall
expenditures in peacekeeping operations will turn out
to be detrimental to our collective efforts to fulfil our
responsibilities under the Charter.

At the same time, special political missions are
increasingly acquiring characteristics similar to
multidimensional peacekeeping operations, even
though they are funded by the regular budget of the
Organization. It is a classic case of taxation without
representation, considering that the Security Council
determines the establishment of a special political
mission, but the costs are spread as if it were a decision
of the General Assembly. Let us not forget that more
than 20 per cent of the United Nations regular budget
is currently destined to the maintenance of special
political missions, negatively impacting the capacity of
the United Nations to adequately carry out mandates
in other areas, in particular as regards development
assistance.

If resources are scarce when it comes to
peacekeeping operations, they are blatantly
insufficient to assure development assistance and post-
conflict peacebuilding. In certain parts of the world,
international challenges to peace and security find their
root causes in poverty, social exclusion, discrimination
and impunity before the law. Without addressing those
root causes, there can be little hope that a stable and
peaceful situation will ensue.

The integration of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
initiatives is therefore crucial for the long-standing
stabilization of States emerging from conflict. It would
be a serious setback if new peacekeeping operation
trends in an environment of resource constraints lead
to the prevalence of military solutions, in detriment
to multidimensional mandates that include parallel,
effective peacebuilding efforts.

Whenever it is requested to deal with a situation,
the Security Council should, from the earliest possible
stages of the peacekeeping mandate-drafting, look
beyond the immediate horizon of events into the root
causes of conflicts, and develop long-lasting strategies
for peace. Improved interaction between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission is of the
essence in that regard.

Let me touch upon recent trends in peacekeeping
operations. The first is the growing use ofinter-mission
cooperation. Brazil recognizes the potential benefits
of inter-mission cooperation, especially as a tool for
quickly responding to crises. However, it cannot be
envisaged as a cost-reduction instrument. Operational,
administrative and financial arrangements related to
inter-mission cooperation cannot result in actions that
fill a gap while opening another.

The second aspect is the deployment of modern
technological resources. Brazil views the incorporation
of technology into peacekeeping operations as an
inevitable development. However, technical means
such as unmanned, unarmed aerial systems may have
their potential usefulness negated if their use results in
a smaller number of well-equipped and trained soldiers
on the ground. The investment in new technologies
will be effective only if paralleled by investment in the
necessary human resources.

Another aspect worth examining is the collaboration
between the Council and regional organizations. This
is most visible with regard to the commendable role
assumed by the African Union in peacekeeping efforts
in Africa. Surely, regional appropriation of regional
issues is a development we must applaud, on the
understanding that applicable provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations are being strictly observed.

At the same time, one should not overlook the
need for international assistance in support of those
initiatives. It is unfair to assume that the African
Union will be able to provide, alone, the resources
indispensable to the adequate fulfillment of missions
whose mandates are ever-more complex and ambitious.
As a rule, neither regional organizations nor the
United Nations should outsource their respective
responsibilities in the provision of international peace
and security.

Peacekeeping operations concern all Member
States and need to be thoroughly and democratically
discussed. A reformed Security Council that is more
representative of the contemporary world would have
the increased legitimacy needed to craft demanding
peacekeeping operation mandates that are attuned
to the aspirations of the wider membership and can
therefore enlist the support of a greater number of
troop-contributing countries towards the achievement
of common goals.

