Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are pleased to see you, Madam President, leading this
timely and important meeting on the eve of tomorrow's
meeting with the African Union Peace and Security
Council, and we thank Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde and
Mr. Smai'l Chergui for their important briefings. We
would also like to note that this meeting falls on the
hundredth anniversary of the birth of Nelson Mandela,
whose memory continues to inspire the region and
the world in their efforts to achieve peace and combat
poverty. We also commend the courage of the leaders
of Ethiopia and Eritrea for the important step they have
just taken towards peace and reconciliation.

Peru notes with concern that despite African
countries' potential and the efforts and progress they
have made in consolidating and sustaining peace,
many continue to face serious challenges and threats
driven or exacerbated by violent extremists, terrorist
groups and criminal organizations. The transnational
and cross-border reach of those non-State actors,
the agents of the vast majority of conflicts today,
reflects the underlying causes of the global effects
that are especially seriously apparent on the African
continent - poverty, inequality, climate change and
weak institutions. In that context, we consider it Vital
to strengthen multilateralism and cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union, as well as
with other regional and subregional organizations and
international financial institutions, in order to respond
to the current challenges. We would like to highlight
three main lines of action for enhanced cooperation.

First, with respect to peacekeeping, we urge the
Council to closely coordinate with the African Union
and other regional organizations in order to strengthen
the effectiveness of peace missions, in accordance
with resolution 2320 (2016), which promotes
complementarities and synergies, including joint
analysis and planning missions. Regional organizations
are key in addressing terrorism, a task that is normally
beyond the mandates and capabilities of peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, we want to highlight the
African Peace and Security Architecture and initiatives
such as the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel and the Multinational Joint Task Force against
Boko Haram.

Secondly, with regard to conflict prevention,
we must coordinate strategic action for mediation
and facilitating dialogue, early-warning systems and
confidence-building measures, and give Visibility
to best practices and help countries interested in
replicating them. We believe the electoral calendar in
Africa provides opportunities for that. We underscore
that prevention requires inclusive and accountable
institutions with the ability to address the demands
of citizens, which are generally indicators of the root
causes of conflict. It also requires greater participation
on the part of citizens, the private sector and civil
society, and especially women and young people.

We believe that the efforts of member States must
be buttressed by the political and diplomatic support,
normative framework and technical cooperation that
the United Nations system, the African Union and
other regional and subregional actors are called on to
provide, in a coordinated and coherent manner. In that
regard, we highlight the roles of the African Union
in Mali and the Sahel, the Economic Community of
West African States in Togo and Guinea-Bissau and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
South Sudan.

Thirdly, with regard to peacebuilding and
sustainable development, it is also essential that
the United Nations, the African Union and other
relevant organizations work together on post-conflict
reconstruction and development by addressing root
causes. To that end, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union's Agenda 2063
should be mutually reinforcing. We want to emphasize
the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in that regard,
as well as the importance of promoting the rule of law
in order to safeguard human rights and foster economic
growth, in line with the Sustainable Development
Goals. We also underscore the importance ofmitigating
and adapting to climate change.

Lastly, we support the ongoing internal reforms
within both the United Nations and the African Union
aimed at creating a closer and more efficient partnership
to address their common challenges.

