Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mariano Fernandez for his briefing and, more
important, for his continued dedication and firm
support to the Haitian people in their efforts to
consolidate democracy and stability, make further
progress in post-disaster recovery and achieve higher
levels of socio-economic development.

Today, the Council is called upon to assess the
situation in Haiti. We have witnessed both significant
progress towards stabilization as well as persistent
economic and political challenges. Brazil encourages
Haitian leaders to work together to ease tensions and
allow for the timely appointment of a new Prime
Minister and for the effective organization of
legislative elections, which will enhance Haitian
democracy. We remain confident in the ability of
Haitians to overcome differences and strengthen their
political institutions in an environment of continued
improvement in the human rights situation.

Also key to making institutional progress in Haiti
today is responding effectively to the illegal occupation
of the former armed forces by groups of individuals in
military fatigue. We take note with satisfaction of the
measures announced by President Martelly in that
regard. We strongly encourage sustained commitment
in this matter of the utmost importance for Haiti's
stability.

Improvements in the capabilities of the Haitian
National Police (HNP) and enhanced cooperation
between the HNP and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) police and military
components are very positive developments. Further
consolidating the HNP is essential to allow for its
timely assumption of security tasks currently
undertaken by MINUSTAH's troops, which we believe
remain indispensable.

In calibrating the pace of the future military
drawdown, the Council must assess the challenges still
ahead and progress in building capacity, training and
equipping the Haitian National Police. Some of the
challenges include the risk of resurgence in gang
violence and specific security needs of the most
vulnerable Haitians, in particular women and children.
Strong political commitment on the part of the
Government to strengthening the HNP will ensure
Haiti's ability to secure a stable environment in the
country.

As we have stated on many occasions, the
promotion of peace in situations such as that which
prevails in Haiti cannot be dissociated from the
promotion of development in a context of respect for
the sovereignty of the host country. We are glad that
the Security Council, during its recent mission to Haiti,
noted that Haitians' levels of poverty are incompatible
with the country's long-term stability. We praise the
work of the United Nations agencies and MINUSTAH
in fostering local capacities and helping to build strong
Haitian institutions.

The work of MINUSTAH's military engineers
serve as catalytic actions that contribute to further
stability, to saving lives and to supporting the work of
local and international development actors. The
international community has a constructive role to play
in improving the effectiveness and national ownership
of development efforts and fully honouring its
commitments.

In her visit to Haiti last month, President Dilma
Rousseff reiterated Brazil's solidarity with the Haitian
Government and people and our commitment to a long-
term partnership based on mutual respect. In addition
to the continuation of bilateral cooperation projects in
areas such as public health, food security, nutrition and
professional training, Brazil continues to lead
plurilateral efforts towards the construction of the
hydroelectric plant of Artibonite 4C. This project will
generate jobs while providing a large segment of the
Haitian population with a valuable source of renewable
energy. Brazil has committed $40 million to the
construction of this plant. We continue to seek the
engagement of a wider group of partners to complete
this work, which has been defined as a priority by the
Haitian Government.

We are fully aware of the challenges ahead in
Haiti's path towards sustainable development and
peace. At the same time, we see that, although much
remains to be done, the progress achieved since the
tragic earthquake of 2010 is significant. The population
still living in camps has been considerably reduced and
a new dynamism is felt in some areas of business. It
has also allowed for a partial drawdown of
MINUSTAH's military surge capabilities, with an
increased participation of the police contingents and of
the HNP in providing security and stability. We hope
that further political and institutional progress will
sustain this trend.

We are confident that Haiti will succeed in its
efforts with the support of the international community
in an environment of full respect for Haiti's
sovereignty, mutual respect, commitment and constant
dialogue. That is what Brazil has been doing and will
continue to do.

