At the outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General and all the briefers for their valuable contributions. Georgia aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (annex 38). This year we mark the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the historic resolution 1325 (2000). This was the first time that women were recognized as proactive participants in all stages of the conflict cycle - from prevention to conflict resolution and from peace operations to peacebuilding. This year also marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, which flagged 12 key areas in need of urgent action to ensure greater equality and opportunities for women. Whereas the past two decades have been marked by strides towards strengthening the women and peace and security agenda, we must not forget that the requirements set out in resolution 1325 (2000) and its subsequent resolutions are far from being fulfilled. That reality has been well epitomized in the latest reports of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security. We are concerned by the ample evidence provided by the Secretary-General, which highlights that the violence against women and girls and attacks on their human rights continue to be rampant in both conflict and post-conflict settings. At the same time, the participation of women in decision-making processes concerning the prevention, handling and resolution of conflicts also lags behind. More worrying, the existing social and economic inequalities, especially for women in fragile situations, have been further exacerbated by the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic. Against that background, urgent action is needed to ensure that the gains made towards gender equality and women's empowerment over the past two decades are not rolled back. With that in mind, the Government of Georgia continues to promote gender equality in all aspects of its public life, including by integrating gender perspectives in the military as an essential part of the predeployment preparation of peacekeepers and by increasing women's participation in peace negotiations. Our third national action plan for the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda (2018-2020), among other activities, facilitates the increased involvement of women in confidence-building and reconciliation processes. Moreover, for years the Georgian delegation has been actively raising all issues related to the needs and priorities of women internally displaced persons and conflict-affected women within each round of the Geneva International Discussions and the Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism - the only formal format of negotiations between Georgia and the Russian Federation on the security and humanitarian issues stemming from the Russian aggression and subsequent occupation of the two Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali. Extending protection to those conflict-affected women who live in the Russian-occupied regions of Georgia, however, remains an insurmountable challenge for the Government of Georgia. The protracted illegal occupation of those two regions by the Russian Federation leaves local residents, including women and girls, continuously deprived of their basic human rights. Restrictions of the right to freedom of movement, the deprivation of property rights, the prohibition of education in the native language and, to make matters worse, ethnically targeted human rights violations have become an everyday reality for thousands of ethnic Georgians living in the occupied regions, as well as in the areas adjacent to the occupation line. Furthermore, Russia is responsible for closing the so-called crossing points along the occupation line in Georgia's Tskhinvali region, where those in need, including women and girls, have been continuously denied access to urgent care and medical evacuation. As a result, 16 Georgian citizens have died since September 2019. Just a few days ago, yet another woman resident of the Russian-occupied Tskhinvali region died after several attempts to access the Georgian Government- controlled territories to receive medical assistance. Allow me to conclude by highlighting the fact that, despite the aforementioned hardships, Georgia's commitment to contribute to the promotion of the women and peace and security agenda at the national and international levels will remain unwavering. Finally, we call on the international community to urge the Russian Federation to adhere to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and fulfil its international obligations, first and foremost the European Union-facilitated 2008 ceasefire agreement.
