Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Sir, for this opportunity to address the Council
at this very important meeting. Given the late hour, I
am going to be very brief. I would like to express my
gratitude to the members of the Council for unanimous
vote in favour of resolutions 2213 (2015) and 2214
(2015), which have just been adopted. This is further
evidence of the unity within the Security Council in
support of the Libyan people in their struggle to emerge
from the difficult situation with which it currently
struggles.

Before I proceed, I must express my gratitude to the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the United Kingdom
for their efforts in preparing the draft resolutions and in
leading the consultations on them.

I would like in on behalf of the provisional Libyan
Government to welcome the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
and to reaffirm the continued support of the Libyan
Government for the efforts of the Mission in carrying
out its mandate. We look forward to a more effective
role being played by the Mission in the coming months,
especially with regard to providing support for the
rebuilding of State institutions. We also reaffirm the
readiness of the Government to provide assistance for
the Panel ofExperts in carrying out its duties within the
limits of available resources.

I should also like to take this opportunity to reaffirm
the important role ofUNSMIL in facilitating the political
dialogue seeking to resolve all outstanding problems
in Libya and to form a national unity Government. I
would like to commend the patience and persistence
of Mr. Bernardino Leon, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and his team in bringing together
the Libyan parties and facilitate dialogue among them.
We know that the task is very difficult, and made
even more so at times by ambivalence, lack of clarity,
misinterpretation and at times even outright incitement
against role of the United Nations. But it is also evident
that very significant progress has been achieved through
the dialogue and that hope has become brighter and
more visible to Libyans that agreement can be reached
and the bloodshed ended, especially now that several
issues have been clarified at the recent meeting held in
Skhirat, Morocco, and given the positive reactions to
the draft document submitted by Mr. Bernardino Leon
to the interlocutors. Moreover, the reaction of these
interlocutors and partners in dialogue was positive.

The entire Libyan people looks to the United
Nations to assist them today, just as it did last century in
the early 19505. The great majority ofthe Libyan people
do not doubt the neutrality of the United Nations or the
sincere wish of UNSMIL to assist Libyans in emerging

from this crisis. But it is to be expected that criticism
will be made by those who wish to see chaos continue,
who object to the building of State institutions, who
do not wish to lose the gains and privileges they have
acquired, and who do not care about the lives lost every
day, about refugees and internally displaced persons,
or about the future of our children. But what is certain
is that all of these people constitute only a very small
minority and that the Libyan people will stand behind
any agreement reached by the interlocutors. I am
certain that the interlocutors realize they are playing an
historic role and that they will not overlook the greater
interests of the country or fail the Libyan people.

Resolution 2214 (2015), dedicated the topic of
fighting terrorism in Libya, is in itself an indication
of the attention paid by the Council to the growing
threat in Libya. There is no doubt that the legitimate
Libyan authorities will spare no effort in continuing to
combat terrorism. We look forward to implementing
the resolution, in particular its paragraphs 7 and 10,
requesting the sanctions committee to review in an
expedited manner the requests for exemptions from the
arms embargo that are submitted in order to provide
weapons to the Libyan Army and also support for
the efforts of the Libyan Government and its allies
in combating terrorism. But we also look forward to
assistance from those States that can bring influence
to bear on certain armed groups allied with terrorist
groups so as to convince them to disengage themselves
from terrorism and to join the efforts of the Government
in combating such terrorism.

Large numbers of Libyan young people have joined
armed groups, through which they receive funds.
Unfortunately, however, they have found themselves in
alliance with terrorist groups. Now they are becoming
senseless victims, being killed and injured. They do
not realize that they are thus destroying not only their
own futures but that of their country. Therefore, those
who can assist the legitimate Libyan authorities to save
these young people should do so.

