Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): I thank you, Madam
President, and the delegation of Lithuania for
organizing this open debate on the important topic of
the promotion of and strengthening of the rule of law
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

Our forebears recognized in the Charter of the
United Nations the need to live in peace and harmony
and expressed their determination to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. They reaffirmed
the rule of law as one of the fundamental components
that contributes to the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Uganda underscores the importance of putting in
place an enabling environment in which the rule of law,
in all its dimensions, is promoted and strengthened at
the national and international levels. I would like to
underscore four points.

First, it is essential to ensure that efforts to strengthen
the rule of law at the national level are nationally
owned and primarily aimed at responding to the needs
and aspirations of the people, taking into account
national traditions and cultures. The involvement and
participation of all citizens, in particular women and
young people, are central.

We need to foster adherence to constitutionalism
and democratic governance, underpinned by strong
institutions, including the executive, the civil service,
the judiciary, the legislature and the security and
law and order sectors, with the necessary checks and
balances. The principle of the equality of all before the
law is fundamental.

Secondly, we concur with the observation set out in
the concept note (S/2014/75, annex) that many countries
that have experienced conflicts in the past are prone
to repeated cycles of violence, displacement, pervasive
humanitarian crises and instability. One of the ways
to avoid such recurrence is to support post-conflict
countries to build strong national institutions that
promote peace and security and to provide economic
opportunities so that populations benefit from peace
dividends.

We have seen many examples in Africa of post-
conflict countries following a steady path to durable
peace, stability and development through national
efforts to build institutions, supported by the African
Union, subregional organizations, the United Nations
and the broader international community. It is important
to ensure early action to address gaps or weaknesses
in the rule of law, and a long-term commitment to
implement the necessary reforms.
In the pursuit of rule of law, there is no case
where one size fits all. That is why transitional justice
mechanisms tailored to individual situations can be
useful tools. In Uganda, we have seen the benefits of
utilizing traditional methods, such as the so-called
mato put system, which emphasize reconciliation rather
than retributive justice and have strong support from
elders and traditional and religious leaders.

Thirdly, the importance of the rule of law as one
of the elements of conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding cannot be
overemphasized. Yet we need to recognize that such a
situation does not occur in a vacuum. It may therefore be
necessary, in some post-conflict situations, to support
a legitimate Government in exercising more effective
control in order to ensure the sustainability of the gains
attained through regional or United Nations efforts.

Fourthly, at the international level, we need to
ensure that all Member States adhere to and respect
international law. No country should have the
prerogative to position itself above international law,
apply it selectively or with double standards. We are
concerned about instances of the application of unilateral
measures in the context of international relations in
order to pursue individual national interests. Moreover,
the marginalization of many developing countries in
the context of global political and economic governance
institutions should not be allowed to continue.

In conclusion, we call for greater efforts to promote
and strengthen the rule of law in all its dimensions, at
the national and international levels, in the maintenance
of international peace and security.

