Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Allow me first to say a
few words with regard to the death of President Arafat.
With the passing away of President Yasser Arafat, the
Palestinian people have lost their historic leader. We
offer our condolences to the bereaved family and to the
Palestinian people. The life of Yasser Arafat testifies to
the troubled and tragic history of the Palestinian people
and of the Middle East in general. His life and his
endeavours reflected the hopes for peace of many
people but reflected also progress and setbacks on the
road to peace. In this hour, we wish that the Palestinian
people may have the strength and the resolve to
continue their efforts towards a sovereign, independent
and democratic State, living in peace, within
recognized borders, side by side with Israel. We hope
that the Palestinian people will soon have a new
elected leadership committed to continuing the search
for peace and justice.

Germany wishes to affiliate itself with the
statement to be delivered later by the Dutch Permanent
Representative on behalf of the European Union.

We would like to express our appreciation for
both the report (S/2004/807, enclosure) and today's
briefing by the High Representative, which come at a
crucial time in the reform process. We all owe our
gratitude to Lord Ashdown for his tireless efforts.
Without his personal dedication and determination, we
would not be standing today at the crossroads leading
from the era of Dayton to the era of Brussels. We
would also like to thank the Foreign Minister of Bosnia
and Herzegovina for his statement.

Despite the shortcomings outlined in both
statements, we can reflect on important progress today.
In line with the principle of local ownership and with
our approach of true partnership, core tasks have been
achieved, in particular in the fields of economic and
defence reform, the rule of law and the strengthening
of institutions at the State level. Nine years after the
signing of the Dayton Agreement, we want to further
enlarge that ownership in order to encourage the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to promote and implement
their own political, judicial, economic and social ideas
within their own State institutions. The cooperation of
Prime Minister Terzie's Government and the other
political forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina with the
High Representative, as well as with European Union
(EU) and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
structures has been and will be essential for the reform
process.

As a member of the European Union, as well as
bilaterally, Germany will continue to support that
process in all its aspects, including the integration of
Bosnia and Herzegovina into the Euro-Atlantic
structures, as promised in the Stability Pact. The
security of all citizens is the precondition for those
reforms. Therefore, Germany will remain dedicated to
the military support necessary for a secure
environment. With more than 1,100 soldiers, Germany
will be the largest troop contributor to Operation
Althea.

The transition to the European Union-led force
(EUFOR) - under a new Security Council mandate we
hope to adopt very soon - is proof of the strategic
partnership of the European Union with the region and
demonstrates the growing institutional cooperation
among the United Nations, NATO and the European
Union in peacekeeping. We therefore welcome the
chance to discuss that cooperation later today with the
Secretary General of NATO. After 2 December, NATO
will remain an important political partner in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and be present as an advisor, with
new headquarters in Sarajevo.

Lord Ashdown, who is serving as the High
Representative and as the Special Representative of the
EU, has been clear on the demands to be met on this
road to European integration: the benchmarks set out
by the European Commission in order to finalize its
feasibility study and by NATO as conditions for
entering its Partnership for Peace programme remain
the principal framework for the efforts and the eventual
success of the Bosnian Government. In that regard, let
me mention the call for cooperation with the war
crimes Tribunal. We fully subscribe to Lord Ashdown's
joint appeal, with the Chief Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
Ms. Del Ponte, last month at The Hague. There can be
no compromise on the commitment to the rule of law.
The War Crimes Chamber must become operational
soon, and must get the full support of the Republika
Srpska. As a step to reconciliation, we welcome
yesterday's declaration on Srebrenica, which was also
mentioned by the Foreign Minister. But we believe
that, in order to reach a sustainable peace, all persons
indicted must face a judge.

