Mr. Moussa: I really valued the two comments
made by the Permanent Representative of Pakistan and
the representative of the United Kingdom.

On the first comment, I would say that, indeed, it
is incumbent upon us who need the Security Council
and the General Assembly to do everything possible in
order to prevent the erosion of the authority of the
Council and the credibility of the system. Ambassador
Akram used a different expression to describe the same
situation when he referred to the failure of the States
members of the Council, in particular the permanent
members, in performing their duties. It is saying the
same thing differently, but he chose to say that there is
a growing feeling that the Security Council is under
serious threat when it comes to its role and its
credibility. I share with him the hope that the Security
Council will remain central in maintaining
international peace and security, but this needs
reconsideration and lessons to be drawn from what has
taken place in recent weeks.

As for the comments made by the representative
of the United Kingdom, I very much agree with his
statement on dealing with the information flow when it
comes to the interaction between the Security Council
or the United Nations and regional organizations. Yes,
indeed - we have to develop a system in which
information can go both ways in order for both sides to
benefit from the wealth of information available to the
United Nations as well as to each and every regional
organization.

As for capacity in dispute settlement, we need to
join hands in dispute settlement and to highlight the
cooperation with regional organizations, which is
indeed lacking. What can we do and what should we do
to help regional organizations to perform their duties in
the preservation of international peace and security
under the auspices of the Security Council, in
accordance with its competence? The Security Council
has to shoulder this competence first if regional
organizations are to be able to help. We need a
programme of cooperation on the points of both
information and capacity, within the framework of the
Charter.

This, I believe, would take care of the third point
mentioned by the representative of the United
Kingdom: to develop formal understanding in order to
be able to add value to the work of the Council, which
it really needs badly.

