Mr. Leon Gonzalez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to congratulate you, Madame President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month.

We express our deep condolences to the people
and Government of Turkey for their losses from the
earthquake. We likewise express profound condolences
to the people and Government of Saudi Arabia on the
passing away of His Highness the Crown Prince.

Cuba associates itself with the statement made by
the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

It is regrettable that there continues to be no
progress in the situation in the Middle East region, in
particular with regard to the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Jerusalem. The region is still
marked by instability and insecurity. The illegal Israeli
occupation of Palestinian and other Arab territories
remains the main obstacle to reaching a just, lasting
and comprehensive solution in the region.

Cuba demands the immediate cessation of the
illegal occupation of the Palestinian territories, the
settlement activities in Palestinian territory, the
indiscriminate and disproportionate use of military
force against the defenceless civilian population, and
the urgent, unconditional and full lifting of the cruel
and illegal blockade of Gaza.

The ovation received by President Mahmoud
Abbas's address to the General Assembly at its 16th
plenary meeting, on 23 September (see A/66/PV.19),
when he announced the presentation to the Secretary-
General of a letter of request for Palestinian
membership in the United Nations, is evidence of the
support by the international community for the
Palestinian cause and a recognition of its rights as a
State. Cuba fully and strongly supports that request for
full membership in the United Nations.

The Security Council must rule on this matter
without further delay, and it must do so positively, as is
the manifest wish of the overwhelming majority of the
States Members of the United Nations.

As the Security Council continues its
deliberations, the days go by and thousands of
Palestinian political prisoners, including children,
women and elected officials, suffer humiliations in
Israeli prisons. Since 27 September last, thousands of
Palestinian political prisoners have been on a hunger
strike, protesting the deterioration of their conditions in
detention and the actions of the occupying Power.
Regrettably, the Israeli prison authorities have
responded by taking additional punitive measures
against the strikers.

The letters dated 10 October 2011 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of
the Security Council (S/2011/629) state that:

"Israel has continued its inhumane treatment of
Palestinian prisoners and detainees via a series of
illegal and harsh measures, such as collective
punishment, which includes forcing them to live
in unsanitary and unhygienic conditions; denial
of health care; restrictions on family visits;
solitary confinement for long periods of time,
with some held in isolation for at least 10 years;
deprivation of the prisoners' right to education;
forced night-time searches of prisoners' cells; and
denial of due process. In addition to such
measures, in violation of the prisoners' basic
human rights, the occupying Power continues to
subject Palestinian prisoners and detainees to all
forms of psychological and physical
maltreatment, such as cuffing their feet and
hands, measures of humiliation and intimidation,
forced interrogations and, in many cases,
torture."

The international community, particularly the
Security Council, cannot remain indifferent. The
Council and the General Assembly must take practical
measures to ensure that Israel puts an end to those
policies, which are carried out deliberately, in violation
of international humanitarian law and of human rights,
including the Geneva Conventions.

Cuba reaffirms once again that all such measures
and actions, including the illegal construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan
since 1967, represent violations of international law
and agreements and of the Charter and resolutions of
the United Nations. Cuba demands Israel's full
withdrawal from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of4 June 1967.

Cuba reiterates once again its position in favour
of a just and lasting peace for all peoples of the region
of the Middle East that will put an end to the
occupation of all Arab territories occupied by Israel
since 1967 and guarantee the exercise of the self-
determination of the Palestinian people by establishing
an independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

