The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Indonesia and Lebanon, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Widodo
(Indonesia) and Mr. Tadmoary (Lebanon) took the
seats reservedfor them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 16 March
2001 from the Permanent Representative of Malaysia
to the United Nations, which reads as follows:

"I have the honour, in my capacity as
Chairman of the Islamic Group at the United
Nations, to request that the Security Council
extend an invitation to His Excellency Mr.
Mokhtar Lamani, Permanent Observer of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to the
United Nations, to participate in the Council's
discussion on the agenda item "The situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian
Question', without the right to vote, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council. "

That letter has been issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2001/235.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Lamani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 15 March 2001 from the
Permanent Representative of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the Arab

Group for the month of March 2001, I have the

honour to request that the Security Council
address an invitation, in accordance with rule 39
of its provisional rules of procedure, to Mr. Ali
Ahmed Abbas, Deputy Permanent Observer of
the League of Arab States to the United Nations,
to participate in Council deliberations on the
situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory."

That letter has been issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol 8/2001/236.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the

Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Abbas.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Pakistan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.


