Mr. Bolton (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to co-sponsor this resolution
on Somalia with all of our African colleagues on the
Security Council.

In Somalia, the security situation is deteriorating
and tensions continue to run high, which is of deep
concern to the United States. Like many other Member
States, we are concerned about the prospects for a
wider regional conflict. However, the United States
views the deployment of a regional force to Somalia as
a key element in preventing conflict.

Through the International Somalia Contact
Group, the United States is committed to working with
our international partners to encourage dialogue among
Somali parties. Despite these efforts and the 22 June
Khartoum Declaration between the Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFI) and the Union of Islamic Courts
(UIC), the situation in Somalia has not improved.

Although both parties have violated the terms of
the Khartoum Declaration, the UIC has done so
through concrete military expansion. It has sought to
further destabilize the Horn of Africa region through
irredentist claims on the Somali-populated regions of
neighbouring States and support for insurgent groups in
Ethiopia.

The Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the African Union have put
forth a proposal aimed at helping to restore stability in
Somalia through deployment of a security, training and
protection mission. The primary purpose of that
deployment is to help stabilize Somalia by providing
security in Baidoa, and protection and training for the
TFI, not to engage in offensive actions against the UIC.

The United States strongly believes that a
sustainable solution in Somalia should be based on
credible dialogue between the TFI and the UIC, and we
continue to work with our African and other partners
towards that end. The continued military expansion by
the UIC, however, has not helped to promote dialogue
and, in fact, has created the need for deployment of a
regional force to stabilize the situation inside Somalia.

The United States supports that regional proposal
and views the deployment of the IGAD Peace Support
Mission in Somalia (IGASOM) as a critical element to
06-6448]

help resume credible dialogue between the TFI and
UIC. It will also help to create the conditions for
Ethiopian and Eritrean disengagement from Somalia.

The deployment of IGASOM. is only one of the
critical elements, however, of what must be a
comprehensive plan to reach a durable solution in
Somalia. A political settlement is needed, and dialogue
towards it must resume. A security protocol, including
a verifiable ceasefire and military disengagement, is
the next step towards a longer-term solution. The
international community must be united in its efforts to
bring the parties back to that dialogue.

The United States welcomes the
recommendations of the United Nations Somalia
Monitoring Group regarding ways to strengthen and
improve the effectiveness of the United Nations arms
embargo on Somalia. We continue to work with our
partners in the Security Council on these and many
other issues as we seek a solution to the Somali crisis.

