Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report. I also want to express my appreciation to
Deputy Secretary-General Frechette and Mrs. Robinson
for their statements.

In some regions of the world there are still
ongoing armed conflicts causing untold suffering to
millions of civilians, especially women and children.
Finding practical and effective solutions to this issue
has therefore become a widespread concern in the
international community. In this regard, I would like to
make the following three points.

First, the Security Council bears the important
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security. Naturally, it therefore attaches importance to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. As far as
the Council is concerned, the most fundamental and
effective means to protect civilians in armed conflict is
conflict prevention. Where conflicts do take place, the
earliest possible solution should be found.

In this connection, further detailed studies on
some of the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's reports could be conducted, with a
View to seeking appropriate and pragmatic solutions. In
its discussions of the relevant contents of the Brahimi
report, the Council may also explore ways to better
integrate peacekeeping efforts with the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. Other United Nations
bodies could play their appropriate roles in a
coordinated and concerted manner and adopt an
objective and practical approach to this issue.

Secondly, the primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians lies with the Governments
concerned, although efforts by the international
community are also crucial. Apart from the United
Nations, regional and intergovernmental organizations
are also playing an increasingly important role. The
United Nations therefore needs to strengthen its
coordination with them. At present, more and more
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) have been
actively joining in humanitarian efforts in many
regions of conflict. The positive role played by NGOs
and civil society in the regions and countries concerned
deserves our recognition and encouragement. At the
same time, there being so many NGOs, their activities
also need to be properly regulated and guided so as to
make the collective efforts of the international
community more rational, coherent and effective.

Thirdly, it is relatively easy to reach consensus
when discussing this issue in general terms. However,
in addressing specific issues the situation sometimes is
much more complex, and difficulties and obstacles can
be remarkably huge. For example, the Security Council
has failed to promptly adopt necessary measures
concerning the protection of civilians in the occupied
Palestinian territories. There are numerous similar
cases in the African continent. In cases such as those of
the Mano River and Great Lakes regions, the lack of
political will is often a formidable obstacle to prompt
action and the prevention of humanitarian crises.

As another example, in Kosovo, as well as in the
entire Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, certain aspects
of the task of protecting civilians are still very difficult.
In particular, the large-scale military action two years
ago against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
inflicted serious damage on the economic and social
life of its civilians. As a result, its national economy
has fallen years behind. In this context, an objective
review of the protection of civilians that is responsible
to history needs to be carried out.

Moreover, another well-known fact is that
protracted sanctions have caused enormous harm to
civilians. Although some of the civilians concerned are
no longer under the scourge of war, their humanitarian
suffering reminds us that their urgent need for
protection should not be neglected.

We hope that the two reports of the Secretary-
General and the discussions now taking place will
serve to deepen our understanding of this issue and
contribute to the rejection of views and positions that
are inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and contrary to the will of the majority of
Member States, so that the United Nations and the
Security Council will be able to live up to the high
expectations of the international community regarding
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

