Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to join previous speakers in condemning in the
strongest terms the reprehensible attack just carried out
against the United Nations in Abuja. We express our
compassion for and solidarity with the victims and
their families, to the Government of Nigeria and,
through the Secretary-General, to all United Nations
staff, who prove their dedication to peace on a daily
basis.

I thank you, Sir, for your initiative to hold this
meeting on the most important subject of
peacekeeping, a pillar of United Nations activity.
France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

Peacekeeping operations have become one of the
most visible areas of United Nations activity. We have
seen a considerable increase in recent years of the
resources deployed on the ground and the goals to be
met. The growing complexity and diversity of missions
require enhanced cooperation between regional
organizations and strengthened synergy among
peacekeeping and peacebuilding stakeholders.

I recall the steadfast commitment of France to
building United Nations peacekeeping capacities.
France participates in seven of the 16 peacekeeping
operations, contributing more than 1,500 men and
women. Beyond this direct contribution, France also
contributes approximately 6,000 men and women to
United Nations-mandated peacekeeping operations of
the European Union, NATO or on a national basis. As
such, France has a presence off the coast of Somalia
and in Kosovo, Afghanistan and Cote d'lvoire.

Above all, France supports the participation of
African States in peacekeeping operations through
African peacekeeping capacity-building programmes.
In the context of training and support for African
contingents, France has established national schools
with a regional focus to impart operational and
technical expertise adapted to the needs of African
armies. These schools provide the same quality of
teaching given in France, adapted to local conditions.
Since 1997, more than 14,000 European and African
students have been trained in the 16 schools we
support.

Since the Franco-British initiative of 2009, we
have continued to call for strengthened military
expertise, enhanced cooperation between the Council
and troop- and police-contributing countries, and better
cost-control in peacekeeping operations.

While a number of recommendations of the
Brahimi report (S/2000/809), published more than 10
years ago, remain valid, I would like to focus on three
aspects that we View as vital for improving
peacekeeping: the protection of civilians, inter-mission
cooperation, and the establishment of peacekeeping-to-
peacebuilding transition strategies.

First, the protection of civilians is one of the
primary objectives of peacekeeping mandates.
Peacekeepers must be trained in this task and behave

11-4815]
beyond reproach on the ground. Peacekeepers are
tasked with establishing an environment of security to
allow for the resumption of political processes. This
requires the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes,
including for children affected by conflict, security
sector reform programmes, and programmes
strengthening the rule of law.

Women are among the main assets for
transforming societies, and it is therefore vital to
strengthen their participation in decision-making.
Integrating women into police and armed forces will
make it possible to fight sexual and gender-based
violence and to promote human rights in these
institutions. Advisors on the protection of children and
women must play an ever greater role in missions.

Secondly, with regard to inter-mission
cooperation, when unforeseen events threaten to
destabilize a country and to cast it back into the cycle
of violence, inter-mission cooperation provides for a
specific and effective response to strengthen missions
in a timely manner with the personnel and materials
they need. We saw this in Cote d'Ivoire, where
cooperation between the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire and the United Nations Mission in
Liberia played a decisive role. Helicopter
reinforcements allowed heavy weaponry to be
neutralized and continue to allow traffic and the
movement of mercenaries at the Liberian border to be
monitored.

Similarly, cooperation among missions and
peacebuilding offices, as well as with regional
organizations, must allow us to be more effective in the
fight against such cross-cutting threats as the Lord's
Resistance Army in Africa, piracy or trafficking, which
have the potential to destabilize entire regions.

Finally, cooperation and the sharing of resources
among neighbouring missions should allow us to make
economies of scale in order to meet the demands of
good management and budget constraints.
Beyond the primary need to protect civilians,
there are also the need to develop crisis exit strategies
that ensure a return to lasting peace, particularly on the
social, economic and political fronts in societies often
decimated by conflict. We count on the Peacebuilding
Commission to instil greater coherence in the actions
of the international community in post-conflict
situations.

Peacebuilding priorities must be taken into
account at the earliest stages of crisis management so
as to anticipate the conditions and mechanisms needed
to emerge from the crisis. It is therefore necessary to
take into account as soon as possible emerging threats
such as drug and human trafficking, organized crime
and corruption, which have the potential to destabilize
fragile countries.

In conclusion, we recall that the success of
peacekeeping missions is the result of the joint efforts
of Council members, financial contributors, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat. These
efforts are futile, however, without the firm
commitment of the host country.

Finally, France pays tribute to the Blue Helmets
of all nationalities, who sometimes give their lives in
their dedication to peace.

