Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I should like to begin by congratulating you
once again, Mr. President, on your country's election as
a member of the Security Council and on its accession
to the presidency of the Council for this month. I should
like also to congratulate the other new members of the
Council, and I thank you for having convened this
important meeting.

The creation of the United Nations gave hope
to peoples around the world that the Organization
would discharge its responsibilities, namely, the
maintenance of international peace and security and
protecting humanity from the sufferings of war. But the
Organization has not been able to fulfil the hopes of
the founding fathers; it has not been able to put an end
to war or to the resultant human suffering, despite the
fact that more than 16 years have elapsed since a debate
began within the Security Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

Experience has shown that protecting civilians in
armed conflict is always a selective process and subject
to double standards, which contravenes the very basis
of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. The impact on peoples of such interventions is
very clear. Regrets or recognition of errors made in the
process of attempting to ease the suffering of peoples
are not enough to restore hope or to rebuild the States
affected.

My country would like to underscore the following
several points.

First, good offices used to prevent crises or settle
disputes peacefully, in keeping with the Charter of the
United Nations and the norms of international law, are
the best means of protecting civilians.

Secondly, the main responsibility for protecting
civilians against all dangers, including terrorist acts,
rest on the shoulders of the State. The State is the
authority that is responsible for maintaining peace and
stability throughout its territory.

Thirdly, the protection ofcivilians in armed conflict
cannot become reality unless the norms ofinternational
law and the Charter of the United Nations are fully
respected, including, first and foremost, sovereignty,
sovereign equality and non-intervention in the internal
affairs of other States.

Fourthly, it is unacceptable to address the issue
of the protection of civilians in a selective manner,
which makes it into a means of furthering the political
agendas and interests of certain influential States at
the expense of other Member States. Some Members,
including Security Council members, use the protection
of civilians as a pretext to impose their interests, which
undermines both the Council and the Charter.

Fifthly, the issue of the protection of civilians
should be approached comprehensively by addressing
anything that might be harmful to civilians and
preventing unilateral interventions that the United
Nations recognizes as illegal. Civilians should not
be exposed to suffering or slow death caused by the
deprivation of daily means of subsistence. They should
not be forced into displacement, asylum or any situation
in which they could be subject to blackmail. The
protection of civilians in situations of armed conflict
requires Member States also to respect the Security
Council resolutions pertaining to the fight against and
financing of terrorism.

My delegation renews its plea for the protection of
civilians suffering under the Israeli occupation of the
occupied Syrian Arab Golan and the other occupied
Arab territories, and for an end to the aggressive
practices of Israel, the occupying Power, as well as
to its occupation. The Council's silence vis-a-vis
Israel's violations of international law, international
humanitarian law, human rights and other international
instruments pertaining to the combat against terrorism
allows Israel to believe that it is immune from
accountability and that it can support terrorist groups
in the occupied Syrian Arab Golan and other regions,
which threatens both regional and international peace
and security, and undermines the rules and regulations
of international law.
In conclusion, unfortunately some delegations are
using this meeting to repeat their allegations with regard
to the situation in our country and to prevent any positive
action intended to resolve the crisis in Syria, including
the upcoming talks in Geneva. It is also unfortunate
that a large number of speakers have not addressed the
issue of the root causes of the Syrian crisis, including
terrorist groups supported by some States, in particular
Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Qatar; the perpetration of the
Israeli occupation of Syrian territory; and the unilateral
measures imposed on our country. The Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic once again asks the Security
Council to assume it responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations in order to put an end to the Israeli
occupation. We further request that Israeli authorities
be held accountable for their violations of Security
Council resolutions.

