Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Itake this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your country's
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I am pleased to see your friendly country
represented in the Council, which is entrusted by the
Charter of the United Nations with the weighty task
of maintaining international peace and security. I also
congratulate the new members that joined the Council
at the beginning of the year.

On 23 November 2015, along with representatives
of the neighbouring States Egypt, Chad, South Sudan,
Ethiopia, Libya and Uganda, the Sudan participated in
the 7th meeting of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan. On
18 December 2015, I received the members of the Panel
of Experts at the Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the
United Nations, where opinions were exchanged and
positive and constructive discussions took place. The
members of the Panel expressed their satisfaction at the
cooperation demonstrated by the Government of the
Sudan with the Committee and the Panel. For instance,
the coordinator of the Panel of Experts told me that "the
cooperation ofthe Sudan was excellent". The Panel was
not prevented from reaching the sites where incidents
had occurred, except in two cases. The cooperation of
the Mission of the Sudan was equally thorough.

What concerns us in that respect is the fact that
neither these exchanges of opinion nor developments on
the ground are referred to in the numerous resolutions
adopted by the Council, including resolution 2265
(2016). Furthermore, it is quite clear that the many
resolutions of the Security Council on this topic tend
to hold the Government of the Sudan responsible for
the terrorist and criminal activities of maverick armed
groups, and that rather than condemn these rebels,
these resolutions repeatedly call on the Government
of the Sudan to arrest and prosecute them. Taking into
consideration our conviction in the need to bring every
criminal to justice, the Council must take the most
forceful measures to persuade these armed groups to
lay down their weapons and accede without delay to the
peace process taking root in Darfur.

The same applies to the attempts of these groups
to find ways to obtain the financing and weapons they
use to attack the United Nations/African Union Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. The importance of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur in defining the dividing
line is fundamental and has produced good results with
the cooperation of the Sudan's neighbours, the League
of Arab States and Qatar. We believe firmly that any
disregard of the Document contravenes the Charter of
the United Nations and is a clear incitement to continued
conflict and bloodshed.

Whether or not the conflict ends in a peace
agreement, we are confident that the members of
the Security Council will make the maintenance of
peace and security their top priority. We reiterate our
commitment to cooperating with the Panel of Experts
in implementing today's resolution while dealing with
the pros and cons that have given rise to the multiplicity
of bodies involved. We remind the Council of the
following strictures that we have asked the Panel of
Experts to observe.

The first is that the Panel should not bypass the
mandate specified by the Council under resolution 1591
(2005), and the second is that it should keep to the time
frame when investigating the inquiries into the various
bodies involved. It should observe the requirement of
giving prior notification to the Government authorities
and alerting it to the Panel's movements, in order
to avoid any objections. We must be aware of the
movements of the Panel when it is in Darfur. The Panel
should not rely for its information on organizations
that have no internationally recognized legal status or
those with specific political agendas. There is no need
to seek information about the Sudanese Government
from any source other than the Government itself, and
we must have sufficient time to comply. The General
Assembly has urged Member States to avoid consulting
partisan and unverifiable information sources in their
adoption of resolutions and measures. We in the Sudan,
as well as the members of the Council, have seen how
tendentious information on the Sudan and on other
events in other countries in the Middle East has led to
the loss of innocent civilian lives.

The meeting rose at 3.25 pm.
