Mr. Fonseca (Community of Portuguese- Speaking Countries): At the outset, let me thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Security
Council for inviting the Community of Portuguese-
Speaking Countries (CPLP) to take part in this
important meeting, which is expected to form the basis
for decisions crucial for the future of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste.

The CPLP welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2006/628) and its conclusions, which
coincide to a large extent with the views that have been
expressed in various United Nations forums on this
subject.

I wish to commend Mr. Ian Martin for his efforts
to help find a sustainable solution to the crisis in

Timor-Leste. I would also like to express support for
the statement delivered to the Security Council by
Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Timor-Leste.

Like the numerous other friends of Timor-Leste,
CPLP member States followed with great concern the
events that led to the situation now under consideration
by the Security Council and were deeply saddened by
their tragic results. On 18 June 2006, in the wake of
those events, the CPLP Council of Ministers held an
emergency meeting in Lisbon and adopted a political
declaration expressing their countries' solidarity with
the Timorese people, offering assistance and endorsing
the request of the Timorese authorities for the
establishment of a new United Nations mission with
police, military and civil components that would
support the stabilization and peacebuilding efforts.
They also expressed the willingness of their countries
to participate in such a mission.

A ministerial mission was dispatched to Timor-
Leste to assess the situation and to offer assistance to
the authorities in their efforts to restore stability and
pursue the path of development, which had been
interrupted by the events. The results of the ministerial
mission were reviewed by the Sixth Conference of
Heads of State and Government of the CPLP, held in
Bissau on 17 July 2006, which reaffirmed its solidarity
with the people and the authorities of Timor-Leste and
reiterated the right of Timor-Leste to the full exercise
of its national sovereignty in all respects, with the aim
of building its future in peace and independence and
without any restraints or limitations.

CPLP member States believe that they can make
a positive contribution to the international efforts to
bring peace, stability and democracy to Timor-Leste.
Our member States have shown their commitment to
and solidarity with Timor-Leste in the past by
contributing to the country's development, both
bilaterally and through international initiatives in the
context of United Nations coordinated programmes.
They are prepared to continue to contribute to the
current international efforts within the United Nations
framework to restore stability in Timor-Leste.
We are pleased to note that the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2006/628) on the future role of
the United Nations in Timor-Leste contains positions
expressed by the CPLP Council of Ministers. The
report meets with our approval, and we support it. We
note that the report also emphasizes that the actions of
the United Nations and of the rest of the international
community in Timor-Leste will be undertaken in
cooperation and coordination with the legitimate
national Government. We agree that there is a need to
establish a strong police force and a small military
force under United Nations command and control. Full
respect for the sovereignty of the independent nation of
Timor-Leste and for its institutions is, in our View, a
basic prerequisite for the success of our collective
endeavour.

Reform of the security sector is a crucial task, on
which a large part of the mission's attention and
resources will be concentrated. The Secretary-
General's report acknowledges the difficulties in the
armed forces and the police force, requiring the
coordination of efforts to reform those sectors. This is
a matter of great importance about which serious
decisions should be made - decisions that will require
planning for the long term and careful thought as to the
role and responsibilities of military forces in Timor-
Leste's future.

The report also fully recognizes the need for
better police training, for the strengthening of the
operational independence and internal accountability of
the police, and for credible, independent civilian
oversight of police operations. In response to the
observations and the appeal made in paragraphs 67 and
68 of the report, CPLP member States will consider
active participation in the provision of assistance to
that sector.

The assessment mission to Timor-Leste
acknowledged that sustainable economic development
must also be a central element in the mission's mandate
and recognized the link between economic
development and security, pointing out that poverty,
high unemployment and a lack of foreseeable
opportunities are underlying causes of the conflict.

Another very sensitive issue stressed by the CPLP
is the dialogue among Timorese political forces, a
condition essential for the country's development. That
06-46776

should be reflected in the mission's mandate, which
must stress the need for political good offices and
reconciliation. The CPLP ministers also underlined the
importance of holding general elections in 2007 with a
view to consolidating the democratic institutions of
Timor-Leste, and they expressed their readiness to
assist in ensuring the success of the electoral process.
Electoral support is part of the mission's mandate,
which must be accompanied by a much-needed
programme promoting broad civic education and
democracy.

Human rights, the administration of justice,
institutional capacity-building, good governance,
gender issues and public information are issues central
to the mandate of the mission, whose structure will, we
hope, enable it to accomplish its purposes.

We are aware that, at the present juncture in
world affairs, a number of more pressing issues are
attracting international attention. But that should not
cause us to forget the plight of the Timorese people or
the Timorese experience, which for some time
appeared to be - and, we are convinced, still can
be - a United Nations success story. The "compact"
proposed by the Secretary-General appears to be a right
step towards that goal.

Building a nation requires will, determination and
the democratic participation of all. Four years as an
independent nation is too short a period in which to
achieve such far-reaching accomplishments. What the
international community is expected to do is help the
Timorese people return to the path of reconciliation,
peace and development on which they embarked four
years ago. That is not beyond reach; it will consist
mostly of walking another mile in terms of the
commitment they undertook when the new nation was
welcomed as a Member of the United Nations. CPLP
countries wish to play an active part in the
international engagement to that end.

