Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in French): I thank the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mariano Fernandez
Amunategui, and wish him every success in the
performance of his duties. I thank him for his excellent
briefing. I also offer a special word of thanks to
Mr. Edmond Mulet for everything that he has
accomplished. I also would like to welcome among us
of our colleague from Haiti.

Our debate today concerns the activity of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) over the past five months and also with
the situation in Haiti and the challenges that it faces:
security, reconstruction, economic and social
development, the strengthening of its institutions and
the rule of law, and the promotion of human rights -
basically the building of a modern democratic State. I
shall be brief because the essential points have already
been covered in previous statements.

We welcome the democratic transition that has
taken place in Haiti. Democracy is being consolidated
in the country despite the difficulties. We hope that the
stalemate in the appointment of a Prime Minister will
soon be overcome so that Haitian politicians will be
able to concentrate on the process of reconstruction
and development in conditions that will strengthen
Haitians' trust in their democratic institutions.

Security has been a central issue in Haiti for a
long time. We take note that the Haitian National
Police has been strengthened, but its action is "severely
constrained by insufficient numbers and a lack of basic
equipment and logistics" (S/2011/540, para. 11). We
feel that cooperation between MINUSTAH and Haitian
National Police should be based increasingly on
training and institution-building. Peace and security in
Haiti are above all the responsibility of the people and
authorities of Haiti, an independent and sovereign
State. The international community cannot replace
these national authorities and can only support the
stabilization efforts carried out by the Haitians
themselves.

The protection of human rights and the
humanitarian situation continue to be of special
concern to us. MINUSTAH is continuing to cooperate
with the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
order to help Haitian institutions to better integrate the
protection of human rights in their daily activities. The
activities carried out by the Haitian authorities are
praiseworthy, given the considerable difficulties, but it
appears that additional efforts will be required in the
fundamental area of consolidation of the rule of law.
The marginalization of particularly vulnerable groups,
the significant number of internally displaced persons
and gender-based and sexual violence also continue to
be a source of major concern.

Much has already been said about the work of
MINUSTAH in supporting public institutions,
economic recovery, the fight against community
violence and the response to the cholera epidemic. I
will therefore not address those issues. Nevertheless, it
is important that the international community continue
its efforts in solidarity with the people of Haiti. Such
continued solidarity is necessary to ensure the
coordination and coherence of those efforts.

It is certain that in adapting to new challenges
and measures, MINUSTAH will continue to play a
central role in that context, in close cooperation with
the Haitian authorities, who have been called upon to
increasingly take charge of their competencies and
responsibilities.

In conclusion, Portugal supports the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and an
extension of MINUSTAH's mandate for an additional
year. I would like to assure the Permanent
Representative of Haiti of Portugal's support for his
goals and for the stability and growing development of
his country.

