The President: I thank the representative of
Benin for that very well-considered intervention and
for offering us some of his own experiences and
thoughts on follow-up.

We have had a long but very good discussion

today, and I would like to thank all delegations for

their thoughtful and thought-provoking interventions.

My thanks go also to the Secretary-General, the World

Bank, the Foreign Ministry of Sierra Leone and
Mr. Brahimi for their presentations.

I think we highlighted a wide-ranging set of
themes that included, but were not necessarily limited
to, national ownership, including, where appropriate, a
role for the diaspora; inclusivity, including within
United Nations institutions; security; mandates;
development; regional and national experiences; the
importance of coordination; the need for both quick
responses and long-term sustainability; the importance
ofjustice; resolution 1325 (2000); and the importance
of getting adequate resources, among many others. We
look forward to discussing these issues with
colleagues, delegations and representatives in the
appropriate various United Nations forums.

And, of course, we also heard today about food
security, which has been taken forward by the
Economic and Social Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and emphasizes
the critical importance of post-conflict
peacebuilding in laying the foundation for
sustainable peace and development after the
scourge of war.

"The Security Council recognizes that supporting
States to recover from conflict and build
sustainable peace is a major challenge facing the
international community, and that an effective
response requires political, security, humanitarian
and development activities to be integrated and
coherent, including in the first phase of integrated
mission planning.

"The Security Council emphasizes the importance
of national ownership and the primary
responsibility of national authorities emerging
from conflict for peacebuilding and sustainable
development, expresses its intention to support
those efforts and encourages other actors to do

the same.

"The Security Council recalls its resolution 1645
(2005) and welcomes the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission in advising on the
coordination of international peacebuilding
activities and resources, and expresses its support
for enhancing the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Peacebuilding Support Office and
the Peacebuilding Fund.

"The Security Council recognizes that, in
particular in the immediate aftermath of conflict,
affected countries have urgent needs including,
but not limited to, the re-establishment of the
institutions of Government, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed forces,
security sector reform, transitional justice,
reconciliation, re-establishing the rule of law and
respect for human rights, and economic
revitalization. The Security Council underlines
that civilian expertise in post-conflict
peacebuilding is essential in helping to meet
these needs.

"The Security Council encourages efforts to
address the urgent need for rapidly deployable
civilian expertise and stresses that the critical role
for such expertise is working in cooperation with
national authorities to strengthen national
capacities.

"The Security Council highlights the need for the
United Nations to play a leading role in the field
in coordinating international efforts in post-
conflict situations. The Security Council stresses
that coordination between national authorities and
others involved in longer-term reconstruction and
development, including organs of the United
Nations system in accordance with their
respective mandates, the international financial
institutions as well as with civil society and the
business sector, is vital for the success of United
Nations and international engagement in post-
conflict situations.

"The Security Council stresses the need to ensure
that finance is available from the outset for
recovery and peacebuilding activities to meet
immediate needs, and to lay a solid foundation
for longer-term reconstruction and development.
The Security Council reaffirms the role of

regional organizations in the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, and the need to strengthen the
capacity of regional organizations in helping
countries recover from conflict.

"The Security Council encourages the Secretary-
General, the Peacebuilding Commission,
international and regional organizations and
Member States to consider how to support
national efforts in affected countries to secure a
sustainable peace more rapidly and effectively,
including in the areas of coordination, civilian
deployment capabilities and financing. The
Security Council invites the Secretary-General to
provide advice within 12 months to the relevant
United Nations organs on how best to take
forward these issues within the United Nations
08-34772
system and, taking into consideration the views
of the Peacebuilding Commission, how to
coordinate peacebuilding activities and encourage
the mobilization and most effective use of
resources for urgent peacebuilding needs".

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2008/16.

There are no further speakers on my list. Once
again, I would like to thank participants for attending. I
also thank our interpreters and the Secretariat.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.10 pm.
43
