Mr. Christian (Ghana): Permit me, at the outset,
to extend our warm greetings to the Ministers who
have joined us today, and commend the delegation of
the United Kingdom for holding this debate on Energy,
Security and Climate, and especially for drawing up a
concept paper with pertinent questions that have
forcefully brought home to us the ways in which the
socio-economic pressures associated with climate
change could threaten international peace and security.

It is our fervent hope, therefore, that the repeated
alarm about the grave threats posed by climate change,
especially to regions that are already struggling with
chronic instability, will lead to action that is timely,
concerted and sustainable, in order to alleviate the
negative consequences of the phenomenon. Let me
add, Madam President, that my delegation is aware of
the rather heated debate that the problem of climate
change tends to generate both at the national and
international levels, but we are encouraged nonetheless
by the existing consensus worldwide on the need to act
expeditiously.

In this respect, we are happy to note that the
African Union is already collaborating with the United
Nations Economic Commission for Africa and other
leading agencies, such as the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO), the United Nations Environment
Programme, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission, as well as non-governmental
organizations like the International Council for
Science.

One important outcome of these joint efforts is
the development of a strategy for mainstreaming
climate information within the Millennium
Development Goals through the implementation of the
Global Climate Observing System in Africa. The
eighth Ordinary Session of the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the African Union held in
January 2007 acknowledged the supportive efforts of
our development partners by formally endorsing an
action plan entitled "Climate Information for
Development Needs: An Action Plan for Africa".

Since energy, security and climate change are
three closely interrelated issues, we are faced with real
dilemmas that call into question some of the
fundamental assumptions on which our strategies for
achieving durable peace and stability are based. If,
indeed, the key to lasting peace and security is
sustainable development, as has been clearly identified
in the Millennium Development Goals, then for us in
Africa the fundamental question that arises
immediately is how to alleviate the grave threats posed
by climate change without compromising the target of
an eight per cent growth rate necessary for reducing
poverty to tolerable levels within the next decade.

For years, developing countries have been
striving to end their dependence on the export of raw
materials to finance their development, a strategy that
has failed them woefully and, in the worst cases,
resulted in bloody conflicts. Naturally, developing
countries regard industrialization as the path to
economic prosperity and lasting peace and stability.
That cannot happen unless they have access to an
efficient and reliable supply of energy for processing
and adding value to their agricultural and mineral
produce. In addition, they must be assured of market
access within a transparent regulatory regime.

In relation to the foregoing, what sort of
compromises will developing countries be obliged to
make in line with the emergent international consensus
on energy, security and climate change? Would they be
politically sustainable within States that are already
unstable and fragile? We are equally obliged to ask
whether, in the light of the unfinished business of the
Kyoto Protocol, the strategy of enunciating a sound
energy policy in order to alleviate the negative
consequences of climate change will entail a radical
change of direction in the partnership between
developed and developing countries.

With ever-growing economic development in
various countries, global demand for energy is rising
rapidly. Global energy consumption is estimated to
grow by 70 per cent by 2030. Consequently, the
acquisition and protection of energy supplies is now of
strategic importance in national policies. The
Commission of the Gulf of Guinea, which groups oil-
rich countries in West and Central Africa, has been

hard at work ensuring that potential maritime border
disputes are peacefully resolved, in line with the
guidelines of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea. This peaceful approach was
exemplified by the manner in which Nigeria's dispute
with Cameroon over the Bakassi Peninsula was
resolved in favour of Cameroon in a deal brokered by
the United Nations.

Several recent studies, including one by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, have
identified the threats that may arise from the expected
sharp increases in the temperature of vast areas of the
African continent. As far as agricultural production is
concerned, worsening drought and rampant flooding
are two sides of the same coin, leading to food
shortages, spread of infectious diseases, as well as
widespread displacement of persons and the
destabilization of whole societies. These developments
will inevitably bring another dimension to the cross-
border problems that are of interest to the Security
Council.

Decades ago, the steady encroachment
southwards of the Sahara Desert alarmed development
experts and led the Organization for African Unity to
adopt various initiatives aimed at halting the
desertification of the Sahel belt. Needless to say, this
progress has been minimal, and the problem has even
worsened. There are credible reports that the nomadic
Fulani cattle herdsmen in Ghana are now arming
themselves with sophisticated assault rifles to confront
local farming communities that have become
increasingly impatient with the devastation that
roaming cattle cause to their crops.

It is important that the Security Council, from
time to time, evaluates the risks inherent in these
phenomena because of their destabilizing effects on
society. We cannot gloss over the deadly competition
over resources that are generating tensions in many
parts of Africa. Ultimately, it makes no difference
whether the risk of conflict stems from the scramble
over dwindling water resources or from the shrinking
of productive land owing to the changing rainfall
pattern or from the inequitable distribution of oil
revenues coupled with severe environmental damage
affecting communities.

