Mr. Mehdiyev: Let me begin by offering my
sincere appreciation to the Government of the Russian
Federation for convening this important meeting. I am
confident that our deliberations today will help to refine
our response to the challenges of peace and security at
the global, regional and national levels.

The crises engulfing the Middle East and North
Africa region are undoubtedly the most difficult
and challenging as compared to any other similar
contemporary situation. As we have seen over the years,
the challenges are numerous but those that effectively
engulf all positive efforts are when the Powers that be
in the global political system tend to be partial and
partisan, when crimes against humanity and the blatant
violation and mockery of internal laws go unchallenged,
when a party acts with extreme impunity and arrogance
merely on the basis of its military muscle, and, last but
not the least, when neighbours act in an unfair way
through proxies and work as spoilers.

The parties can continue to engage in blame games
and to hold each other responsible for the failures.
However, the fact of matter is that one cannot expect the
weaker party to remain docile and passive in the face
of the continuous onslaught of atrocities, aggression,
occupation, desecration of religious sites, invasion of
territory, violation of United Nations resolutions and
so on.

Rightly, that is the situation of the Palestinians, the
crimes of the Israeli Government and the state and fate
of the mediation process. In talking about how to make
it work and to ensure sustainability, the following are
imperative. Israel should immediately stop occupying
Palestinian lands and building new housing. The blatant
violation of human and international laws must stop.
The blockade of Palestinian territories must end. The
international community must remain impartial and
non-partisan. The very reason for the establishment of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) was no
other than the Palestine issue. Ever since, we have seen
the crises and the attempts to resolve the dispute going
through different ups and downs.

IfI may stretch it to that extent, the crises in the
region are no less complicated. They say that those who
do not learn history are doomed to repeat it. That is
precisely how everyone has acted with regard to the
other countries in the region. The colonial intervention
in Palestine led to what we see there today. Similarly, the
foreign interventions and proxy wars have played havoc
in the region at an unprecedented level. There is a need
to pause and take stock of the aggravating situations.
The resolution of conflicts in the Middle East and
North Africa region requires sincerity, impartiality and
commitment. Mediation cannot be dictation. It cannot
be ignorance of the facts and of history. It cannot be the
denial of rights.

Apart from the threat that the long-standing and
unresolved conflicts, mainly located in the Muslim
world, continue to pose to the peace and security of
our societies, new tensions and conflicts with cultural
and religious dimensions have also recently emerged
to challenge our collective efforts to build a better
world that is founded on moderation, understanding
and harmony. Prejudices and misunderstanding
among cultures and civilizations increasingly fuel the
extremist discourse across the divide. The perilous
currents of Islamophobia, xenophobia and racism,
as well as sectarianism, clearly have the potential to
endanger the peace, security and well-being of present
and future generations unless priority is given to
dialogue and mediation.

As the OIC also grapples with tensions from
within and outside its area, priority is also focused
on the surge of violent extremism, terrorism and
radicalization, escalating tensions between some States
and the ongoing conflict situations in various OIC
regions through a new peace and security architecture
to resolve conflicts, using the tools of mediation, the
good offices of the Secretary-General and a proactive
and quiet diplomacy, as well as the mechanism of the
Executive Committee provided for in chapter XV of the
OIC Charter.

One of the greatest threats militating against our
efforts to address intolerance and hatred on the basis
of religious beliefs and cultural identity is the growing
scourge of defamation and the vilification of Islam and
Muslims in parts of the world, particularly in the West.

I shall reiterate OIC's offer of an effective
partnership among all stakeholders in promoting
peace and a world of hope, dignity and justice. As the
second largest intergovernmental organization after the
United Nations, with 57 member States spread across
four continents, the OIC, the collective voice of the
Muslim world, has the responsibility, in accordance
with its charter, to safeguard and protect the interests
of its member States within the spirit of promoting
peace and harmony among the various peoples of the
global community.

In that context, the 01C maintains cooperative
relations with the United Nations and other regional and
subregional bodies. Over the years since its creation
in 1969, it has also developed a strategic partnership
with such bodies, in particular the United Nations, to
protect the vital interests of the Muslim world, to work
towards the peaceful settlement of disputes, and to ease
heightening tensions that could undermine international
peace and security. It therefore remains steadfastly
committed to preventing hate and inflammatory
rhetoric that, if left unchecked, could disrupt our
global order and cause a religious conflagration with
catastrophic consequences.

We would like to underscore the importance of the
following points: developing the necessary political
within the international community to resolve long-
standing conflicts, including the Arab-Israeli conflict,
which has continued to have a negative impact on
global peace and security; adopting a new paradigm
based on a dialogue-based culture ofpeace and security
that focuses more on early warning and pre-emptive
responses to avert conflicts, while de-emphasizing
long and wasteful conflict management; enhancing
governance, including by ensuring that Member States
address the root causes of conflicts, while strengthening
their mediation capacity and capabilities; establishing
a network of United Nations-OIC mediators, experts,
think thanks, civil society groups, including the Group
of Friends of OIC Mediation; mobilizing and allocating
sustained funding to OIC mediation activities;
promoting a more culturally and religiously sensitive
mediation approach for sustainable global peace;
enhancing the United Nations Alliance of Civilization
and formally recognizing islamophobia as a threat to
global peace and security, adopting appropriate counter
measures through Human Rights Council resolution
16/18 and the Istanbul process and enhancing the use of
the Secretary-General's good offices in mediation and
conflict resolution.

