Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
Let me join in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency and in commending
Ambassador Munoz and his delegation on their
effective work last month on our behalf.
We also extend our condolences to the
Government and the people of Russia over the terrible
terrorist attack today in Moscow. We condemn it and
all such attacks.

I also thank the Special Representative,
Mr. Holkeri, for his comprehensive assessment of the
situation in Kosovo. The Special Representative is
doing an admirable job in a period when key policy
initiatives are being implemented in Kosovo, and he
enjoys my Government's unqualified support. I also
welcome the participation today of Assistant Foreign
Minister Perovic.

We are entering the beginning phases of a review
mechanism that will assess Kosovo's progress in
implementing the eight internationally endorsed
standards, a mechanism initiated by the Contact Group
and now being carried out under the auspices of the
Special Representative.

The Security Council welcomed the review
mechanism in its presidential statement of 12
December (S/PRST/2003/26). My Government fully
supports that review mechanism. It is meant to spur
Kosovo's implementation of the eight standards of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), which represent the only path for
Kosovo to take to normalize economic and political
conditions, to create a secure environment for the
return and reintegration of internally displaced persons
and refugees, to create a truly multi-ethnic society, to
establish normal relations with Belgrade and other
neighbouring areas and, finally - if sufficient progress
has been made - to proceed to a process of
determining its future political status.

I would like to emphasize that of the eight
standards on the basis of which Kosovo's progress will
be evaluated, those affecting the securing of Kosovo's
multi-ethnic future must have uppermost priority.

The Special Representative today informed the
Council about progress in drafting an implementation
plan. This plan is a crucial guide to the review
mechanism approved by the Council last December. It
is essential, therefore, that the plan be presented soon
so that all actors involved have the necessary markers
and guideposts to direct them in implementing the
standards.

For the standards implementation process to be
truly effective, it should involve all parties and
communities in Kosovo. In that regard, we note with
approval the participation of elements of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in the
working groups that the Special Representative has
convoked to implement the standards. We commend
Prime Minister Rexhepi for his leadership in this
regard and urge both him and the ministers in his
Government to participate actively and without
reservation in the standards implementation working
groups, and to follow up with concrete action once the
implementation plan has been presented.

In this context, I would note that the United
States does not support the transfer of so-called
reserved competencies to the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government at this time, although there is ample
room for greater participation by local government
institutions in decision-making in those areas, while
leaving ultimate authority to UNMIK.

It is also important that the Kosovo Serb
community participate in the working groups for
standards implementation, accepting the Special
Representative's longstanding invitation to do so.
Participation in the working groups is the best way for
the Kosovo Serbs to represent their interests, and in
that way the Serb community of Kosovo can take its
rightful place in shaping the future of Kosovo as a
multi-ethnic society. We urge the Serb community of
Kosovo to engage in this process.

The direct dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina is one of the eight standards on which there
can and should be immediate progress. The Secretary-
General noted in his report that the introduction of the
review mechanism has created a new more favourable
environment for the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government to accept participation in the direct
dialogue. We call on the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government to participate fully in the direct
dialogue and for the Government in Belgrade to
continue to participate.

We note with special concern the reference in the
Secretary-General's report to the entrenchment of so-
called parallel institutions in Kosovo: institutions
maintained by the Government of Serbia outside the
governing institutions of Kosovo provided for in
resolution 1244 (1999). These institutions undermine
the efforts of legitimately elected officials and are
harmful to intercommunal relations. We call on the
Government in Belgrade to bring these institutions
under the purview of UNMIK and the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government or to abolish them
altogether.

We would like to see Kosovo make sufficient
progress so that the international community can
produce a positive review in mid-2005, enabling us to
proceed to determine Kosovo's future status. However,
the international community should not and must not
flinch from judging the situation objectively. If
Kosovo's institutions choose to approach the standards
process half-heartedly, the international community
and the United Nations must not hesitate to issue a
negative assessment and postpone the process to
determine future status. In the meantime, the United
States will continue to do all it can to assist institutions
in Kosovo in implementing the internationally
endorsed standards.

I would like to thank Mr. Holkeri again for his
briefing and for the work that he and his team are
doing in Kosovo. I would like to reiterate my
Government's unqualified support for his efforts.

