Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): We
welcome these now regular exchanges between
peacekeeping representatives and the Security Council,
one of the chief results of the Franco-British initiative
of 2009. We thank the Force Commanders ofthe United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Mission in Liberia and the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire for their briefings. Their vision for
operations on the ground is essential to informing our
thinking.

Peacekeeping operations are one of the emblematic
United Nations activities. While their number and
complexity is constantly growing, we continue
to plead for strengthening military expertise,
improving the Council's cooperation with troop-
and police-contributing countries and for keeping
a better grip on the cost of peacekeeping operations.
We therefore support the guidelines of the High-level
Working Group on Programme Criticality, which
is trying to reconcile cost management with the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.

I would first like to recall France's commitment to
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping capacities.
France has about 1,000 men and women participating
in seven of the 15 peacekeeping operations. Beyond
our direct contribution, we are also deploying about
10,000 men and women in various external theatres
of operations mandated by the Council and conducted
or directed by the European Union, NATO or by us
in our national capacity. We support the participation
in peacekeeping operations of some African States
through networks of national regional vocational
schools, teaching technical and operational know-how
adapted to the needs and personnel of African forces.
We also participate alongside European partners in the
EURORECAMP programme, where we first initiated
the concept of African peacekeeping capacity-building
in 1997.

I would now like to offer some reactions to the
Force Commanders' briefings.

We support all initiatives designed to achieve the
optimal instruction and regular training of contingents
before or during their deployment. The changes of the
past 10 years - the fight against impunity and, in
some cases, mandates for peacekeeping operations on
working to arrest people sought by the International
Criminal Court in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Mali, the protection of civilians, special
vigilance regarding sexual violence - all require
adapted training.

We welcome the efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to establish operational
standards and provide troop-contributing countries
with training manuals to allow them to deploy troops
capable of accomplishing the ever-more-complex tasks
given to peacekeeping operations. The recent example
ofthe generic UnitedNations Infantry Battalion Manual
gives troop-contributing countries a solid basis for
providing more effective peacekeeping forces. I would
like to stress in particular the importance of training
contingents on human rights, as well as to take this
opportunity to express our full support for the policies
put forward by the Secretary-General in that regard, in
particular the due diligence policy, which was taken
into consideration by the Council in its establishment
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

With regard to the use of modern technologies
in peacekeeping operations, we welcome the
experimental tactical use of surveillance drones that
will soon begin in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). We await with great interest
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations evaluation
of this initial experimental phase in terms of the
potential future deployment of such technology in the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
and the United Nations Mission in the Republic of
South Sudan (UNMISS). These systems are excellent
force multipliers that help to enhance the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations in the context of limited
resources. Other avenues should also be explored,
especially in the area of helicopters, where modern
technologies can allow for fuel savings to be made and
significantly improve flight safety.

Finally, when unexpected events threaten to
destabilize a country, inter-mission cooperation, as
the UNOCI Force Commander set out in his briefing,
can be an adaptive and effective response to provide
timely reinforcements in terms of troops and materials
to missions in need. Such cooperation is a flexible
mechanism, whose effectiveness has been proved in
West Africa, between UNOCI and the United Nations
Mission in Liberia; in East Africa, where MONUSCO
helicopters can be temporarily deployed to UNMISS;
and in the Middle East, where the rapid deployment of
the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic was possible only due to the logistics
support of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
and the redeployment of military observers, civilian
personnel, equipment and vehicles from other Missions.

In that regard, I would like to ask the UNOCI Force
Commander what specific steps have been taken within
UNOCI to support the deployment of MINUSMA.
This question takes up that posed by the representative
of Australia. More broadly, what are the regional
possibilities for ongoing cooperation between Liberia,
Cote d'Ivoire and Mali for United Nations peacekeeping
operations in West Africa?

In conclusion, I commend the commitment of
peacekeepers of all nationalities, some of whom even
pay with their lives for their dedication to peace. France
pays tribute to them.

