I thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting to discuss the situation in the Central African Republic. I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of South Africa, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and my own country, Tunisia (A3+1). We would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations; Mr. Smail Chergui, African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and Security; and Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa of the European Union External Action Service, for their briefings and insights on the situation in the Central African Republic. We welcome the progress made thus farin implementing the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Central African Republic. Our delegations are encouraged by the continued commitment of the Government and other signatories to utilize the Agreement's mechanism despite the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak. We also welcome the Government's efforts to improve its relations with neighbouring countries through holding bilateral commissions and tackling the illegal exploitation of natural resources. We commend the role played by the AU and the Economic Community of Central African States in supporting the implementation of the Agreement, including through the use of programmatic funding by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to strengthen the role of women in advancing the Agreement. We continue to encourage all parties to fully implement the Agreement in order to help extricate their country from the cycle of continuous conflict. We are fully aware of the challenges ahead as the country prepares for the forthcoming presidential and legislative elections scheduled for December while it responds to the health emergency posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. We commend the National Electoral Authority for publishing the revised electoral calendar to facilitate elections within the constitutional timelines while adapting to the challenges of COVID-19. On the security front, our delegations are concerned about the resurgence of violence perpetrated by some armed groups, particularly in Birao, Bria, Ndele and Obo - in direct violation of the Agreement. Regrettably, in some areas, the violence has not only displaced civilians but also resulted in civilian and peacekeeper casualties. Equally concerning are the violent attacks on the Central African Armed Forces and humanitarian workers, which constitute violations of international humanitarian law. The A3+1 also remains concerned about the humanitarian situation in the Central African Republic amid the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. We deeply regret that violent confrontations among armed groups are still taking place, thus deepening the divide between signatory armed groups along ethnic lines and fomenting intercommunal tensions. Armed groups should utilize the dispute resolution mechanisms provided for in the Peace Agreement in order to resolve their differences. It is possible that COVID-19 could exacerbate the conflict. The A3+1 therefore welcomes the Government's quick response to contain the pandemic. We also welcome the support extended by the United Nations and other international and regional partners. We encourage the international community to provide further support to address the root causes of insecurity in the Central African Republic in line with the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and in accordance with the aims of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We welcome that the Central African Republic authorities have undertaken essential political reforms, including the adoption of appropriate legislation, in line with the terms of the Peace Agreement. The recent adoption of the law establishing the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation attests to the determination of the Central African authorities to adhere to the Agreement requirements. This is a significant step towards achieving stability and social cohesion. It is in that context that we welcome the desire of the Government and other signatories to utilize the Agreement's implementation mechanisms to that end. It is our hope that further advances in the composition of the special mixed security units and in the process of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation will be made in the coming months, in line with the requirements of the Peace Agreement. We applaud MINUSCA's efforts to promote the participation of women in the implementation of the Peace Agreement, mainly through local monitoring and implementation mechanisms. We continue to encourage the meaningful and sustained participation of women in the peace process, as well as in the forthcoming elections. We welcome MINUSCA's commitment to protecting civilians from armed group violence, as well as the valuable support it extends to the Central African authorities in order to hold accountable the perpetrators of serious crimes and other human rights abuses, including the use of sexual violence. Finally, we commend MINUSCA and other regional and international partners for facilitating the implementation of the Political Agreement and assisting the Central African authorities in organizing free and fair national elections. To that end, we welcome the generous support already provided by all partners, including through the Peacebuilding Commission. We call on all stakeholders to demonstrate resolve and work together for the successful holding of the forthcoming elections, which, in our view, are crucial for the stability of the country.
