Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for responding rapidly to my request for
an urgent meeting. I welcome the briefings by Under-
Secretary-General Feltman and Under-Secretary-
General O'Brien, and I welcome the fact that this is a
public meeting of the Security Council.

Aleppo has been Syria's cultural capital for
centuries, but in this conflict it has become a very
different symbol, one of oppression and brutality, a
symbol of Al-Assad's willingness to fight to the last
breath, even if it means the very destruction of Syria
itself. One need only glance at media reports from
yesterday. At 11 a.m. local time, two barrel bombs fell
on the Al-Huluk neighbourhood of Aleppo city. Four
people were killed. Just after midday, regime shelling hit
at least seven neighbourhoods. A couple of hours later,
at 2.30 p.m., rockets hit the Al-Shaher neighbourhood. I
could go on, but I think the point is clear: the cessation
of hostilities has effectively ceased to exist in Aleppo.
The city is burning; people are dying. In little over a
week last month, 253 people were killed in Aleppo, 80
of them were women and children. As Dr. Abo El Ezz
put it so painfully, "we are running out of coffins to
bury our friends, family and colleagues".

The cessation of hostilities was supposed to be
one of the three pillars of Special Envoy De Mistura's
political settlement in Syria, but like the hospitals and
houses of Aleppo, that pillar has been systematically
attacked and degraded by the actions of the Al-Assad
regime. Any trace of optimism from resolution 2268
(2016) has all but evaporated.

Through his actions, Al-Assad has shown that
he has no commitment to a political settlement, no
commitment to bringing peace to Syria. It has never
been clearer: there can be no peace while he remains
in power. How can he play a role in the future when he
orders his forces to impede access to humanitarian aid
in complete disregard of so many of our resolutions;
when he wilfully denies those most in need of the very
supplies that could save their lives; when he deliberately
attacks hospitals, as we heard so painfully yesterday?

Al-Assad and his allies will point to the threat of
the terrorist group Jabhat al-Nusra in Aleppo. They
will claim that their actions are in defence of the Syrian
people. But how, under any circumstances, can the
assault and encirclement of an entire city be justified?
How can the shelling of hospitals and schools be
justified? Those attacks amount to nothing more than
barbaric collective punishment. They are war crimes.
I agree with the Secretary-General: those responsible
should be held fully accountable, including by the
International Criminal Court.

The Council has an obligation to the people
of Aleppo. We have an obligation to show that we
are working for their protection, that we are trying to
find that elusive political settlement that will end this
war. What confidence can a man, woman or child in
Aleppo have in our words today? What faith can they
place in any future cessation of hostilities when they
have seen this one abused so violently? The only way
to build back confidence, to restore that faith, is to
stop the violence. We owe it to the people of Aleppo
to be clear and candid about the efforts to stop those
attacks. Without such clarity, how can they believe that
a cessation of hostilities will not be used as cover for
further military advances?

I therefore welcome the recent announcement about
the agreement between the United States and Russia
reaffirming the cessation of hostilities in Aleppo,
Latakia and eastern Ghouta. But we must now see an
immediate, positive response to that latest development.
Only its full implementation will give the people of
Syria that much needed clarity for actions speak louder
than words.

To support that effort, the United Kingdom is today
proposing a Security Council statement that condemns
the violence in Aleppo and calls for an urgent end to the
brutality. We owe it to the people of Aleppo, the living
and the dead, to show that the Council can speak with
one voice on that issue and that we can work together
to bring this violence to an end. We cannot choose
to do nothing in the face of such barbarity. To do so
would be tantamount to collusion with the very forces
destroying Aleppo.

