Mr. Matussek (Germany): First of all, allow me
on this, your very last day, to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your successful Security Council
presidency. You have had a full agenda, and we will
always remember this special presidency. I would like
to join my colleagues in thanking the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2009/323) and Special
Representative Kai Eide for today's briefing, which
was passionate, honest and clear, as we are used to his
being. In addition, I would like to thank in particular
Ambassador Tanin for his realistic analysis and his
wise counsel.

Germany fully supports the statement of the
European Union presidency and shares the analysis
presented on the situation in Afghanistan.

As an important contributor to civilian
reconstruction and development programmes for
Afghanistan and as a major troop contributor to the
United Nations-mandated International Security
Assistance Force operation, Germany would like to
highlight the following aspects.

First, the electoral process in Afghanistan is a
crucial step for consolidating democratic development
in Afghanistan. The international community, in
particular through the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), is successfully supporting the
Independent Election Commission in preparing for
these elections. We are confident that, for these first
Afghan-led elections, our Afghan partners, first of all
President Karzai and his Government, will work to
ensure a stable process that leads the country all the
way to credible, free and fair elections on 20 August.
Germany has continuously supported the UNDP
Enhancing Legal and Electoral Capacity for Tomorrow
project by donating $10 million in 2008, and will
provide an additional $12 million for this programme
in 2009.

Security remains a critical concern, especially
with regard to the election process. In this context,
Germany has increased the number of its troops on the
ground in order to assist in conducting free and fair
elections in a safe and secure environment.

Secondly, Afghan ownership and good
governance remain key to the success of the efforts of
the international community in supporting development
in Afghanistan. We encourage the Afghan Government
to fight corruption and the trade and production of
narcotic drugs with increased dedication. We also
welcome the recent Government initiatives in the field
of agriculture and private sector development and call
upon the Afghan Government to follow through with
them.

Thirdly, Germany will continue to support
reconstruction and development in Afghanistan. 2009
has seen yet another increase in German contributions,
up to approximately $250 million overall. We strongly
believe that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) must continue to play the
leading role in coordinating all civilian efforts of the
international community, as agreed upon last summer
in Paris.

In this respect, we strongly support the Joint
Coordination Monitoring Board process as the core
consulting mechanism. As a major contributor to the
United Nations budget, we openly supported the
considerable increase of the 2009 UNAMA budget, and
we look forward to seeing tangible results. We believe
that, in order for UNAMA to carry out its enhanced
mandate, a further increase in its resources is
warranted, as Kai Eide rightly pointed out this
morning.

Against this background, Germany welcomes the
increase in UNAMA personnel on the ground and the
inauguration of two more UNAMA regional offices in
Tirin Kot and Sari Pul. We express our support for
UNAMA's efforts to open additional regional offices in
Afghanistan. We are pleased to note that the increased
presence of UNAMA in the regions has already started
to add value, including in the areas of Mazar-e-Sharif,
Kunduz and Faizabad.

Fourthly, we support the proposal brought
forward by the Secretary-General to include a finalized
set of benchmarks in a later report to the Council. We
believe that those benchmarks could contribute to
measuring progress in the implementation of UNAMA's
mandate and priorities. At the same time, we ask that
those benchmarks be considered as supporting
reconstruction efforts that already exist, not as an end
in themselves.

Let me conclude by thanking Kai Eide again for
his tireless efforts and his successful leadership of
UNAMA. Despite all the challenges ahead we have
been able to help improve the living conditions in
Afghanistan, to build schools for boys and girls,
hospitals, bridges, streets, etc. This success has been
possible only thanks to all the women and men from all
over the world who are willing to serve in Afghanistan.
Let me seize this opportunity to thank them all for their
tireless efforts and their personal commitment.

We would like to thank all the teams working
under the umbrella of UNAMA as well as the many
non-governmental organizations and members of the
diplomatic corps, and last but not least all the
personnel of the security forces, for their efforts to
improve the life of the Afghans.

Germany will live up to its international
responsibilities and will continue to support the Afghan
people.

