Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
wish to thank Special Representative Moussa for his
briefing today.

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) remains a
vicious and persistent menace to the people of Central
and East Africa. Although its capacity is diminished
and it is on the run, the LRA's brutal attacks and
abductions continue. We must put an end to this horrific
organization and its atrocities.

The United States commends the Governments of
Uganda, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan for their
steadfast efforts to do so. The United States is taking
action in partnership with the African Union and the
United Nations to provide wide-ranging support to
regional efforts to counter the threat posed by the LRA.
We also support the International Criminal Court cases
against Joseph Kony, Okot Odhiambo and Dominic
Ongwen, who must be held accountable.

Despite significant challenges, the region is making
progress. The LRA has been weakened and pushed out
ofmany areas. Communities at risk are better connected
and sharing information. Defections from the LRA
are rising, and the United States is working with the
region's Governments, United Nations missions and
non-governmental organizations to encourage more
defections by air-dropping more leaflets, expanding
radio broadcasts and establishing safe reporting sites.

Our collective efforts have made an impact, and yet
the LRA continues to sow fear and Victimize populations
across the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan. According to
the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/923), the LRA
continues to perpetrate attacks in the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and has displaced an estimated 443,000 people.

Clearly, more must be done to protect civilians, to
improve the flow of information on LRA activities and
to increase humanitarian access. The United Nations
has a critical role to play in each of those areas.

The United States fully supports the United
Nations comprehensive regional strategy to counter
the LRA. We welcome the efforts made by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Moussa and
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) to implement the United Nations strategy
and urge a continued push for implementation.

As we said in June, the real test of the strategy
is how it translates into action on the ground and
the results it produces. The United Nations strategy
rightly emphasizes the protection of civilians. Both the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan have mandates to
help protect civilians from LRA attacks, which we
encourage them to pursue aggressively, including via
targeted patrols in LRA-affected areas.

Strengthening civilian protection requires affected
communities to become more resilient. Thus the United
States is funding programmes to help LRA-affected
communities develop protection plans and better
communicate with other communities.

Expediting and enhancing the flow of information
about LRA activities is essential to protecting civilians
and hunting down the LRA's top leaders. The Secretary-
General's report expresses concern about a possible
LRA presence in and around the disputed area of Kafia
Kingi, along the Sudan-South Sudan border. Earlier
this year, the LRA carried out attacks farther west than
ever before, near Bangassou, Central African Republic.
There are credible reports of the LRA poaching
elephants in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
illegally trafficking ivory.

With United Nations leadership, we must together
develop a common operating picture of the LRA's
positions in the region and target its logistics networks.

The Security Council has directed four United
Nations missions in the LRA-affected regions,
including the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, to share information on the LRA
and cooperate on efforts to combat it. Designating
a focal point in each mission for that purpose would
improve such cooperation and help to facilitate a truly
regional response to this menace.

Finally, we must continue providing for the
humanitarian needs of local populations. We commend
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and its partners for expanding the delivery of
humanitarian aid to LRA-affected communities.

But many LRA-affected areas in the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are still inaccessible owing to poor infrastructure and
insecurity. Increasing humanitarian access must remain
a priority for all stakeholders. We urge UNOCA to work
with United Nations missions in the region to facilitate
better access by humanitarian actors to vulnerable
populations in remote areas affected by the LRA.

Eliminating the LRA threat in Central Africa
depends on the unwavering resolve of the Governments
in the region, which have the primary responsibility
for protecting their citizens. The African Union can
solidify regional cooperation through its Regional Task
Force. We hope that the United Nations will do all it can
to help the African Union's initiative succeed.

Countering the LRA is a critical part of UNOCA's
agenda, but the United States also welcomes UNOCA's
support for regional coordination and capacity-building
to combat terrorism as well as piracy and maritime
armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea. UNOCA's
preventative diplomacy and peacebuilding efforts
contribute to regional stability.

We share the Secretary-General's concerns
about the challenges faced by women and girls in the
subregion, including female genital mutilation, early
forced marriage, denial of access to education and low
political participation. We urge UNOCA'S continued
attention to those priorities and ongoing efforts to
advance human rights, media freedom and peaceful,
free elections.

Central Africa is beset by problems but filled with
promise, which it cannot realize fully until the LRA is
no more. From the countries of the region to New York
and Addis to the capitals of those sitting around this
table, we share a common interest in bringing about the
demise of the LRA. We all want those whom the LRA
has displaced to return home and the communities it
has plagued to heal.

We seek lasting security and economic development
for the people of Central Africa. We demand that those
who commit atrocities and terrorize innocent civilians
be brought to justice. Those goals are worthy, they are
possible, and the United States will not rest until they
are achieved.

