Mr. Madavo: In keeping with the manners
expected of a guest, I shall be very brief, and limiting
myself to making three small points - or three
footnotes.

First, to go back to my initial statement, we are
very grateful to have been invited and to be part of this
international effort, as I characterized it, to take risks
for peace-building in Guinea-Bissau. I am particularly
interested in this as Vice-President for Africa, because
20 per cent to 25 per cent of Africa's people live in
countries in conflict or are impacted by conflict, and in
that kind of situation development and economic
progress are not possible. So this issue of resolving
conflict is absolutely central to the development
agenda in Africa today.

My second footnote has to do with how gratified I
am by the call from many of you for a holistic and
integrated approach to conflict resolution, supported by
cohesive coordination and partnership, and with the
statement that we should go beyond simply talking
about these issues and act on them, moving from talk to
action. I also will bring back with me to Washington
the messages sent by you on the importance of political
sensitivity on the part of the Bretton Woods
institutions, on the importance of realism in the way in
which we structure programmes and on the importance
of flexibility in the way in which we approach some of
these issues. All of this must be done without lowering
our sights in terms of the key objectives of encouraging
growth focused on poverty reduction in these countries.
In many ways we have to be open to a process of
learning by doing. These are not easy issues; they are
complex. We need to monitor the experience and to
learn from that experience, to fit it into the design of
future programmes.
My third footnote is that I hear very clearly the
message about the importance of focusing on resource
mobilization to support peace-building, reconciliation
and development. We in the Bank, in particular, are
expected to play a role in this question of resource
mobilization. But I think there was also a subtext to the
comments, which was that it is not enough to have
donor conferences in which we make pledges. If these
pledges do not translate into commitments and if these
commitments do not translate into supporting real
implementation on the ground of programmes that
produce results, then we are just conferencing and
patting ourselves on the back, without having the kind
of impact that we are looking for. So I hope that, as we
prepare for the round table in February, we shall look a
little bit more deeply at what happened. How come the
pledges did not translate into commitments? How come
the commitments did not translate into support of
programmes on the ground that are producing results?
What did we learn? What are the constraints? And how
shall we fix this in going forward? I very much look
forward to the World Bank's supporting - the United
Nations Development Programme will be chairing -
the round table, working collaboratively and making a
contribution to the extended weekend.

This has been a wonderful experience for me. I
will certainly go back and reflect this to my colleagues
and to my senior management, including
Mr. Wolfensohn.

