Mr. Prosor (Israel): Let me begin by congratulating
you, Madam President, and the delegation of Argentina
for your leadership of the Security Council this month.

Today marks the tenth anniversary of the bombing
of the Baghdad headquarters of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, which claimed the lives
of 22 people, including Sergio Vieira de Mello, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

Instead of defending victims of armed conflict,
humanitarian personnel are themselves becoming
victims. In the light of the recent attacks on United
Nations personnel in Darfur, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and South Sudan, we must show zero
tolerance to those who deliberately target United
Nations and humanitarian workers.

Civilians continue to make up the vast majority
of casualties in armed conflict. Human suffering
anywhere should be the concern of men and women
everywhere, but the responsibility rests with the
international community.

Nobel laureate and humanitarian activist Elie
Wiesel said that

"Wherever men and women are persecuted because
of their race, religion, or political views, that place
must - at that moment - become the centre of the
universe."

Today, men and women are being persecuted in
every corner of the world. The risk of mass killing
has risen sharply in Libya and Mali, and the threat
to civilians remains critical in the Central African
Republic, Somalia and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

But nowhere is the situation bleaker than in the
Middle East - where nations gained their independence
long ago, but many people did not. After years of
stifling repression and brutal oppression, the people of
the Middle East said: enough is enough. Millions have
poured into the streets from Benghazi to Beirut and
from Tehran to Tunis. They have raised their voices for
liberty, for democracy and for opportunity.

By far, the worst instance has been Bashar
Al-Assad's murderous campaign against the Syrian
people. Day after day, there are reports of detentions
and disappearances; of soldiers ordered to fire on
civilians; and of people being kidnapped, beaten and
tortured. From Hama to Houla, from Dar'a to Damascus,
innocent people are being slaughtered.

In its June report, the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry, which is investigating the
hostilities in Syria, stated, "Crimes that shock the
conscience have become a daily reality. Humanity
has been the casualty of this war". The atrocities in
Syria have been made possible by the backing that
Al-Assad receives from Hizbullah. For months, the
Hizbullah leader, Hassan Nasrallah, denied Hizbullah's
involvement in the Syrian conflict. Today, the whole
world knows that his guerillas are openly battling their
fellow Arab Muslims in Syria and threatening to tip the
fragile sectarian balance.

Nasrallah has repeatedly vowed to keep the
murderous Al-Assad regime in power. This past Friday,
he personally committed himself to fighting in Syria if
necessary, saying, "Ifthe battle requires me to go, I will
go". Nasrallah has proven that he has no regard for the
lives that have been lost, for the people who have been
forced to flee, or for the untold suffering of the Syrian
people.

The same disregard for human life is clear in
Lebanon, where Hizbullah's arsenal has become larger
than that of many NATO countries. And Hizbullah
sees fit to store those weapons in homes, schools and
hospitals. It would seem that the people of Lebanon are
more valuable to Hizbullah as human shields than as
human beings. Hizbullah is a ruthless terrorist group
that is committing double war crimes by operating
within civilian populations and directing attacks
against them.

Before proclaiming his support for the Al-Assad
regime, Nasrallah travelled to Iran to secure financial
and military backing from Ayatollah Khamenei. We
must not forget that the first non-violent protests were
in the streets of Tehran, and the Iranian Government's
response was to torture, detain and even kill peaceful
protesters. Those Iranian protesters were human
rights activists, former Government officials, clerics,
students, professors, journalists and bloggers. For those
who thought that Rouhani's election would be the dawn
of a new Iran, take note. After taking office, the new
President wasted no time expressing his support for
Bashar Al-Assad.

Jewish tradition implores us to raise our eyes to
see the needs of all humankind. As one of Judaism's
greatest contemporary scholars and teachers, Rabbi
Joseph Soloveitchik wrote,

"We have always considered ourselves an
inseparable part of humanity, ever ready to accept
the responsibility implicit in human existence".

As a family of nations, our responsibility to one
another stems from our common humanity. Our moral
imperatives supersede whatever politics, religion or
geography may divide us. From the deserts of Africa to
the jungles of South America, we must stand together
to ensure that people everywhere have freedom,
opportunity and dignity.

