I would like to thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Ms. Noura Ghazi for their briefings. We are pleased to see that the ceasefire agreement of 5 March in the north- west continues to be generally observed, although certain challenges remain in that area as well as in different parts of Syria. In addition, the resurgence of terrorist activities is troublesome. We would like to reiterate our support for the appeals of the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy for a nationwide ceasefire in Syria. We continue to urge all parties to heed the call to fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in the most comprehensive manner possible and to ensure stability in Syria. Only when a sustainably calm situation on the ground is secured can trust and confidence among the parties concerned be regained and an enabling environment be created to accelerate the political process. Viet Nam would like to take this opportunity to commend the continuous efforts of the Special Envoy to bring the parties together, and we look forward to the resumption of negotiations within the framework of the Constitutional Committee. We consistently support a political solution for the situation in Syria, in keeping with resolution 2254 (2015), with full respect for the principles of sovereign equality, territorial integrity and non-interference in internal affairs and full adherence to international law and the Charter of the United Nations. The volatile socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in Syria, with a new layer created by COVID-19, is becoming extremely worrisome and putting greater pressure on the hardship of Syrian people, including millions of internally displaced persons. Even though the number of confirmed cases remains relatively low, the risk of the further spread of COVID-19 demands appropriate attention in order to contain the negative impacts of the pandemic and the humanitarian situation on the people, now and in the long run. While fighting the pandemic, we urge all the parties concerned to create the most favourable conditions for the continuation of essential humanitarian assistance. We also call upon the international community to provide unwavering support for the Syrian people. Let us first focus on saving and protecting the lives of innocent people.
