Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Turkey for taking the initiative to
organize this debate on counter-terrorism. I would also
like to thank Foreign Minister Davutoglu for his
presence in presiding over today's meeting. The
Chinese delegation would also like to take this
opportunity to express its appreciation for the effective
work carried out by Turkey as chair of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC).

Terrorism is a common threat faced by the entire
international community. The Chinese Government has
always supported decisive combat against all forms of
terrorism.

In this regard, counter-terrorism efforts should
adhere to one standard. The international community
should decisively combat terrorist activities, wherever
or whenever they occur. International cooperation in
fighting terrorism should reject double standards;
otherwise, such efforts will be off-track, run counter to
the original intent to fight terrorism or even give rise to
impunity for it. Counter-terrorism efforts should be
based on international cooperation with strengthened
coordination synergy, and the United Nations and the
Security Council should play the central coordinating
role.

During the past few years, the Security Council
has adopted a series of counter-terrorism resolutions
and the General Assembly has adopted the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which have provided the
necessary guidance for international counter-terrorism
cooperation. Counter-terrorism efforts should adhere to
the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter and fully respect the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. Countries
throughout the world should strengthen their domestic
counter-terrorism legislation, law enforcement and
cooperation in the areas of early warning mechanisms,
the fight against terrorism, terrorism financing, travel
restrictions, border control and intelligence exchange,
among others.

China supports a larger role for the CTC in
helping countries to build their capacity and in
providing more counter-terrorism assistance to
developing countries. Counter-terrorism efforts should
aim to address both the phenomenon and its root
causes in an integrated manner. Terrorism has a very
complex political, social and economic background.
Efforts to counter terrorism should pay attention to
eradicating poverty and social injustices and to
properly settling regional conflicts and preventing
separatism, radicalism, hatred and intolerance in order
to eliminate the breeding grounds for terrorism.

If we neglect such integrated efforts and rely
merely on military and law enforcement methods, we
may end up in a situation that breeds even more
terrorism after such measures are adopted. Counter-
terrorism efforts should also advocate dialogue and
exchange among civilizations, religions and racial and
ethnic groups to enhance mutual understanding and
tolerance. Counter-terrorism efforts should not
emphasize ideological elements. China is opposed to
linking terrorism with a particular State, race or
religion.

