Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
express great thanks to the four Police Commissioners
for briefing the Council on their experience on the
ground. I also thank Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.

As the previous four Council members have said
and subsequent speakers will say, we fully believe in
the importance of the role played by police contingents
in peacekeeping operations in building trust among
the local population through close, ongoing contact
with citizens, especially concerning the protection
of civilians, as we have heard several times. Our
objective, therefore, should be to ensure that the
population views the police more as guarantors of their
rights and freedoms, rather than in their essential role
as law enforcers. That should be our objective, and it
is the topic on which I will focus my statement. That
is why we believe that we must take into account five
key points.

The first is collaboration with the local population.
There are clear examples, among which I will
mention the case of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where the lack of collaboration between the
local population and the Mission's police component
is due basically to the fear of retaliation from armed
groups. It is a legitimate fear that should give us cause
to further consider ways to prevent it. It is therefore
critical that we focus on ways to build the host State's
capacity in that regard.

Another example is the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). I would like to address a question
to Mr. Issoufou Yacouba in that respect. MINUSMA,
as he rightly noted, is operating in an asymmetric
environment. It is therefore especially important to
have close patrols aimed at building confidence among
the population and ensuring that encounters with
United Nations police officers are capable of raising
awareness of the work of the Mission, especially
among the youth. Here, I wish to ask Mr. Yacouba how
he believes we can combine Close community policing
with the justified need to maintain security in an
asymmetric environment, where the Mission's mobility
is severely limited. What impact would the threats in
an asymmetric environment that hinders interaction
with the population we are called on to protect have on
limiting the work of the Mission?

The second thing I wish to mention concerns
accountability, which is the flip side of my previous
point. It is obvious that all Member States are firmly
committed to accountability on the part ofpeacekeeping
operations personnel, and Spain sincerely supports
that. It is necessary to prosecute all crimes committed,
particularly in cases of sexual exploitation or abuse.
In that regard, we reiterate our full support for Under-
Secretary-General Ladsous in the implementation of
the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy.

My third point directly touches on the work of
the police-contributing countries, including Spain
and other countries. As Ambassador Power has said,
we must be committed to providing carefully selected
uniformed forces with predeployment training,
including, importantly, the requisite human rights
and international humanitarian law training and ways
of preventing sexual exploitation and abuse. Vetting
and training must be complemented with appropriate
equipment for the uniformed police forces deployed on
the ground. That is particularly true in an environment
such as Mali, which requires robust police forces
especially intended for quick deployment. In scenarios
such as that, instruments such as the European
Gendarmerie Force, in which the Spanish Guardia
Civil participates and which was very successful in
the European Union military operation in the Central
African Republic in recent times, are especially useful.

A fourth aspect has to do with one of the essential
functions carried out by police missions, that is,
support for the host State's police. Once again, the case
of Mali is meaningful, as are the case of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti when it comes
to capacity-building for the Haitian National Police and
the case of the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan when it comes to support for the local
police in establishing emergency response capabilities
in Juba in the context of the protection of civilians.

Finally, the fifth aspect I want to touch on, which
others have touched on, is to highlight the crucial role
of mission police components in the context of the
women and peace and security agenda. Ms. Priscilla
Makotose indicated that clearly in the context of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. It is a fact that women's participation in police
contingents is more advanced than it is in military
contingents, but a great deal needs to be done to achieve
the 20 per cent target that we have set for ourselves. The
presence of women, as has already been mentioned,
builds confidence among the civilian population and
makes it easier to report sexual and gender-based
violations. We must comply with resolution 2242
(2015), which the Council adopted in October 2015, and
redouble our efforts to increase women's participation
in peacekeeping operations if we want to ensure that
those operations are truly effective.

Lastly, allow me to make a general observation.
Spain has always been firmly committed to the efforts
of the Organization to strengthen the peacekeeping
operations system. This commitment was reflected
in Spain's broad participation in international
missions under the auspices of different international
organizations. Currently, Spanish police forces
participate in 11 international missions. That is why
we have devoted special attention to the work of the
Secretariat in this regard, and we welcome the outcome
of the report on the external review of the functions,
structure and capacities of the Police Division, which
was requested by the Secretary-General in accordance
with resolution 2185 (2014). The report includes a series
of recommendations that warrant consideration by the
Council. We also want to underscore the importance
of finalizing the strategic guidance framework for
United Nations police so that police resources can be
utilized with common standards, which will allow them
greater effectiveness and efficiency in discharging
their mandates.

