Ms. Vogt: It is an honour for me to address the
Council in my new capacity as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the Central
African Republic and to present the fifth report of the
2

Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central
African Republic (BINUCA) (8/2011/311). The report
before the Council provides an account of the main
developments during the first half of this year and the
peacebuilding challenges that lie ahead for the people
of the Central African Republic and its Government. It
also describes the main activities of BINUCA in
support of the Government's peace consolidation
efforts in accordance with the mandate entrusted to it
by the Security Council.

Much has been accomplished over the last two
years, since the establishment of BINUCA as an
integrated peacebuilding office in January 2010. A
number of governance institutions have been
established, and some key legislation has been
instituted. Freedom of the press has been expanded,
despite recent setbacks, when two journalists were
arrested for articles they had published. The overall
security situation remains calm but is unstable,
especially outside of Bangui.

Despite these advances, the Central African
Republic still faces serious challenges. It is afflicted
with extreme poverty, weak national institutions,
corruption, a high rate of violent crime perpetrated by
armed movements and brigands, human rights
violations and impunity.

As noted in the report, BINUCA and the United
Nations system have spared no effort in providing
timely and integrated support to the Government and
the people of the Central African Republic in
addressing those challenges.

In the current context, and as the Secretary-
General's report highlights, the two most immediate
challenges are the political dispensation following the
legislative and presidential elections and the
implementation of peace agreements with rebel groups,
and the sustainable disarmament and reintegration of
former combatants, as part of the overall security
sector reform.

The reporting period was dominated by the
presidential and legislative elections. International and
national observers characterized the elections as
inclusive and peaceful while noting a number of
irregularities. The Constitutional Court has addressed
some of these irregularities by overturning results in
nine electoral districts and ordering a rerun in
13 others. On 29 June, the Minister for Territorial
11-40363
Administration announced that the 13 by-elections
would be held in approximately two months.

The composition of a new Government, headed
by incumbent Prime Minister Touadera, is a positive
step, in our view, towards the establishment of an
inclusive cabinet. It comprises representatives of civil
society and the opposition parties, including six
women.

The Government has pledged to address
immediate challenges. In this regard, it announced the
establishment of a new, professional and independent
body to manage future elections and the revision of the
electoral code. This commitment was again publicly
stated at the recent partners' roundtable in Brussels. I
believe that we should hold them to this promise.

As a result of the boycott of the electoral process
by the opposition, the Parliament and other institutions
are dominated by the ruling party. This situation
constitutes a considerable challenge to ongoing efforts
towards stability and national reconciliation. As
mentioned in the Secretary-General's report, a major
challenge would be for the Government to provide
political space and engage the opposition outside the
Parliament on issues related to the development of the
country. The Government has committed itself to
undertaking political reforms, including of the electoral
process, to address some of the difficulties that plagued
the last elections. BINUCA will work closely with
regional and international partners to support the
Government in addressing these issues.

In May, we witnessed positive developments on
the implementation of the peace agreements with
armed movements and rebel groups. The Government
announced its intention to disarm, demobilize and
reintegrate all combatants by the end of the year.
Concrete steps have been taken in this regard. On
12 June, in another positive step, the Convention des
patriotes pour la justice et la paix (CPJP) joined the
Libreville peace process and signed a ceasefire
agreement with the Government. On 13 June, Baba
Ladde, the Chadian rebel leader of the Front populaire
pour le redressement (FPR), signed a communique
with the Chadian Government to start negotiations with
a View to signing a peace agreement within a month to
lay down its arms and for the safe passage of his group
back to Chad.

The implementation of such an agreement, if
followed through, could lead to the repatriation to
11-40363

Chad of about 400-500 elements of the FPR, which is
one of the issues raised by the Arme'e populaire pour la
restauration de la de'mocratie (APRD) as a precondition
to disarm. We have to remember that the FPR is really
a Chadian group operating in the Central African
Republic; it is not a national rebel group of that
country. This agreement was facilitated by the National
Mediator of the Central African Republic. Here, we see
the Central African Republic playing a positive role in
trying to get some of these rebel groups back to their
countries.

There were subsequently clashes between
elements of the FPR and the APRD politico-military
movement, in the course of which APRD hostages
were taken by the FPR. Eighteen hostages were
subsequently released on 29 June in Kagabandoro
following the intervention of the National Mediator.
The successful implementation of this agreement will
partially depend on the compliance of the disparate
groups that belong to the FPR. We shall see whether
they will follow what their leaders sign.

Bringing the FPR into a peace process is an
important element in unblocking the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process in the
north-west of the country. President Bozize' and the
leaders of the politico-military groups announced the
launch of a national DDR process on 25 June in
Bocaranga, and over 340 APRD combatants were
disarmed on that occasion. The Government indicated
its intention to proceed with similar disarmament
exercises in other locations in the hope of completing
the process by the end of the year. The launch at
Bocaranga was conducted without the support of the
international community, and especially without
international military observers, as the mandate of the
observers had expired just days before the event.
President Bozize', expressing great frustration with the
slow pace of support by the international community,
has appealed for assistance for the entire DDR/security
sector reform (SSR) processes, but argues that both the
Government and the politico-military groups were
ready to secure their country and to enable the people
to resume their normal lives.

Support to DDR and overall security sector
reform remains a core priority for the Central African
Republic and BINUCA. I met with President Bozize
and Prime Minister Touadera in the margins of the
partners' roundtable meeting held in Brussels. They
both emphasized the political importance of SSR and
3

DDR, and restated their commitment to implementing
the terms of the agreements signed with all politico-
military groups. It is imperative that the international
community do everything possible to support the DDR
and SSR processes and to provide the necessary
resources for their timely completion. BINUCA, the
United Nations country team and partners, along with
the Government, will undertake a review of the overall
DDR and SSR processes in the near future.

The Central African Republic is at the crossroads
of critical conflict zones, impacted by insecurity from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan,
with the possibility of an upsurge of insecurity across
the Sudanese border as that country grapples with
security challenges that will necessarily attend the
creation of the new State of Southern Sudan. The
Central African Republic also suffers from cross-
border criminal elements roaming the Sahel and
exploiting the weak ability of the national security
forces to secure the Republic's territory and people. An
implosion in the Central African Republic would have
cataclysmic impact throughout the region, negating
investments made in securing the neighbouring
countries. I intend to work closely with my colleagues
in the region to provide a holistic response to these
challenges.

In the meantime, the Government has taken an
important step to secure the north-eastern Vakaga
province by signing an agreement for joint border
patrols with Chadian and Sudanese security forces. It is
important that this agreement be implemented and that
the joint patrols receive adequate support from the
international community. This joint force will partially
address the security vacuum in areas occupied by
rebels, heavily armed poachers and the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA).

In the south-east, the LRA continues to kill, take
hostages and impede normal daily life. Security needs
to be improved in the north-eastern part of the country
to help address the deteriorating humanitarian
situation. Humanitarian workers are coming under
increasing attacks from armed criminals. We must not
allow the criminality in certain parts of neighbouring
Darfur to become a model for the Central African
Republic.

Efforts to provide security for Central Africans
and consolidate peace must be complemented by the
promotion of good governance and the rule of law. The
Government must extend its authority into each of the
regions and provide health and education services to all
of its citizens as it works to create economic
opportunities.

Another subject of great concern to the Secretary-
General is the protection of women and children. More
needs to be done to prevent sexual exploitation and to
promote children's and women's rights. We must also
ensure that we put an end to the recruitment and use of
child soldiers, and more broadly work to see that
children's rights are respected and enforced. I intend to
establish a protection unit within my office to help
coordinate these issues, as befits the importance
attached to them in our mandate.

I would like to highlight the need for the
promotion of a culture in which human rights are
respected throughout the country. Concrete steps must
be taken to tackle corruption and the pervasive
impunity affecting law enforcement institutions. The
Government must be supported in strengthening the
judicial system to end mob justice. On a positive note,
the Government recently granted BINUCA access to
prisons and detention centres. Also, an independent
national human rights commission is expected to be
established shortly.

The Government of the Central African Republic
presented its second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
(PRSP) for the period leading up to December 2015 at
the partners' round table that was held in Brussels.
That conference was held largely due to the efforts of
Ambassador Grauls, and I wish to put on record that
his personal engagement in seeing that meeting
through was instrumental to the success of that effort.
The document outlines the Government's strategy and
programme towards peace consolidation, including
good governance, rule of law, social services and
economic development. I encourage traditional and
new partners to financially support the programmes
contained in the second PRSP.

Looking ahead, the main challenge would be to
ensure continued support to peace consolidation efforts
in the Central African Republic, in particular to efforts
towards political dialogue, DDR and SSR. I would like
to thank the members of the Council and of the
Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations family
and especially my predecessor, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zewde and all other partners
11-40363
who have been so steadfast in their support of the
Central African Republic.

