The President (spoke in French): I should like to
thank members of the Council for the kind words they
addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of France.

At the outset, I very much welcome the presence
of Mr. Adnan Terzic, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We listened to
him attentively. I thank Lord Ashdown and Mr.
Guehenno for their briefings.

I associate myself with the statement to be made
shortly by the Permanent Representative of Ireland on
behalf of the European Union. Therefore, I shall
confine myself to two comments.

First, I wish to reaffirm France's support for the
actions undertaken by Lord Ashdown in Bosnia and
Herzegovina - actions that we very much appreciate.
The priorities he has set for his mission are also ours:
the rule of law and justice, economic reform and
development, the fight against organized crime,
structural reforms, returns. His determination has
enabled us to make further significant progress on
those issues. I would note in particular the creation of a
national high judicial and prosecutorial council, the
reorganization of the defence sector at the national
level and the introduction of a national Indirect
Taxation Authority. That progress will assist in
building a modern State compatible with the deepening
relationship with the European Union, as affirmed at
the Thessaloniki Summit last June. In that regard, I
wish to thank the High Representative for his role in
leading Bosnia and Herzegovina towards a stabilization
and association agreement.

Secondly, I wish to emphasize our great vigilance
in the concrete implementation of the reforms achieved
by the High Representative. Indeed, we note that local
resistance sometimes interferes with the adoption and
implementation of certain reforms. With respect to the
specific issue of the certification of local police
officers, we appeal to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
authorities to respect international law. We have noted
well the observations of Lord Ashdown and Mr.
Guehenno on that point. We also attach great
importance to the cooperation by all of the country's
authorities with the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia. In that regard, we note that
more progress is needed.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Ireland. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

