Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I will be brief. I was

asked a number of questions by the Russian Ambassador.
Ihave nothing to add to what I said in relation to the report
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) that has just been published and the
way in which the samples were taken. I have nothing to
add to what I said on the consular aspect. I would like
to stress that the investigation in the United Kingdom
is indeed independent of the Government. With regard
to selective adherence with regard to the OPCW or the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), we are a State
party in very good standing. On the question of Porton
Down, the United Kingdom does not possess chemical
weapons. Porton Down is a defensive establishment that
conducts research and provides scientific and technical
support to the United Kingdom Government in relation
to protection against chemical weapons. Protective
research is permitted under the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Porton Down is full compliance with the
Convention and is subject to regular inspection by the
OPCW. Any member State is invited and permitted to
conduct an inspection at any time.
We received 16 questions from the Russian
Federation under article IX of the CWC. The rules of
the OPCW and the articles of the CWC make it Clear
that we have 10 days to respond, and we will respond.
With regard to President Putin, I am happy to clarify
that I was referring to the early 2000s. With regard to
Litvinenko, the polonium trail literally led all the way
back to Russia.

I would like to repeat something that I have said
before. We respect Russia as a country. We have no
quarrel with the Russian people. But we will always
speak out against reckless and illegal behaviour on the
part of the Russian authorities, whether it takes place in
Syria or in Salisbury.

Finally, when Christmas comes, I would like to buy
my colleague the Russian Ambassador a subscription to
an English book club. But as it is not Christmas, I would
like to return his literary favour today. The Russian
account of the behaviour of the United Kingdom and
what is happening on the ground in both Salisbury and
Syria is a rewrite of George Orwell's 1984, updated for
the modern day and modern Russian methods.

The meeting rose at 4.40 pm.
