The Deputy Secretary-General: Let me first
thank you, Madam President, for convening this open
debate of the Security Council on children and armed
conflict.

The problem which brings us here today is one of
the most disturbing human security issues facing the
international community. It is also a great challenge to
the United Nations, one which is close to the heart of
the Secretary-General. He therefore deeply regrets
being unable to attend this important debate, which he
intended to open personally, and he has asked me to
convey his appreciation and full support for this timely
initiative.

Almost a year ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1261 (1991), which places the issue of
children and armed conflict on the peace and security
agenda. That resolution has strengthened the advocacy
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and of the
United Nations Children's Fund. It has also enhanced
the United Nations ability to implement programmes
on the ground in affected countries.

It is time to reflect on the progress we have made
and to examine how best to move forward with the
protection of children in war-torn nations. The
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, which focuses on the involvement of
children in armed conflict, has finally been adopted
and is now open for signature and ratification by
Member States. Child Protection Advisers are deployed
in Sierra Leone and in the Democratic Republic of
Congo.

Despite these positive developments, the task
ahead is still enormous. Children in many corners of
the world - in Sierra Leone, in the Democratic
Republic of Congo, in Angola, in Sri Lanka or in East
Timor, to name but a few - continue to be killed,
maimed, sexually abused, recruited into armed forces
or deprived of life-saving humanitarian assistance.

The Secretary-General's report, which the
Council is about to consider, contains a comprehensive
review of issues related to the protection of the rights
of children affected by armed conflicts and a series of
specific and targeted recommendations for action.

Mr. Olara Otunnu and Ms. Carol Bellamy, who
between them spearhead the work of the United
Nations system in protecting children in conflict, will
brief the Council in much greater detail. The abuse of
children in armed conflict, as everywhere else, is
unacceptable. We can and must do much more to make
our world safer for all of them.

I am confident that today's debate on this most
pressing issue will be fruitful and that the Council will
show the necessary political leadership in the fight
against those who exploit children. This is a cause
which concerns all of us, for children represent the
hope and the future of the world.

