Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council this
month. I also thank your predecessor for having wisely
guided the work of the Council last month. We further
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, for his comprehensive
and detailed briefing.

Jordan aligns itself with the statements made by
the representatives of the Sultanate of Oman on behalf
of the Group of Arab States and of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement, as well as with the
statement to be made by the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic on behalf of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference.

The peace process in the Middle East is at a
critical phase and facing serious obstacles. Nevertheless,
Jordan, under the leadership of His Majesty King
Abdullah Bin Al Hussein, remains committed to
working with the various international and regional
actors to ensure peace and stability in the region on the
basis of the two-State solution, which enjoys the
unanimous support of the international community and
has been reaffirmed in the many resolutions adopted by
the Security Council.

The road to peace is very clear. It requires the
international community to intensify its efforts to
launch serious and effective talks between the
Palestinians and the Israelis. The negotiations must
address the various issues related to final status,
including borders, Jerusalem, refugees, security and
water. They must take place as soon as possible; begin
at the point where previous negotiations ended and on
the basis of a monitoring and verification system with
a clear calendar; and lead to the creation of an
independent, viable and contiguous Palestinian State
on Palestinian national territory, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, within the 1967 borders and living side by
side in peace and security with Israel.

In that respect, Jordan reaffirms the important
and ongoing leadership role being played by the United
States of America and the efforts undertaken by the
Quartet to ensure that the talks are relaunched in an
effective manner, lead to the two-State solution, and
establish a comprehensive regional peace based on the
mandates and terms of reference of the international
community and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Despite the upsurge in diplomatic and political
activity in the region and world capitals to promote the
relaunching of the talks, Israel is pursuing its unilateral
policies in the occupied Palestinian territories. These
policies in no way indicate any desire for peace on its
part, are manifestly ineffective and have proven to be a
failure in settling the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. If
Israel wants to convey a genuine desire for peace, it
must immediately end practices that contradict its
stated positions. These are the actions of an occupying
Power and thereby contradict international law.
International law, international humanitarian law and
human rights law, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Times of War, must all be respected.

The Assistant Secretary-General's briefing stressed
Israel's ongoing settlement activity and expansion in
the occupied Palestinian territories, particularly East
Jerusalem. Such activity reflects the will to create a
new reality on the ground, in clear contravention of
international humanitarian law and of Israel's
commitments under the Road Map. The Israeli
settlements are a burden on and obstacle to the
movement of Palestinians and economic development
and growth in the Palestinian territories. They give rise
to increased tension and exacerbate a situation in
which trust is already sorely lacking. They also
represent a major obstacle to international and regional
efforts to relaunch the negotiations, and even jeopardize
the possibility of a peaceful solution and the future of a
contiguous, independent and viable Palestinian State.
We therefore demand that Israel put a complete and
immediate halt to all its settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories, in particular East
Jerusalem and including so-called natural growth.

Today's meeting is an opportunity to draw the
international community's attention to one of the most
serious issues facing the region: illegal Israeli practices
in East Jerusalem. These practices have endured
throughout the decades of occupation, during which
Israel has refused to live up to its legal commitments.
As the occupying Power, Israel has refused to respond
to the repeated appeals of the international community
and imposed its own rules and settlement policies. It
has clearly violated the relevant United Nations
resolutions, in particular the resolutions of the Security
Council, often creating a vicious and sanguinary circle.

Israel has continued its illegal practices in East
Jerusalem, including its archaeological excavations at
Muslim and Christian holy sites, particularly in and
around Al-Haram Al-Sharif. It has also continued under
various pretexts to destroy houses, expel Arab
inhabitants, close Palestinian institutions and deprive
Palestinians of their right to remain in the holy city by
confiscating their identity cards. These measures are all
part and parcel of a broader policy to enhance Israeli
control over the city, create a new reality on the
ground, and alter the demographic profile of occupied
East Jerusalem.

The influential international actors must stop
these Israeli practices. It is of great importance that the
international and regional protagonists understand the
negative impact of these Israeli activities on the
Islamic world. Israel must cease forthwith its violations
of the status of East Jerusalem, in particular by
abandoning its practice of increasing the Jewish
population there and of seeking to weaken the city's
Islamic character. Such activities, which violate
international law - especially the Fourth Geneva
Convention - threaten the future of the holy city and
jeopardize the possibility of a peaceful settlement,
must end.

For the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and His
Majesty King Abdullah Bin Al Hussein, the status of
the city is a red line that must not be crossed. The
protection of Jerusalem, and Jerusalem itself, are top
priorities for Jordan. We will take every step necessary
to protect Islamic and Christian holy sites there. The
restoration and maintenance of those sites and the
protection of the city's Arab identity are crucial, and
any attempt to make it a Jewish city will be opposed.
Jerusalem must remain a symbol of peace and peaceful
cohabitation. It plays a role of singular importance in
the lives of millions of Muslims and Christians
throughout the world. The repeated provocations and
illegal acts could lead to a situation that would threaten
the foundations of international peace and security, the
maintenance of which is of course the main task of the
Security Council.

It has been a year since the Israeli aggression
against the Gaza Strip. The repercussions of that
aggression continue to be tangible for our brothers in
the Gaza Strip, where they live in despair, poverty,
hunger and privation in many forms. The situation in
the Gaza Strip has now reached the level of a
humanitarian catastrophe. Our brothers there are
suffering on a daily basis, lacking even the basic means
for survival. Any progress in the peace efforts requires
a radical change in the tragic situation of the
Palestinian people in the occupied territories,
particularly in the Gaza Strip. The international
community must take immediate and effective steps to
guarantee that Israel implement resolution 1860
(2009), that it lift the blockade of the Gaza Strip,
authorize the launching of reconstruction and economic
recovery projects, allow the entry of medical supplies,
food, agricultural products, fuel and construction
materials, permit the sick to reach hospitals and allow
civilians their freedom of movement.

Jordan and His Majesty the King continue their
numerous efforts to engage with the international
community and urge it to put an end to the dreadful
suffering of the Palestinian people. We call upon the
international community to provide the assistance
required to improve living conditions there and ensure
that they do not deteriorate even further. We appeal to
the international community to shoulder its humanitarian
and legal responsibility to guarantee the human rights
of the Palestinian people in the Palestinian territories,
and to provide urgent humanitarian assistance to put an
end to their suffering.

The Security Council plays an essential role in
providing assistance and political support to regional
and international efforts to relaunch negotiations
leading to a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to
the Palestinian question, which is at the heart of the
situation in the Middle East. A resolution of the
Palestinian question is the key to all the conflicts in the
region. If the efforts towards peace fail, there will be
catastrophic consequences for the region and its
peoples. Any failure in establishing peace and putting
an end to this conflict will exacerbate extremism and
pose a threat to the peace and security of the
Palestinians and Israelis and indeed of all peoples in
the region, as well as to broader international peace
and security.

