Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
Mr. President, I would also like to congratulate you on
your country's assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month.
Allow me at the outset to express my deep
appreciation to the Presidents and the Prosecutors of
both the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for presenting their
reports and their assessments. We can all agree that the
Tribunals' work through the years has been and
remains of great importance, as they have emphasized
with each new judgement the role that they play in
creating a legacy for the future of international
criminal justice and international law as a whole.

Created as an ad hoc measure for restoring and
maintaining peace and fostering reconciliation in our
respective regions, the Tribunals have grown into very
complex institutions. Accordingly, the completion of
their mandates, as set forth in the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, demands very careful
consideration. It is both necessary and important not to
undermine the work that has been done by the
Tribunals so far simply to meet the deadlines.

Bosnia and Herzegovina especially welcomes the
reports of both the President and the Prosecutor of the
ICTY, and their continuing positive assessment of the
cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Tribunal. Referral of cases to national jurisdictions
under rule 11 bis is a very important component of the
completion strategy and is taken seriously by the
judicial authorities of my country, proving once again
Bosnia and Herzegovina's strong determination to see
that justice is served. The number of cases referred to
our national courts is significant compared to other
countries of the region and has had a positive impact
on the overall workload of the Tribunal.

The War Crimes Chamber of the State Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is fully operative, and our
judges, in cooperation with their international
counterparts, have created a positive environment as
well as the conditions within our judicial system
needed to meet the requirements of rule 11 bis. My
country has continued to grant access to Government
archives and provide the documentation requested by
the Tribunal. Moreover, relevant authorities have
adequately responded to assistance requests and have
facilitated the appearance of witnesses before the
Tribunal.

Closely linked with our cooperation with the
ICTY is a State Strategy on War Crimes Cases, adopted
in December 2008 by the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Strategy sets forth
criteria for distributing cases between national and
lower level courts, reflecting work done in the
cataloguing of crimes committed. The Strategy also
stresses the importance of regional cooperation in the
investigation of war crimes and calls upon all
authorities to urgently improve their cooperation in this
area.

Thus, speaking of regional cooperation, it is
unacceptable that the Government of the Republic of
Serbia through Interpol issued international warrants
for 19 citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina for war
crimes alleged to have been committed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is important to stress that the ICTY
remanded this case to the relevant courts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Because the war crimes were alleged to
have been committed on the sovereign territory of
Bosnia and Herzegovina by the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, it is clear that this case should be tried
before courts of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

My country also recognizes the efforts of the
Prosecutor, Mr. Serge Brammertz. Although his
dedication and determination have secured justice for
victims and peace for their families, the fact that two
fugitives remain still at large represents a serious
obstacle to the complete fulfilment of the Tribunal's
mandate. These fugitives must be brought to trial
before the ICTY; they cannot be allowed to enjoy
impunity as a result of the end of the Tribunal's
mandate.

In this regard, Bosnia and Herzegovina calls for
the immediate arrest of these two remaining indicted
war criminals - Ratko Mladie and Goran HadZie.
These arrests must remain the Tribunal's main priority,
which is the principal reason why the international
community should not declare the Tribunal's mandate
completed until justice is brought to the victims and
their families.

For this reason, the implementation of the
completion strategy remains of great concern to us. We
all must keep in mind the fundamental reason why the
ad hoc tribunals were established. The strong
involvement of the international community through
the residual mechanisms in several important aspects
such as arrest and trial of remaining fugitives,
contempt proceedings and supervision and
management of prison sentences is thus very much
required.
We duly note that the Tribunal's commitment to
following its completion strategy is demonstrated
through the adoption of concrete measures for
enhancing the efficiency of the proceedings. However,
both the full support of the Security Council and the
international community and modification of the
deadlines already announced remain of crucial
importance. Ongoing delays in the arrest and transfer
of indictees jeopardize the timely implementation of
the completion strategies.

All of the issues that I have outlined require
careful consideration and present practical challenges,
as we strive, now more than ever, to develop principled
yet effective residual mechanisms. The cooperation and
support of all countries is greatly needed to ensure that
impunity not be an option.

