Mr. Mohd. Radzi (Malaysia): Let me join others,
Mr. President, in thanking you for convening this
meeting, enabling non-members of the Security
Council to participate in the deliberations on the
important issue before the Council. We also look
forward to open, inclusive and more comprehensive
deliberations in the General Assembly on the issues
relating to Afghanistan.

Since the Secretary-General's last report in
March 2005 (S/2005/183), we are encouraged to note
that Afghanistan continues to register relatively
impressive progress in the implementation of the Bonn
Agreement. Afghanistan is a nation emerging from a
long period of armed conflict, and the process of
peacebuilding and national reconstruction are not
expected to be easy. Nonetheless, we believe that -
with the sustained support of the international
community and the strong determination of the
population to attain peace, and with a functioning
Government now in place - many essential measures
to further enhance stability and development in the
country can be effectively pursued and implemented.

The desired progress having been achieved in
Afghanistan, it is important that it be sustained and
strengthened. We look forward to further efforts to
ensure the success of the parliamentary and provincial
elections that are scheduled to take place on 18
September this year. We welcome the Secretary-
General's assurance of continuing commitment to
assist the Government of Afghanistan as it continues to
address the vital tasks required to fulfil its political,
security and development agenda.

While we welcome the encouraging achievements
thus far, my delegation fully acknowledges the
remaining challenges ahead, which could present
serious obstacles to the full recovery of that country.
We are concerned to note, in the area of social and
economic development for example, that 20 per cent of
children in Afghanistan die before the age of 5 and that
a woman dies every 30 minutes of pregnancy-related
causes. Life expectancy remains, alarmingly, at 44.5
years. The extent of poverty and underdevelopment
among the vast majority of the population can be left to
our imagination. It remains clear to us that the question
of development must be given serious attention when
the issues of security, illegal drugs and the institution
of good governance are addressed.

We noted in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2005/525) that in the years since the Bonn
Agreement, the Government of Afghanistan has
received extensive assistance from the international
community. The United Nations too has played a key
role in responding to many humanitarian crises.
Nonetheless, given the prevailing fragile situation in
Afghanistan, my delegation wishes to urge the
international community and the United Nations to
continue their support for the Government of
Afghanistan in its endeavour to overcome the
challenges remaining in the essential areas of nation-
building. More efforts must be made to assist
Afghanistan to explore and develop its economic and
trade potential. International assistance in the field of
education, including the development of relevant
infrastructure, human resource training and
development, is one important area requiring greater
emphasis in the national development agenda.

The coming parliamentary elections, to be held in
September 2005, constitute a crucial event that,
hopefully, will mark the completion of the political
transition towards national reconciliation and stability
in Afghanistan. However, my delegation shares the
view that the security situation in Afghanistan must be
effectively addressed prior to the parliamentary
elections. My delegation believes that the Afghan
people's participation, enthusiasm, support and, most
important, their will to achieve peace and development
will make the coming electoral process possible, in a
peaceful and orderly environment. The Government,
assisted by the international community, must continue
its efforts to promote and build the confidence and the
trust of the people in a secure and peaceful
environment.

Malaysia also noted in the report of the
Secretary-General that in 2005 the narcotic drug
eradication effort was not as successful as expected. In
that regard, we believe that the international
community must play its role in extending close
cooperation and in assisting the Government of
Afghanistan in its efforts to substantially decrease the
drug trade in the near future, with a view to its total
eradication in the long term. We believe that, in
addition to genuine and sustainable national efforts,
international cooperation is essential for effectively
combating illicit drug cultivation and trafficking.

Malaysia looks forward to cooperating closely
with the Government of Afghanistan in the context of
our bilateral relations and stands ready to explore way
and means to continue to enhance our relations.
Malaysia stands ready to assist and, in this connection,
will continue to provide, within our modest capacity,
technical assistance and training to Afghanistan in
essential areas of nation-building under the Malaysian
Technical Cooperation Programme.

In this trying period of national reconstruction, it
is clear that Afghanistan requires continuing support
from the international community. In spite of the
difficulties, the country has been able to accomplish
relatively impressive progress in moving forward. We
have to acknowledge that the remaining effort will
continue to be difficult and challenging. Nonetheless,
as we have stated earlier, we are confident that, with
assured and sustained support from the international
community, the Government and the people of
Afghanistan will be able to rebuild the country and
strengthen the foundation of constitutional democracy
and that Afghanistan will assume its rightful place in
the community of nations.

Last but not least, we wish to join others in
expressing our appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jean
Arnault, the relevant United Nations agencies, all the
men and women of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and national Governments for
their remarkable efforts in assisting Afghanistan
despite the prevailing difficult and dangerous
conditions.

