Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
as well as your country, Sweden, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council at the
beginning of your membership. We also congratulate
the newly elected members of the Council, namely,
Bolivia, Ethiopia, Italy and Kazakhstan. We also
congratulate the new Secretary-General as he begins
his wide-ranging duties.

I am fully confident, Sir, that as President of
the Security Council you have not overlooked any
contribution by any country that has participated in this
important discussion on conflict prevention. Allow us
to summarize our vision of that important topic in its
eight aspects.

First, with regard to the comprehensive concept
of conflict prevention, if we look at different conflicts
around the world, especially internal conflicts, we see
that efforts are not only limited to their prevention alone.
We see that conflict prevention is now a reality that
includes the following preventing the aggravation of
conflict, preventing an ongoing conflict and preventing
the exploitation of conflict.

That broader concept of prevention gives the
Secretary-General, who enjoys ultimate neutrality,
additional major burdens to ensure that a conflict does
not become a battleground to advance the interests
of other countries, just as in the past conflicts used
to be battlegrounds to advance the ideologies of
other countries.

With regard to the direct link between conflict
prevention and economic and social development,
development is the antidote to conflict. Internal
conflicts spread and expand in proportion to economic
weakness and a lack of development opportunities.
I would like to point out that imposing unilateral
coercive economic sanctions is as reprehensible as is
resorting to the use of force to settle disputes. Under
the Charter of the United Nations, only the Security
Council is entrusted with the use of force in resolving
conflict, and it is therefore the Security Council alone
that is entrusted with the use of economic sanctions, as
was stated in Security Council presidential statement
S/PRST/1995/9, in which the Council agreed that the
object of economic sanctions is not to punish but to
modify the behaviour of the country concerned.

My next point is on the need to acknowledge the
underlying causes of conflict. In the case ofAfrica, the
root causes of conflict are economic deterioration and
climate change, which have led to the erosion of green
areas, especially on the west coast ofAfrica as far as the
coast of the Sudan. That has resulted, unfortunately, in
the outbreak of the conflict in Darfur, which erupted as

a direct result of climate change. Despite references in
a report of the United Nations Environment Programme
to the role of climate change in the emergence of the
crisis in Darfur, the position of the United Nations on
the issue continues to be limited to what amounts to an
implicit denial of that role. I would like to echo what
some members have said today regarding the need to
appoint a special representative for climate change
and security.
My next point is the need to refrain from using
violence to attain political objectives, which is a
principle of international law. When, at the outset of
a crisis, armed rebel movements violate international
law, the country concerned must turn to the United
Nations and Member States for any possible assistance
in preventing and ending such violations.

Next, on sustaining peace, the possibility of
sustaining peace is undermined when a country suffers
from continued conflict. When the overall situation in a
country dealing with an internal armed conflict shows
a reduction in military clashes - thanks, of course,
to a negotiated peace agreement - we then move to a
second phase, in which we can begin to ensure sustained
peace. That opportunity has not been available in
certain situations, the province of Darfur in the Sudan
being one of them. Some members of the Security
Council have chosen - through their influence or their
role as penholders in the Security Council - to impose
the adoption of resolutions that have ensured that those
conflicts remain unresolved, and they have thereby
created diplomatic confrontations. Council members
know that they are supposed to work not on behalf of
their own countries and interests but on behalf of the
international community. That is a difficult mission, but
it is not an impossible one. We must help one another.

On the role of the General Assembly and the United
Nations Secretariat, we are pleased that Secretary-
General Guterres spoke about the importance of
conflict prevention and considers it a priority.

I would like to conclude by quoting the words
of Mr. Vaclav Havel, the late first President of the
Czech Republic:

"We must recognize that we are related to
more than the present moment and the present
place, that we are related to the world as a whole
and to eternity. We must recognize that, by failing
to reflect universal, supra-individual and supra-
temporal interests, we do a disservice to our
specific, local and immediate interests."

