Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too are grateful to the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2002/62), which contains important
information about recent activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We are grateful also to Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno for his introduction of the report.

In our View, last November's province-wide
elections marked a shift to a new phase in the activities
of UNMIK. Along with the unexpected need to replace
the Head of the Mission, this means that, on the basis
of resolution 1244 (1999), we must take complete stock
of the situation in Kosovo. We believe that we must all
do this together, primarily within the framework of the
Security Council, because it is clear that the question
of a Kosovo settlement is not the monopoly of the field
mission and its leadership. Ensuring success for the
entire process requires coordinated efforts among the
actors. This would be useful also because it would
enable the new Head of the Mission to avoid repeating
the grave miscalculations that were allowed to occur
under his predecessors.

Clearly, the November elections in Kosovo did
not solve all the problems of implementing resolution
1244 (1999). It must be pointed out that even since the
beginning of the new year there have been dozens of
terrorist acts against Serbs, and that there are still many
threats from Albanian extremists. Yet the international
presence has not taken new urgent measures to
guarantee the security of the Serb community in
Kosovo. UNMIK and KFOR must concentrate on
providing genuine security and on establishing
conditions for the large-scale return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to where they previously
lived. They must also work to normalize life
throughout the province. Of course, the local self-
government institutions now being established in the
province must be involved in resolving these problems
as well.

Unfortunately, Kosovo continues to be a source
of threats both to its immediate neighbours and to the
region as a whole. The hotbeds of terrorism and
organized crime that developed during the crisis period
have not yet been eradicated. That is intolerable. We
believe that, together with UNMIK, KFOR must
tighten control of the borders between Kosovo on the
one hand and Albania and Macedonia on the other in
order to stop terrorists from crossing them and to put
an end to weapons smuggling.

We agree with the view widely held among
countries involved in the settlement process: that the
process of defining the final status of Kosovo should
be frozen for some time to come. It is particularly
important to develop a system of measures to prevent
the self-government structures now being established
from becoming a tool with which to fulfil ambitions to
gain independence for the province.

We welcome the determination of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia leadership to cooperate closely
with the Security Council, with the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and with the
international community at large in shaping a multi-
ethnic Kosovo. We support the UNMIK leadership in
its intention to develop constructive cooperation with
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia authorities, the
foundation for which is to be found in the Common
Document signed on 5 November 2001. It is important
to help establish direct dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, something that has often been advocated by
the leadership of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

At this stage, it is not the status of the province
that is in the forefront, but rather practical issues of
cooperation relating primarily to the economic
interdependence of the province and the rest of Serbia.
We should make effective use of the High-ranking
Working Group as a mechanism for such interaction.
The Group began its work last December, which we
certainly welcome.

Still pressing is the issue of the Yugoslav
leadership's proposal for the signing of a status-of-
mission agreement for UNMIK and KFOR. In that
context, we view as a step in the right direction the
recent signing by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and KFOR of an agreement on easing the regime
governing the Air Safety Zone along the administrative
border with Kosovo.

