The President: At the outset, I should like, on behalf
of the Security Council, to extend deep sympathy to the
Government and the people of Turkey in connection with
the great tragedy they have experienced as a result of the
major earthquake that occurred in north-western Turkey. I
am sure that I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing profound shock and sorrow at the great loss of
human life and the extensive material damage suffered. I
request the representative of Turkey to convey to his
Government our sorrow and sincere condolences.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan
border

Interim report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Tajikistan (S/l999/872)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Tajikistan, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alimov
(Tajikistan) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the interim
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Tajikistan, document S/1999/872.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Tajikistan of 12 August 1999 (S/1999/872),
submitted pursuant to paragraph 10 of its resolution
1240 (1999) of 15 May 1999.

"The Security Council welcomes significant
progress in the implementation of the General
Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and
National Accord in Tajikistan (5/1997/510), achieved
to a great extent due to the renewed efforts of the
President of the Republic of Tajikistan and the
leadership of the Commission on National
Reconciliation (CNR). It particularly welcomes the
official declaration by the United Tajik Opposition
(UTO) of the disbandment of its armed units and the
decision by the Supreme Court of Tajikistan lifting
the bans and restrictions on activities by the political
parties and movements of the UTO as important
steps contributing to the democratic development of
Tajik society. The Council reiterates its
encouragement to the CNR to intensify its efforts
aimed at the institution of a broad dialogue among
the various political forces in the country in the
interests of the restoration and strengthening of civil
accord in Tajikistan.

"The Security Council encourages the parties to
undertake further concerted measures to ensure the
full and sequential implementation, in a balanced
manner, of the General Agreement, especially all the
provisions of the Protocol on Military Issues
(S/1997/209, annex II), including those related to the
reintegration of former opposition fighters. It also
encourages them to continue their active work in
creating conditions for the timely holding of a
constitutional referendum and presidential and
parliamentary elections, underlines the importance of
the involvement of the United Nations, in continued
close cooperation with the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, in this process and
welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to
approach Member States with concrete proposals on
voluntary contributions to support such involvement.

"The Security Council notes with appreciation
the work of the outgoing Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. J an Kubis, and of all the

 

personnel of the United Nations Mission of Observers
in Tajikistan (UNMOT), and encourages the Mission
to continue assisting the parties in the implementation
of the General Agreement. It underlines the need for
UNMOT to operate throughout Tajikistan and to have
the necessary personnel and financial support and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to consider
means of ensuring a full and active role for the
Mission in the implementation of the General
Agreement up to the strength authorized by its
resolution 1138 (1997) of 14 November 1997 while
continuing to observe stringent security measures. The
Council urges the Secretary-General to appoint a
successor to J an Kubis as the Special Representative
as soon as possible.

"The Security Council supports the continued
active involvement of the Contact Group of Guarantor
States and International Organizations in the peace
process.

"The Security Council welcomes the continued
contribution made by the Collective Peacekeeping
Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States in
assisting the parties in the implementation of the
General Agreement in coordination with all concerned.

"The Security Council expresses its concern at
the precarious humanitarian situation in Tajikistan.
It welcomes the activities of various international
organizations and humanitarian workers related to
the implementation of the General Agreement and
addressing the humanitarian, rehabilitation and
development needs of Tajikistan. The Council calls
upon Member States and others concerned to
respond promptly and generously to the mid-year
review of the 1999 Consolidated Inter-Agency
Appeal for Tajikistan."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1999/25.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.15 pm.

