I would like to express my deep appreciation to the Estonian presidency and to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, for organizing this open debate on improving the working methods of the Security Council, to which Japan has always been deeply committed. Japan also appreciates the tireless work of current and recent Council members towards the development of this body's working methods, including the adoption of eight new notes by the President last year under the strong leadership of Kuwait. Japan is of the view that, in pursuing reforms of the working methods, it is important to strike the right balance between the dual needs for transparency and efficiency. To strengthen the legitimacy of the Council's decisions, the decision- making process should be as transparent as possible, allowing it to take into account different views from both inside and outside the Council. On the other hand, we should be mindful of our prime objective, which is to enhance the Council's capacity to take the best action in the most efficient and timely manner to maintain and restore international peace and security. Japan also believes that we need to strike the right balance between our ambition and feasibility. In that respect, we should reflect on whether the rules established so far have been fully put into practice. Identifying which items in note S/2017/507 have not been adequately fulfilled, and why, would contribute to estimating the appropriate level of ambition we should maintain and finding room for further improvement to existing rules. We expect in-depth discussion will take place in the Informal Working Group under the slogan "action-oriented implementation" proposed by Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. Japan commends China, the Dominican Republic and Estonia for their dedication in devising and developing the working methods that have enabled the Council to continue its work under the current physical constraints caused by coronavirus disease. This format, developed to adapt to the context of the current pandemic, would serve as a good basis for considering how the Council could continue operating under similar limitations, for example, when physical meetings cannot be held owing to heavy snowfall. Lastly, we would like to point out that while the working methods are an essential part of Security Council reform, they are not the only part. Ultimately, a comprehensive reform of the Council must include an expansion of its membership, in both permanent and non-permanent categories, to reflect current realities by adding more Member States that have the capacity and willingness to take on major responsibilities with regard to the maintenance of international peace and security. Japan will continue to work with all Member States towards that goal.
