Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to begin
by congratulating you, Mr. President, on Pakistan's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and by expressing our appreciation for the convening of
today's important meeting to address an issue of special
importance and relevance to my country, Afghanistan.

I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate our
condemnation of the terrorist attacks that took place in
Quetta and the Swat Valley, which left more than 100
innocent people dead and many more wounded. Such
horrific incidents reaffirm the fact that terrorism is still
a formidable threat. That is why we all must redouble
our efforts to defeat this menace.

My delegation is pleased to know that the Security
Council continues to pay serious attention to the fight
against terrorism. In May of last year, the Council
held a high-level meeting on threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts (see S/PV.6765). The outcome of that meeting underscored
the changing nature of the terrorist threat and the need
for a strengthened global response in dealing with the
problem (see S/PRST/2012/17). Today, more than ever
before, the fight against terrorism is being conducted
in a more results-oriented, balanced and integrated
manner.

Afghanistan has lived with, and suffered from,
terrorism for more than two decades. It was not too long
ago when Afghanistan's territory was used by Al-Qaida
and affiliate groups not only as a site for brutal attacks
against the Afghan people, but as a staging ground for
terrorist attacks around the world. Over the past 11
years, since the fall of the Taliban, Afghanistan has
made important headway in its fight against terrorism
and in transforming itself into a more peaceful, stable
and democratic society.

Despite the progress made thus far, terrorism and
insecurity remain serious challenges facing the Afghan
people. The effects of terrorism resulting from attacks
on innocent civilians, including women and men,
tribal and religious elders, members of civil society
and even young school children, are felt throughout
Afghan society. Just last month, in another cowardly
attack, a terrorist posing as a peace negotiator carried
out a suicide bombing against our chief of intelligence,
Mr. Asadullah Khalid. Gratefully, the assassination plot
failed and Mr. Khalid is now recovering successfully.
Such acts will in no way weaken the determination
of Afghans to defeat terrorism and succeed in their
journey towards peace and prosperity.

Our comprehensive counter-terrorism approach,
which is central to our national security strategy, is
being carried out by our national security institutions.
At the operational level, scores of terrorists and
enemy combatants have been captured and brought
to justice. Through intelligence-gathering, we have
subverted hundreds of terrorist plots in various parts
of the country. Operating with increased capability,
our security forces are increasingly taking charge of
combat operations nationwide, including in counter-
terrorism operations.

Insecurity and terrorism are not only a threat
for Afghanistan, but for our wider region, which we
hope will be dealt with fully and effectively within
the framework of our joint efforts with regional
partner countries. We therefore cannot overstate the
importance of regional cooperation. Over the past year,
we have stepped up efforts to defeat terrorism, improve
security and ensure prosperity in our part of the world.
To that end, we are making important progress through
bilateral, trilateral and quadrilateral mechanisms, as
well as through regional efforts such as the Istanbul
Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for
a Secure and Stable Afghanistan. We have enhanced
our cooperation with Pakistan in a number of areas,
including counter-terrorism efforts, in order to bring
about lasting peace, security and stability to both of
our countries.

Consistent with our struggle against terrorism, we
attach great importance to the body of legal instruments
concerning this problem. Afghanistan is party to
13 international counter-terrorism conventions and
protocols. In that regard, the relevant ministries and
governmental agencies are working closely towards
the implementation of national legislation. I would be
remiss ifI failed to commend the respective important
work being done by the counter-terrorism subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council - the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities; the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), concerning counter-terrorism; and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). Afghanistan will continue to present
national reports with regard to the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

The role of the United Nations lies at the core of
an effective fight against terrorism. The third biennial
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, conducted last June in the General Assembly,
marks another milestone in strengthening United
Nations counter-terrorism efforts and has generated
new impetus in the efforts of States against that global
threat. Furthermore, we believe that greater synergy
and coordination among the relevant United Nations
bodies and agencies will enable the Organization to
enhance cooperation as efficiently as possible, both
internationally and regionally. In that regard, we look
forward to further discussions on the topic of the
appointment of a United Nations counter-terrorism
coordinator.

We also commend the important work being done
by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.
Through various initiatives, such as workshops in
different regions, including Central Asia, the Task
Force is playing an important role in helping States
to build their counter-terrorism capacities. Another
important development was the establishment of the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, in November
2012. We are confident that the Centre will go a long
way towards enhancing coordination efforts.

The Global Counter-Terrorism strategy underscores
a holistic approach in the fight against terrorism. Our
success is dependent upon the extent to which we are
able to make further progress in a number of areas. The
dangerous link between terrorism and transnational
organized crime must be broken. The problem of
terrorist safe havens, alongside the outstanding issue
of financial and logistical resources made available to
terrorists, has yet to be resolved. Those are real problems
that require real solutions. Moreover, we believe that
conflict prevention and resolution are essential facets
of the counter-terrorism effort. The United Nations role
is of particular importance in that regard.

In addition, ensuring job opportunities for
youth and poverty eradication will help curtail the
recruitment of new individuals to terrorist networks.
In that connection, we would like to highlight the
activities of the Department of Economic and Social
Affairs in promoting development for all. It goes
without saying that terrorism is a common enemy that
does not discriminate against any particular religion,
nationality or culture. Everyone is a target. We call for
increased measures to strengthen interreligious and
cultural dialogue and understanding.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore
Afghanistan's long-standing commitment to the fight
against international terrorism. As a prime victim of the
threat, we are well aware of its devastating effects on
societies, yet we are also well aware ofthe progress that
can be made in that regard through joint and concerted
efforts. We greatly value the support we have received
from our international partners over the past 11 years in
our struggle against the global threat, and look forward
to our continuing partnership with the international
community on the way forward.

