The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and
Sweden, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Nikola Spiric', Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to a seat at the
Council table.

Mr. Nikola S'piric', Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Nikola
Spirie, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Stareevie
(Serbia) and Mr. Liden (Sweden) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Inzko to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to document S/2009/588*, containing a
letter dated 12 November 2009 from the Secretary-
General transmitting the thirty-sixth report on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko. I now
give him the floor.


