Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): I wish to
warmly thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Kai Eide, for his frank,
complete and thoughtful briefing on the situation in
Afghanistan and his appeal, especially, to keep a
realistic optimism and determination in our efforts. I
agree with the points made to that effect by the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador
Zahir Tanin.

I would like to reaffirm once again our full
support for the leading role of the United Nations in
coordinating international civilian activities in
Afghanistan. The Security Council has already
endorsed the preliminary recommendations of the
Secretary-General on the empowerment of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
It is now up to the General Assembly to allocate the
additional financial, human and security resources that
are urgently required in order to enable UNAMA to
play the enhanced role assigned by this Council in
resolution 1806 (2008) and reaffirmed by the Paris
Conference. That role is all the more relevant as we are
facing challenges that require political and
humanitarian responses - the worrisome food crisis,

the precarious situation of civilians and the difficulties
in promoting the protection of human rights.

Against the difficult background evident in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2008/6l7), we fully
support his call to accelerate the implementation of the
Paris agenda by restoring a strong sense of urgency.
The increasing asymmetric terrorist attacks by the
insurgents and the high level of civilian casualties
compound the complexity of the situation,
overshadowing the progress made in economic
development, social services and, recently, counter-
narcotics activities. We cannot afford to lose political
focus and momentum. We face undeniable disturbing
trends that need to be reversed urgently.

For that reason, we agree on the compelling need
to honour the commitments made at the Paris
Conference. One of those commitments relates to the
allocation of the available resources in an efficient
manner, in accordance with the fundamental principles
of coordination and aid effectiveness. That concerns, as
mentioned by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, all the relevant actors, with no
exceptions. The coordinating role of the United
Nations in international civilian efforts should be
consistently kept in mind, along with the principle of
Afghan ownership and leadership in all sectors.

Civil-military cooperation is part of that equation.
Military efforts cannot succeed in a political vacuum.
In that context, we join the Special Representative in
welcoming recent ministerial appointments by
President Karzai.

For its part, Italy is once again playing its role.
Despite budgetary constraints, we are making an
additional effort on the military side by ensuring
enhanced flexibility and operational capacity for our
contingents. Furthermore, we have answered the calls
for increased support for the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy by supporting the national
budget with an additional contribution of €15 million
to the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund. Bearing
in mind the vital importance of an orderly and fair
electoral process, we are providing a contribution of
€5 million to the voter registration project.
We are striving to bring all our efforts in line with
the principles of aid effectiveness and Afghan
ownership. Those principles have also characterized
our endeavours to support justice sector reform. We are
pleased to note the incremental steps illustrated in the
report of the Secretary-General. Yet, we are aware that
more is needed in that area, beginning with a
substantive improvement of the status and
qualifications of judicial personnel. In that connection,
what Ambassador Eide said about the quality factor
among UNAMA personnel is also important. We also
agree with him that the Council and the United Nations
should undertake efforts to support that aspect of
enhancing UNAMA.

Italy has constantly emphasized the importance of
the regional dimension to the stabilization of
Afghanistan and the wider area. We welcome the recent
concrete signals of enhanced dialogue and cooperation
between Afghanistan and its neighbours. I would like
to recall that, during his meetings in New York last
month, Minister for Foreign Affairs Frattini discussed
an initiative to convene an outreach ministerial event
on the stabilization of the region next year during the
Italian presidency of the Group of Eight.

Finally, I would like to note the demonstration of
unity among members of the Security Council in the
consensus adoption of resolution 1833 (2008), on the
extension of the mandate of the International Security
Assistance Force. That vote showed the cohesion of the
international community in supporting stabilization
efforts in Afghanistan - a cohesion that should
become a constant objective of the international
community and that should be reflected as well, as
Special Representative Eide repeatedly noted today, in
the communication strategy of all international actors
keen on stabilizing the region.

