I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his informative briefing today. The gravity of the humanitarian situation in Syria continues to be a great cause for concern. This concern also grows week after week with the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Given the dire conditions of health care, the number confirmed cases may not reflect the actual situation and the risks faced by the people and health workers. Contact tracing may well be a crucial method of containing COVID-19. However, around 89 per cent of cases in Syria are untraceable. Testing and quarantine capacity is also very limited. We are also troubled by the worsening impact of the pandemic on the condition of health workers, humanitarian workers and United Nations staff on the ground. If infected, they cannot perform their crucial tasks of helping people and peace. On top of that, social and economic strains, food insecurity and the lack of development continue to be great challenges to sustainable peace and stability. While a relatively calm situation on the ground has largely been maintained during the past period, it is not sustainable. The protection of civilians continues to be a source of concern, with reported loss of lives and injuries caused by explosive devices and unrest in several parts of Syria. In order to facilitate the humanitarian response and best support the Syrian people, my delegation would like to stress the importance of two key aspects: access and support. First, full, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access is of the utmost importance to assisting millions of people throughout Syria. We urge all parties to preserve the relative calm on the ground and fulfil their obligations under international law, including humanitarian law, in order to maximize the impact of humanitarian efforts in Syria. We fully support the call made by the Secretary- General and the Special Envoy for a nationwide ceasefire in order to facilitate the pandemic preparedness and response in Syria. We take note of the increase in aid delivery to the north-east, which includes health items provided by the World Health Organization. We also welcome the continuation of humanitarian assistance throughout north-western Syria. However, there are still shortages in the north-east and access challenges in the north-west, even after the adoption of resolution 2533 (2020). We therefore urge all parties in Syria to fully cooperate with the United Nations and other humanitarian partners to maintain the provision of assistance to all people in need. Attention should also be paid to improving access for the people living in various camps, such as Rukban and AI-Hol, and to finding a sustained solution to the water security issue concerning the Allouk water station. Regarding support for the Syrian people, we would like take this opportunity to commend the tireless efforts of humanitarian and health workers as well as the international community. We salute the dedication of all humanitarian and health workers on the ground. Against the current backdrop, we believe that special focus needs to be placed on controlling the spread of COVID-19 and mitigating its grave impacts on the dire humanitarian situation in Syria. Providing needed technical assistance and medical supplies is now becoming more and more urgent as the danger of undermining peace and humanitarian efforts looms large. It is also important to make sure that the COVID-19 response capacity of Syria is not impacted by sanctions. The humanitarian situation in Syria needs a sustained solution. The most viable path is a comprehensive political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and in full accordance with international law.
