Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her briefing today to the Security Council on the
twenty-third report published pursuant to resolution
1593 (2005). The report of the ICC Prosecutor examined
a number of challenges and puts forth comments
concerning the Court's performance with respect to the
situation in Darfur. I would now like to highlight the
following points.

There is a common African position when it comes
to the way in which the ICC deals with certain African
matters. This position is reflected in, for example,
Decisions 547, 586 and 590, of the twenty-fourth,
twenty-fifth and twenty-fifth African Union summits,
respectively. As provided for in these decisions, Africa
is firmly committed to fighting impunity in accordance
with the Constitutive Act of the African Union. We
therefore call for the suspension of the procedures
undertaken by the ICC against President Omar
Al-Bashir, the President of the Sudan.

The aforementioned decisions of the African
Union summits urge the Security Council to put an
end to the referral of the Darfur situation to the ICC.
We therefore express our dissatisfaction at the fact that
the Security Council has not acceded to the requests
of the African Union in this area over the past two
years. Furthermore, in the light of the reservations
expressed by the countries of the African Union with
regard to the Rome Statute, the ICC must refrain from
taking measures that would affect the peace, security,
stability, dignity, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the countries of the African continent. In addition,
the ICC must respect the provisions of international law
with respect to the immunities granted to heads of State
and sitting officials.

In conclusion, we reject any measure taken against
African States on the pretext that these States do not
respect or assume their responsibilities under the Rome
Statute or that they are not upholding resolution 1593
(2005). We reject any measure against States that have
not arrested or delivered President Al-Bashir to the ICC,
especially since African countries must respect their
obligations stemming from resolutions and decisions of
the African Union summit as well as the Constitutive
Act of the African Union.

