Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like to
thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland, His
Excellency Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz, for convening this
important debate.

Today some 420 million children worldwide are
affected by conflict. We therefore face the real danger
that the Security Council sits idly by as a whole
generation of children grows up without knowing
peace and without having access to basic services and
education. We need to change that, and I would like
to extend our utmost appreciation to Ms. Kamara and
Mr. Awan for briefly showing us the way forward and
reminding us of the brutal realities on the ground. I
also thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Gamba for Children and Armed Conflict and
Ms. Henrietta Fore for their outstanding and important
work. Germany is proud to be one of the largest donors
to UNICEF.

We take our commitment to children's rights
seriously and see our engagement in the Working
Group on Children in Armed Conflict as an important
part of that. I would like to thank Belgium for its
excellent chairmanship of the Working Group. We are
pleased that under Belgium's leadership the Group has
been able to agree on strong conclusions on Syria and
Myanmar this year and has developed more innovative
ways of following up on its conclusions. Let me focus
on three brief points.

First of all, on the United Nations framework for
children in armed conflict, we welcome the annual
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509) and note
the listings contained in the annexes. We are aware that
this is not an easy exercise, but there is intrinsic value
in the report and the listing. It will open further avenues
for engagement by the United Nations. We would
therefore encourage Special Representative Gamba to
continue to work towards concluding and implementing
action plans with the listed parties and further engage
the countries mentioned in the narrative of the report.

In this vein, we also welcome Special Representative
Gamba's recent travel to Mali and the Central African
Republic, her recent public statements about situations
of concern and her successful efforts to conclude an
action plan with the Syrian Democratic Forces. We
encourage her to dig even deeper into the issue of
children deprived of liberty for alleged association
with armed groups, for example in Nigeria and Iraq.
We will specifically be providing funding to her Office
to engage in more regional prevention programmes as
per resolution 2427 (2018).

We also very much appreciate her cooperation with
the European Union and with NATO, where we have
supported the position of Senior Children and Armed
Conflict Adviser. Since much of the work on children in
armed conflict is entrusted to child-protection advisers
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, Germany
underlines the need United Nations missions to be given
adequate resources in this regard, which is especially
important since human rights and other protection
functions have in some cases been consolidated, and
thus the distinct role of child-protection adviser needs
to be preserved.

Secondly, let me say a few words on the grave
violations described in the report. We deeply regret,
as many speakers before is have, that 10 years after
the adoption of resolution 1882 (2009), there seems
to be no end in sight for the killing and maiming of
children. In fact, we have been reminded of the fact
that the numbers are unfortunately at a record high.
The Secretary-General has identified Afghanistan,
Syria and Yemen as cases of particular concern. The
use of explosive weapons in populated areas needs to
be avoided at all costs in that regard. In Syria alone,
air strikes, barrel bombs and cluster munitions have
killed and maimed over 1,850 children, which is both
unacceptable and tragically unnecessary.

We also deeply concerned about sexual and gender-
based violence, the levels of which are constantly
underreported in the monitoring and reporting
mechanisms, owing to the difficulty of verification.
Despite the strict verification requirements, the
Secretary-General was able to confirm appallingly
high figures in some cases in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Somalia, for example. In April this
year, the Security Council called for a more consistent
focus on the gender-specific nature of sexual violence
against all affected populations, including men and
boys, and recognized the situation of children born out
of sexual violence. We will keep our attention on these
issues and we need to ensure non-discriminatory and
multisectoral assistance to all child survivors of sexual
violence. That also must include access to sexual and
reproductive health services.

Finally, as initiators of resolution 1998 (2011), on
attacks on schools and hospitals, we condemn all such
attacks, which contravene international law, in the
strongest terms. We have seen such attacks in Syria and
Afghanistan. With 225 recorded attacks on schools and
hospitals in Syria, the number for 2018 was at an all-
time high since the beginning of the conflict. We urge
all States to sign on to the Safe Schools Declaration.

Germany is working hard to ensure compliance
with international humanitarian law so as to prevent
all six grave violations documented by the Secretary-
General's report (S/2019/509). That is why, together
with France, we are drawing up a humanitarian call for
action to improve compliance with international law and
humanitarian principles, to be presented in September.
In that context, we particularly look forward to the
upcoming debate about the Geneva Conventions, under
the Polish presidency's initiative.

Lastly, I want to share a few words on accountability
and integration. In our view, the most effective way
to prevent grave violations is to ensure that there
is accountability instead of impunity. Impunity
regarding violations against children must be stopped.
In Myanmar, for example, accountability for mass
atrocities, including sexual violence, killings and
maimings in Rakhine, is wanting.

Germany also reiterates its fullest confidence
in the work of the International Criminal Court in
ensuring accountability as well as that of international
investigative mechanisms, such as those set up by the
Human Rights Council. It is clear, however, that for
long-term reconciliation and reintegration of children
affected by armed conflict, we need community-based
programmes anchored in a child-rights approach that
complements accountability mechanisms. All too
often, staying with armed groups appears to be a more
viable option for children than being released into an
environment with no basic services, no education and,
crucially, no psychosocial support. That underlines the
urgent need for more predictable long-term resources
for integration, and we are encouraged by the work of
UNICEF and the Special Representative in looking at
reintegration more fundamentally. We hope to soon be
able to examine concrete suggestions for improvement.

