Ms. Gamba: On behalf of the Secretary-General,
I would like to thank the Republic of Poland, and
Foreign Minister Czaputowicz personally, for holding
this open debate. It is vitally important that we take this
opportunity to come together and focus on the current
plight of children affected by armed conflict across the
four corners of the globe.

As many in the Chamber will be aware, 2019 marks
20 years since the Security Council first adopted a
resolution on children and armed conflict (resolution 1261 (1999)) and the 30th anniversary of the entry into
force of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The date of 4 August is also the 10th anniversary of
the adoption resolution 1882 (2009), in which this
organ decided it was necessary to increase the focus
of the children and armed conflict mandate on killing,
maiming and rape and other forms of sexual violence.
Today's debate therefore provides a milestone where we
can take stock of our collective efforts to date.

Given these important anniversaries, I am very
pleased that we have Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan
here today to provide us with their insight from their
experiences in Sierra Leone and South Sudan. I hope
that they will both talk about the impact of conflict of
children and also inspire us with guidance. We need to
better understand how we can build upon and improve
the current work on the ground and better utilize child
protection expertise to end and prevent violations. I
extend a very special thank you to Peter and Mariatu
for being here today.

To give my own insight, last month I travelled to
Mali to assess first-hand the situation of children and
advocate for increased protection measures for boys and
girls. My visit was the first ofa Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
to the country. I travelled to Mopti, in the centre of the
country, a region recently affected by dramatic spikes of
violence. I met representatives of the authorities, child
victims of the conflict and members of the Dogon and
Peul communities. Time constraints meant that a joint
meeting with representatives of the two communities
was necessary, and it was held. This format led to a
very constructive engagement. I was struck by their
common recognition of the importance of protecting
children from violence. It was clear to me that the
protection of children can act as a confidence-building
measure between opposing parties. It can demonstrably
and positively impact peace processes and agreements,
as we recently saw with the commitments of the two
groups to ceasing hostilities last week.

This trip focused on the fundamentals of the
mandate I represent. Over the time I have been
Special Representative, I have expended much energy
in engaging with parties to conflict where there is a
willingness to engage. This has inspired positive
results. In many situations where the monitoring and
reporting mechanism has been in place, Governments
have put in place clear measures, such as establishing
interministerial committees to interact with the
country task force, or passed laws on the protection
of children. This has galvanized action and allowed
progress to develop quickly as a direct result of high-
level engagement. The formula will work with our
teams on the ground.

Action plans are perhaps the most tangible example
of the outcome of such engagement with parties to
conflict. In recent months, three new action plans
have been signed with non-State actors and other
engagement tools have been put in place. However, we
understand that these tools are only the beginning of
a process to better protect children. They are not an
end in themselves. I take this opportunity to call on
all concerned Governments and on all those who
can provide support, including the Council, to do
their utmost to ensure the full implementation of
these commitments. When we have worked together
effectively, we will see real tangible progress through a
reduction of violations and the release of children.
Regional and subregional work is a key element of
this direct engagement. I take this opportunity to thank
the Council for giving us the tools last year, within the
context of resolution 2427 (2018), to pursue prevention
plans with these entities. I hope that soon we will
have new instruments in these forums to aid our other
engagement on the protection of children. This high-
level political engagement supports the cornerstone of
our endeavours - child protection efforts in situations
of armed conflict. Access and actors in the field must be
the priority to protect children and prevent violations.
We cannot achieve anything without the tireless work
on the ground of so many colleagues and partners - the
sterling work of UNICEF in particular.

For our part, in late 2018 I launched the ACT to
Protect campaign with the African and European
Unions. This campaign is aimed at supporting the work
on the ground and has already been launched in Mali
and utilized in Somalia. I hope that we can count on the
support of the Security Council and individual Member
States as we push to create a tangible difference for all
children affected by the six grave violations.

Unfortunately, for all our efforts to date we are
not yet at a point where we can be confident that the
situation is improving year upon year. The report before
the Council (S/2019/509) speaks for itself. Although we
have fewer violations across four categories, we have
an increase in killing and maiming and similar levels of
sexual violence. In last year's report (S/2018/465) two
figures stand at very high levels: one for killing and
maiming, with over 12,000 children affected by these
violations, and one for children who benefitted from
reintegration assistance - over 13,500. That, too was a
historic high. Let me refer to both.

In 2018, verified cases of children killed and
maimed reached record levels since the creation of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism. I echo
the Secretary-General's concern that unprecedented
numbers of violations were attributed to national and
international forces. It is vital that the Council redouble
its efforts to ensure that all parties abide by the
principals of distinction, proportionality and military
necessity. We must make sure that all military actions
are guided by the fundamental tenets of international
humanitarian law. In this regard, I urge parties to
conflict issue specific command orders that address
reducing child casualties. This will help us uphold the
spirit of this Council when it adopted resolution 1882
(2009) and recognized that more need to be done to stop
killing and maiming of boys and girls.

About 40 per cent of the casualties in the global
figure are caused by unexploded ordnance, improvised
explosive devices and landmines. This a real
preoccupation of my Office, particularly as they cause
long-term and serious disability. I believe this is one
area where quick wins can be made if there is a focus
and a will on the part of the international community to
reduce the use and clear up these explosive remnants of
war when peace agreements have been reached. I hope
that next year we can see a reduction in these types
of casualties. Of course, overall the majority of cases
are ascribed to armed groups, crossfire and violent
ground engagements.

While the other topic that the Council addressed 10
years ago in resolution 1882 (200) is not as numerically
startling at first glance, we still have a long way to go
in tackling this issue. Rape and other forms of sexual
violence are significantly underreported, including
when perpetrated against boys. The fear of stigma and
retaliation, involvement of powerful perpetrators, lack
of services and concerns for the protection of survivors
and witnesses discourage children and witnesses from
coming forward. It is clear that, unfortunately, this
violation has proved difficult to address. I believe
that greater accountability mechanisms and adapted
responsive care services for survivors can contribute
to making significant progress in addressing this issue.

Moreover, too many children continue to be detained
as a result of conflict. I urge that children exposed to
alarming levels of violence not be further ostracized
once released from armed groups and armed forces. We
must allow these children to be considered as what they
are - victims of a conflict This is particularly true for
the most vulnerable ones, such as children currently or
allegedly associated with foreign fighters. I would like
to reiterate the message of the Secretary-General that
no child should be deprived of a nationality. In this year
of the thirtieth anniversary of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, it is pertinent to recall that actions
for all children affected by armed conflict should be
taken with the best interests of the child in mind.

The facts contained in the report serve to emphasize
my reoccurring point. We need to prioritize action on
the ground and also protect the staff who undertake it.
In 2018, conflict and military operations, insecurity,
constraints on humanitarian access, staff reductions,
threats, violence and infrastructure prevented child
protection actors from doing their most fundamental
mission of protecting children. I ask the Council and
individual member States to work with us to address this
issue by emphasizing the need for humanitarian access
in resolutions and bilateral relations. Child protection
actors need to have access to provide life-saving support
to victims and survivors of violations. We can strain
every sinew at the highest level to prevent Violations,
but we also need to be able to respond quickly to
violations when they occur.

Notwithstanding the restrictions on access, I
am pleased that a high number of children have been
separated from parties to conflict and provided with
reintegration assistance. These releases have occurred
due to the engagement of child protection actors as
part of the development of action plans or as a result
of emerging peace processes, mediation and dialogue
between Governments and armed groups. It is therefore
important for me to reiterate that these figures justify
the extensive effort in engaging with joint action plans
with all parties to conflict, as well as promoting child
and armed conflict language and concerns at the heart
of all peace dialogue and processes. Separating children
provides opportunities for boys and girls to be given a
second chance at life. We must ensure more dialogue
and more engagement.

By the same token, we must also ensure that we
are ready to receive released children appropriately
through adequate and comprehensive programmes that
are funded and readily available. We cannot afford to
lose children once they are released and we cannot
afford to make them wait their turn for reintegration
assistance because of a lack of resources. That is why
reintegration and considering the real reintegration
needs of boys and girls globally is so urgent. I would
like to thank Poland for the priority it has given to the
task through its important role in the Group of Friends
of Reintegration of Child Soldiers, which was launched
by my Office, together with UNICEF, in late 2018.

I would like to end by imploring the Council to
support the mandate to the greatest extent possible.
We need the Council's support to engage with parties
to conflict to end and prevent violations. We need its
support to ensure that there is sufficient pressure to
make commitments mean something. Most of all, we
need the Council's support to ensure that there exists
the requisite child protection capacity to give children
affected by conflict all the support they need - their
one chance.

