Mr. Zahid (Morocco) (spoke in French): First of
all, Mr. President, I wish to express my congratulations
to you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month of March. I also wish to thank
you for the diligence with which you have convened
this meeting of the Council to examine the grave
situation in the Palestinian territories as a result of the
increased repression of the Palestinian population and
the tightening of the blockade around the Palestinian
towns. May I also congratulate your predecessor, the
Ambassador of Tunisia, who guided the work of the
Council with remarkable competence, and who focused
the international community's attention on the grave
crisis confronting our African continent.
We listened very attentively to the many
statements on the alarming, tragic and exasperating
situation in the Palestinian territories, and Morocco
wishes to echo all of the cries of distress and all of the
appeals to reason that have been made from this
rostrum.

For many months now, violence has ravaged the
occupied Palestinian territories because of the impasse
in the peace process and the repression, of which the
civilian populations of these occupied territories are the
victims. Persistent efforts have also been made to hold
responsible the Palestinian victims of the violence.
This violence unfortunately has been the echo of yet
more violence and of many other acts of provocation.
The grave deterioration in the security situation of the
Palestinians has compounded the deterioration of their
daily economic lives because of increasingly frequent
and lengthy blockades. All the media have shown us
images of children who cannot go to school and
mothers who do not have any access to hospital. The
Palestinian people should have been, and should be,
spared this type of suffering, which has gone on now
for half a century. These are conditions that can only
exacerbate violence.

Morocco is very concerned at this explosive
situation, which threatens the peace and security of the
entire region, a region that is struggling for its right to
peace, security, stability and prosperity. Hundreds of
Palestinians, victims of Israeli violent excesses, and
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians who are victims
of the closures of Palestinian territories require urgent
action on the part of the international community. We
must ensure the protection of these civilian populations
that have suffered so much and avoid the economic
collapse of the young Palestinian State.

In order to re-launch the peace process, the
repression and the economic sanctions against the
Palestinian population must come to an end. It is for
these reasons that, once again, we call upon Israel to
comply with the relevant provisions of the Geneva
Convention on the protection of civilian populations
and that it put an end to the repression and to the
closures that can only heighten the violence and reduce
even further the chances for the peace process to
resume and be successful. This process already has
been made very fragile by the long crisis that the
region has been experiencing for too long now.

Morocco is very concerned at the grim prospects
for the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
and we associate ourselves with all the peace- and
justice-loving States in asking that the Security Council
establish appropriate measures to allow the Palestinian
people to live in peace on their own territory. We are
convinced that this is the only way likely to ensure the
security of Israel itself, as well as that of the peace and
security of the entire region. The Palestinian people
must enjoy its inalienable rights, including its right to
establish its own State on its own territory, with Al-
Quds as its capital.

The Security Council should, without delay, once
again consider sending a protection force to the
occupied territories. At any cost it must also bring the
Israeli authorities back to the negotiating process on
the basis of the Madrid and Oslo agreements. In order
to restore peace to the Middle East, the Palestinian
people must recover all of their territory occupied since
1967. They must also be able to establish their State on
their territory with Al-Quds as the capital. The path to
peace, just like the path to security and prosperity in
the region - and this includes for Israel - necessarily
means a resumption of negotiations, an end to Israeli
aggression and a withdrawal from all the Palestinian
and Arab occupied territories, including Al-Quds al-
Sharif, as well as the exercise by the Palestinian people
of their rights, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.

The deterioration of the situation has now
reached cataclysmic proportions. As we know, violence
breeds more violence. The international community
today has a more and more pressing obligation vis-a-
vis the Palestinian people. Together we must undertake
urgent action that responds to the gravity of the
situation, to avoid the inevitable, for it is we, all of us,
who will bear the responsibility.

