The President (spoke in French): I wish to warmly
welcome the Deputy Secretary-General, Ministers and
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Cote d'Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Gambia,
Germany, Guatemala, Haiti, India, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan,
Lithuania, Maldives, Mali, Mexico, Morocco, the
Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay,
Poland, the Republic of Korea, South Africa, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Michaelle
Jean, Secretary-General of the International
Organization of 1a Francophonie; Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate; and Mr. Arthur Boutellis, Director of the
Brian Urquhart Center for Peace Operations.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
to participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Joao
Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Tanou
Kone, Permanent Observer of the Economic Community
of West African States to the United Nations; and His
Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/927, which contains a letter dated
27 October 2016 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim
of the Permanent Mission of Senegal addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

I now give the floor to the Deputy Secretary-
General.

