Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We join previous
speakers in welcoming the Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, Jose Guterres, and we thank him for his
statement. We welcome and congratulate Ms. Haq on
her appointment as the Secretary-General's Special
Representative to Timor-Leste and Head of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT),
and we thank her for her insightful briefing. We thank
her predecessor, Mr. Atul Khare, for his commendable
work.

We are encouraged that Timor-Leste continues to
make progress, despite the structural, economic and
administrative challenges. We commend the Timor-
Leste authorities for continuing to work with all
interested parties to address political issues through
dialogue, which has contributed to stability in the
country. The strengthening of Timor-Leste's
institutions, such as Government ministries and
democratic institutions, is a welcome development. We
also welcome the Government's commitment to
strengthen rule of law and justice institutions through
appropriate legislation.

The efforts of the Government still require
support from the international community, particularly
from the United Nations, especially in the area of
institution-building. Long-term support and
commitment is essential for strengthening key
institutions of governance and economic recovery. We
therefore welcome the increase in the leadership and
ownership of the development process by Timorese
authorities and people.

As institution-building continues, the importance
of clarifying and delineating the roles and
responsibilities of the different institutions, such as the
national police and the defence forces, will need to be
addressed. In that regard the Government's
commitment to address the matter through the
development of a national security policy is
commendable. We also welcome efforts to address the
concern of civilian oversight in the security sector,
such as the establishment of the Parliamentary
Committee for that purpose.

We welcome the progress made in the registration
and certification of national police officers, whose
authorized strength has now almost been reached. That
is not only good for the development of the rule of law
in the country, but is also a significant step in the
facilitation of the quicker resumption of policing
responsibilities from UNMIT police. We are
concerned, however, by the lack of UNMIT technical
police expertise needed at this point to support the
Timorese police. We call on UNMIT to address that
matter as a priority.

Despite that problem, as well as the insufficient
administrative and logistical capacity within the
national police in Timor-Leste, we are encouraged that
crime rates did not increase in districts where the
national police resumed policing responsibilities. We
note the Government's view on the need to expedite
and conclude the process of resumption of policing
responsibilities by the national police by the end of
2010, and we note UNMIT's readiness to ensure that
that is achieved.

The resettlement of internally displaced persons
is critical in dealing with a potential recipe for
instability. We therefore welcome the resettlement of
all internally displaced persons and the closure of all
camps. We commend the Government for starting the
implementation of phase II of the National Recovery
Strategy, aimed at providing assistance to resettled
families. While that is a good start, its long-term
sustainability will be realized only if the Government
makes complementary efforts to address other
socio-economic challenges. Issues such as rural
development, education and youth unemployment
require the urgent attention of the Government and its
development partners. I am glad that the Deputy Prime
Minister emphasized that point in his briefing.

In that regard, the prompt implementation of
UNMIT's medium-term strategy and related
benchmarks will be crucial in facilitating progress. To
that end we support the Secretary-General's
recommendation on the extension of UNMIT's
mandate for a further 12 months.

Finally, we thank the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, the UNMIT staff and the United
Nations country team for working hard to support the
efforts of the Government and the people of Timor-
Leste to stabilize and develop their country.

