Ms. Rambally (Saint Lucia): I have the honour today
to take the floor on behalf of the group of supporters of
General Assembly draft resolution A/6l/L.69, a diverse
group of 42 developing countries from Africa, Latin
America and the Caribbean, and Asia and the Pacific
that are united by a common cause - to achieve lasting
and comprehensive reform of the Security Council,
including of its working methods.

At the outset, on behalf of the L.69 group, let me
thank you, Madam President, for convening today's
open debate on the working methods of the Security
Council and for outlining the broad parameters of the
subject through your letter and concept note of 8 October
2014 (S/2014/725, annex). With you at the helm of the
Council this month, we are confident that on matters as
important as the Council's working methods there will
not just be discussion, but that concrete steps will also
be taken to ensure that our agreement on the subject
today translates into visible action in the Security
Council.

I would like to make the following assertions on
behalfofthe L.69 group for the Council's consideration.
First, it would be unfortunate on our part if we were to
treat the issue of improvement in working methods as
a stand-alone issue distinct from the subject of overall
reforms of the Security Council. General Assembly
decision 62/557, adopted by consensus, mandated that
the question of working methods be one of the five
pillars of Security Council reform and be discussed as
part ofthe overall question of Security Council reforms,
not in isolation.

Secondly, we should not assume that working
methods are divorced from the members that use them.
If the membership of the Security Council continues to
reflect the post-Second World War architecture of 1945
even in 2014, obviously not much can be expected in
terms of improvement in the working methods except
to acknowledge with disappointment that the rules of
procedure continue to be provisional even 70 years
after the Council's creation. This is further exemplified
by the fact that the Council has demonstrated little
interest in consulting with those affected most by its

decisions, or even in adopting transparent and inclusive
rules of procedure.

Thirdly, it is apparent by now that the Council has
not acted to harness fully the capabilities of the wider
United Nations membership. That is particularly evident
in the manner in which it applies coercive measures
under Chapter VII, to the neglect of provisions under
Chapters VI and VIII, which have proved to be counter-
productive in resolving international crises, even as
it has sought to expand the definition of peace and
security with a view to encroaching upon the Charter-
mandated roles of other United Nations organs.

Fourthly, with regard to working methods, we have
often been told in the context of the intergovernmental
negotiations that permanent members, being permanent,
are masters of the Council's working methods and have
the sole right to determine them. We humbly beg to
differ.

The Council is mandated by the United Nations
Charter with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. What
the Council does to discharge its responsibility and how
it does it is thus of interest to the entire international
community, not only to Council members, let alone
only the permanent members. Article 24(1) of the
Charter clearly prescribes that in carrying out its duties
under its responsibility, the Security Council acts on
behalf of the wider membership of the United Nations.
We therefore all have an equal stake in its effective
functioning and working methods.

Fifthly, the Council must also improve its
cooperation with regional organizations, particularly
with the African Union, since a large portion of the
Council's work concerns the African continent. Such
cooperation must be serious and include providing
assistance to the African region, as per their
requirements, not only when some permanent members
deem it in their interest.

Sixthly, some very useful suggestions on overall
improvements in the working methods were made at
the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly in
section 4 of the non-paper circulated on 10 December
2013 by the President of the Assembly at that session.
We believe that the Council may find its contents useful
throughout this process. It is our considered belief that
cosmetic changes to the working methods alone will
not help. Real improvements require change in both
process and approach, which as a first step require
reform in the composition of the Council.

In conclusion, let me reiterate our considered
view that genuine reform in the working methods of
the Security Council requires a comprehensive reform
in the membership of the Council, with expansion in
both the permanent and non-permanent categories,
not only improvements in its working procedures.
That is essential both for the credibility and continued
confidence of the international community in this
institution.

The seventieth anniversary of the United Nations
provides us a historic opportunity to address this
long-standing historical anomaly. Now is the time for
collective stock-taking of this institution in which all
Member States have reposed their collective trust.

