Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I would like to thank the
Chinese presidency, especially the Foreign Minister,
for convening this open debate.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union earlier today.

The world has gone through profound changes in
the past 70 years. We have witnessed the progress of
humankind, an increase in the number of sovereign
States, the rise of non-State actors, climate change
and environmental degradation, inter- and intra-State
conflicts,and the complexity of the many global
challenges we face today. Addressing those new
challenges, which require global action, is increasingly
difficult for the international community - or, rather,
the United Nations, which, so far, has been unable to
entirely adapt to the changing world.

There is no doubt that the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations are still very
much valid. However, if we want the United Nations
to remain credible today and in future, we have to do
better in fulfilling them.

We believe that the United Nations and its States
Members should do more to promote and protect human
rights and to address growing inequalities. Respect
for human rights is the basis for peace, stability,
development and prosperity, and the Security Council
plays a key role in ensuring that every person enjoys
their fundamental rights and freedoms.

Slovenia's emphasis on the importance of human
rights is also reflected in its active support for the
Secretary-General's Human Rights Up Front initiative,
which inspired the idea for the conference on the theme
Rights for Peace: Challenges and Opportunities, which
will take place in Slovenia in September.

In 2015, 10 years after the adoption of the World
Summit Outcome Document, we should fulfil the
commitments of our leaders, notably to uphold the
responsibility to protect. We should try not to reduce
that responsibility to military intervention alone, but
take into account the other pillars as well. Focus should
be placed on sharing responsibility among United
Nations Member States and trying to help each other, in
particular those in need. Particular emphasis should be
placed on the core principle that each and every country
has the responsibility to protect its own population.
There should be no excuses whatsoever. The principle
of the responsibility to protect does not undermine
sovereignty; on the contrary, its implementation can
only strengthen sovereignty.

We believe that a political division among Member
States of the Council and the Council's failure to
take action when the lives of people are at stake is
unacceptable. That is happening too often and is
becoming a great problem. It is high time to fulfil
another key commitment of the 2005 World Summit,
namely, reforming the Security Council and adapting
it to the new realities and circumstances of the
international community. It is necessary to continue to
adapt Council's working methods and regulate the use
of the veto in actions aimed at preventing or ending
the most heinous acts, such as genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. In that regard, Slovenia aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Maldives on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency Group.

The United Nations Charter and the resolutions of
the Security Council and General Assembly should be
respected and implemented. With regard to the Security
Council, it is important to establish a clear overview
of adopted resolutions and the deficiencies in their
implementation before devising an action plan on how
to overcome the difficulties.

The Council and all Member States should make
better use of Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter.
Prevention and the timely peaceful resolution of
potential conflicts are by far the most cost- and
resource-efficient means. Slovenia focuses particularly
on the issue of mediation. In that regard, it is also
important to enhance cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations and among the
regional organizations themselves.

When conflicts do occur, however, we need to
ensure that people responsible for war crimes, crimes
against humanity and gross abuses of human rights are
held accountable, regardless oftheir side in the conflict.
International criminal justice bodies, including the
International Criminal Court, could be of significant
help in such cases. The rule of law is one of the key
elements for peace, stability and development. In
that regard, Slovenia aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Austria on behalf of
the Group of Friends of the Rule of Law.

In conclusion, I believe that we also have to use
this year's review processes on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and on the peacebuilding architecture and
peacekeeping missions to make the United Nations
more credible. We have to keep in mind that the United
Nations is only as strong and efficient as its Member
States allow it to be.

