Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French):
Allow me to reiterate the message of France with
regard to the situation in the Middle East: we must
not - cannot - give up. Simply put, the situation is
untenable, as evidenced by the ongoing violence in
Israel, Jerusalem and the Palestinian territories. Since
the beginning of the outbreak of Violence, there have
been at least 153 Palestinians killed, mostly perpetrators
of attacks, and 25 Israelis killed. That very aggravated
situation cannot last, and we reiterate our condemnation
of all attacks.

It is our responsibility to take action. France remains
convinced that the lack of political prospects is the root
cause of the recent events, as it plays into violence,
radicalization and extremism. The increase in security
measures implemented by Israel and the continued
punitive demolitions and settlement activities, illegal
under international law, fuel tensions and mutual
resentment. In that regard, the recent announcements
of new settlements in the West Bank and Jerusalem are
extremely worrisome and raise serious doubts about
Israel's commitment to reaching a two-State solution.

The scope of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
goes beyond just the territory that extends from the
Mediterranean to the Jordan Valley. The Palestinian
issue continues to fuel regional tensions. No one in this
Chamber wants Daesh to seize the Palestinian cause and
distort it, in its own interests, as a compelling argument
for recruitment. It is possible that Daesh could, in due
course, settle in Gaza and the West Bank. We must do
everything possible to make sure that does not happen.

The need for ambitious and collective mobilization
by the international community grows increasingly
urgent as the days go by. The temptation for some to
defer the matter, to manage the conflict and to wait
for favourable circumstances before talking seriously
about peace is, in our View, not viable, because making
the conflict take a back seat among our priorities and
treating it like a frozen conflict could lead to a new
outbreak. That is why the collective commitment of
the Council members, the European Union and the
countries in the region is essential. That requires
creating a specific and credible political horizon for a
shared goal, namely, the two-State solution, which we
must safeguard.

In order to take steps in that direction, France
remains convinced of the need for a change in approach
along the lines of collective, enhanced and renewed
support. The work undertaken during the meeting
of the Quartet, which was expanded to include Arab
countries and international partners during the General
Assembly, must continue. That is a key element.
The Security Council also has a role to play - a
responsibilty to assume - and must fully commit itself
to bringing about a solution that is acceptable to both
parties. France will remain fully mobilized on this
issue, as it is thoroughly convinced that the stability of
that fractured and shell-shocked region requires a fair
and lasting settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian issue.

There is also urgency with regard to Syria: it is
urgent to break the cycle of violence and establish a
political transition. We lend our full support to the
process launched in Vienna and endorsed by the Security
Council in resolution 2254 (2015), of 18 December 2015.
It important that the inter-Syrian negotiations, which
are key to achieving peace, can begin. We understand
that Mr. Staffan de Mistura is doing everything possible
for them to begin on 29 January. To ensure the success
of those negotiations, three elements are necessary.

First, there must be a swift and significant
improvement in the humanitarian situation. There can
be no credible political process without immediate
improvements in the situation on the ground for
Syrians. The open meeting (see S/PV.7360) of the
Security Council early last year exposed the persistent
and abject practice of using sieges as a weapon of war. I
reiterate our solemn call for the immediate and effective
lifting of all sieges, as well as for lasting humanitarian
access to all those in need, without any restrictions, and
for the stopping of attacks against civilians. The Syrian
regime and its supporters must respect international
humanitarian law. It is not a bargaining chip, but rather
an absolute obligation.

Secondly, the designation by the opposition of its
own representatives must be respected. The opposition
group that emerged at the Riyadh conference brings
together for the first time a broad spectrum ofnon-jihadi
political and military leaders who have committed to
a shared goal of a united, free and democratic Syria
that respects the rights of all citizens. It is up to that
group to be the interlocutor with the regime during the
negotiations. The negotiation process could, however,
also lead to consultations with various stakeholders,
namely, those from civil society.
Thirdly, there is a need for the discussions to focus
on the political transition, in accordance with the terms
agreed in the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).
It is not a matter of creating a pseudo-Government of
national unity, rather it is one of agreeing on creating
a transitional governmental body with full executive
powers to afford Syria prospects for reconciliation.
Only a political solution will end the suffering and
ongoing exodus of civilians and reduce the terrorist
threat we face. I assure you, Mr. President, of France's
resolute commitment in that regard.

