The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Pakistan.

At the outset, I would like to express our thanks
to Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland, as well as to
the President of the Economic and Social Council,
Ambassador Marjatta Rasi, for their participation in
today's debate. We are grateful for their insightful
statements.

Jan Egeland mentioned 20 current crises affecting
millions of people. Most of these are complex crises
and most are within the purview of the Security
Council.

Evolving a comprehensive, integrated and
coherent response to these crises remains a formidable
challenge for the international community. In the
United Nations, we have an institution best suited to
generating responses in a timely, effective and coherent
manner.

At the policy level, the first priority must always
be preventive diplomatic action. A credible early
warning capacity based on impartial and accurate
analysis of situations remains an essential requirement,
and I am glad that our colleague from the United
Kingdom spoke on this point. If this analysis points in
the direction of a potential conflict, then the United
Nations system must act promptly and with cohesion to
prevent it. As somebody has quipped, prevention is
better than a Security Council resolution. There are
several means at our disposal, ranging from the
Secretary-General's good offices and the initiative that
can be taken by the General Assembly to the
mechanisms prescribed in Article 34 of Chapter VI of
the Charter. All these can be usefully employed to
address situations the continuance of which could
endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security.

There is, however, greater need for a calibrated
policy response, with the Secretary-General, the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the United
Nations system at large working in synergy, within
their respective roles and mandates. We think that
Brazil's idea of a conflict-avoidance action deserves
further consideration.
In the event of the outbreak of a conflict, the
Security Council's role becomes clear and pre-eminent.
The Council has evolved many instruments for conflict
management. Its standard operating procedures are
clear: first, to halt the fighting and, secondly, to
disengage the conflicting parties, if necessary through
the interposition of a peacekeeping force. Peacekeeping
missions help contain conflict, save lives and create
space for peacemaking, It is no accident that eight of
our 15 peacekeeping operations are complex in nature.
Speedy action to adopt resolutions establishing
peacekeeping operations and to appoint special
representatives of the Secretary-General is critical to
the success of these efforts in the initial phase.

The quality of the Council's engagement -
whether direct or indirect - is of crucial significance.
Of late, the Council's missions to regions of crisis have
become an important tool for gaining a better
understanding of ground realities and for finding ways
of containing conflict and promoting peace processes.
The Council's interaction with regional and
subregional organizations, consistent with the
provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter, is also
increasing. Cooperation with the Economic Community
of West African States has shown that this partnership
is and can always be mutually beneficial. It was
instrumental in helping to stabilize conflict situations
before the deployment of United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire. Cooperation
with the newly-established Peace and Security Council
of the African Union should also develop along similar
lines.

But the Council must go beyond conflict
management in addressing complex crises. While
peacekeeping missions working within their mandates
can help in different ways, they are not a panacea for
the whole range of complex issues and underlying
causes. Sierra Leone is a relevant example.

Therefore, the Council must pay greater attention
to resolving conflicts. Chapter VI of the Charter
contains a whole inventory of measures that the
Council could employ in the pursuit of this objective.
There has to be a clear recognition that durable peace
can be established only when the underlying causes of
conflict are effectively addressed.

The root causes of conflicts are many and
diverse. They are political, social, economic, historical
and cultural in nature. In the long list of root causes,
however, poverty and underdevelopment seem to be
omnipresent. A look at the issues on the agenda of the
Security Council reveals that the theatre of nearly all
the conflict situations we are dealing with is the
developing world - a striking observation indeed, but
not a startling one. The inter-linkage between peace
and development is now well recognized. This was also
at the heart of the Millennium Summit, which took a
number of far-reaching and important decisions
concerning the dual objectives of peace and
development.

The international community's approach to
complex crises must take into account this vital inter-
linkage between peace and development. Again, at the
policy level, strategic coherence is a prerequisite. This
entails enhanced coordination within the United
Nations system. Apart from being within the purview
of the Security Council, complex crises, because of
their multidimensional character, also involve, in
varying degrees, the areas of responsibility of other
principal organs of the United Nations: the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. It is
therefore crucial for the United Nations to bring
synergy to its work through cooperation, coordination
and complementarity in the work of its principal
organs.

Peace-building is now seen as a crucial
component of any strategy for sustainable peace and
development. In post-conflict situations - such as in
Guinea Bissau and Burundi - peace-building has
elicited cooperation and coordination between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.
We have heard about this from Ambassador Rasi.
Peace-building in most complex crises is also not
possible without the active involvement and support of
the Bretton Woods institutions.

Intra-organ coordination must be accompanied by
closer coordination between the Secretariat and the
agencies, funds and programmes. By deepening
system-wide coordination, we would ensure timely,
effective and coherent responses to the crises that often
test the will and the capacity of our Organization.

Several proposals have been advanced to promote
coherence in response to multifarious challenges.
Recently, the President of Mozambique and the Prime
Minister of Portugal proposed the creation of a new
commission to promote peace and development,
mandated by and in conjunction with the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council.
Pakistan itself has proposed the establishment of ad
hoc composite committees of the three principal organs
of the United Nations - the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council- to effectively address complex crises and
emergencies, including in Africa. The Pakistan
delegation is informally circulating today a non-paper
outlining our proposal for the creation of ad hoc
composite committees.

We hope that this proposal and similar initiatives
will be considered by the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council and the General
Assembly and will be taken into account in the context
of the proposals for institutional reform of the United
Nations system.

One thing which was underlined by Under-
Secretary-General Egeland in his remarks is relevant
throughout the system: the requirement for adequate
and full funding of the actions required to prevent,
manage and ameliorate conflicts and to restore peace
and stability. Peacekeeping does, indeed, cost $3.5
billion today, and it may increase further. But we must
not lose perspective. Not only are the United Nations
and its family of organizations the only available
instrument for dealing with complex crises: they are
also the most cost-effective. Much more needs to be
done to project and propagate that simple truth. We
agree with those who said that all the issues which we
have considered will come together and should be
considered on the auspicious occasion of the sixtieth
anniversary of the United Nations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I wish to mention in concluding our discussion
that this debate has more than lived up to the
expectations held by the Pakistan presidency when it
proposed consideration of the item.

In accordance with the understanding previously
reached, the Pakistan presidency will prepare and
circulate a summary of the many useful and important
ideas and suggestions which have been made by almost
every delegation in this debate.

Since this is - I hope - our last public meeting
for this month, I wish to take this opportunity to thank
all Council members and the general membership of
the United Nations for their unfailing support and
cooperation to the Pakistan presidency during the
month. It has been a real pleasure serving the Council
in the capacity of President.

I also wish to thank the Secretariat and all the
support staff, including the conference officers,
interpreters, security officers and all other personnel
for their dedicated work. I express our best wishes to
Ambassador Baja and the team of the Philippines
delegation for a very successful presidency next month.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15pm.
