Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): The human tragedy which
befell the people of Afghanistan in the late 1970s continues
unabated to this day. The conflict in that war-ravaged
country is no closer to resolution today than it was 17 years
ago. Yes, the nature of the war has changed over the years,
but the killings, the untold suffering and the general
mayhem remain the same. The parties to the Afghan
conflict are as bent on seeking a military solution to the
civil war as they were during foreign occupation.

Unfortunately, the biggest losers in this fratricidal
conflict are the ordinary people of Afghanistan, millions of
whom have been forced to live like refugees in their own
country. Tens of thousands more have had to flee the
country to seek refuge in neighbouring countries. As
displaced persons or refugees, they lead lives which are no
more than mere existence. They have witnessed daily their
country turned into ruins and their schools, hospitals,
government offices and other national property reduced to
rubble. The dream of a future in a peaceful country has
been turned into an endless nightmare by several years of
war.

For Afghans, war and its ever-shifting battle lines
bring mixed fortunes as one circle of misery succeeds
another. The recent takeover of Kabul by one of the
factions may have been a boon for some, but it was
certainly a severe blow to several others, who found their
civil liberties curtailed. There has also been a wave of
arbitrary executions and detentions.

We are also deeply concerned about the humanitarian
aspects of the conflict in Afghanistan. The fighting has
affected personnel of humanitarian organizations, many of
whom have been forced to leave the country. In some
cases, food convoys have been prevented from reaching the
victims of the conflict, and in other cases humanitarian
assistance is being pillaged. If this situation continues
unchecked, it could have a disastrous impact on the
humanitarian situation of the people of Afghanistan,
especially in the coming winter months.

Resolution of the crisis in Afghanistan will, in the
final analysis, depend on the willingness of the parties to
the conflict to reach a peacefully negotiated political
settlement. The international community can only encourage
them in that direction, but it cannot impose its will on
them. They have in fact not heeded the advice of the

 

Security Council in previous years. This they have done
to the great peril of their country and their people. The
United Nations has shown its readiness to help the people
of Afghanistan, but the parties should realize that the
United Nations can only help them if they are ready to
help themselves.

In its presidential statement of 28 September 1996
(S/PRST/l996/40), the Security Council reaffirmed its
commitment to the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and national unity of Afghanistan.

However, the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and national unity of Afghanistan can be assured
only by the Afghan parties themselves. They should
renounce violence and engage in genuine and meaningful
negotiations. They have so far failed to attain their
objectives, whatever they may be, through war, and it is
unlikely they will do so in future. It is time they
committed themselves to national reconciliation. This can
be achieved through an all-encompassing negotiation
process in which none of the parties are left out.

The human tragedy in Afghanistan will not be
brought to an end unless and until the neighbours of
Afghanistan can agree on the modalities for helping that
war-tom country to achieve peace. It is a well-known fact
that foreign interference has hampered the search for a
political settlement in Afghanistan. It is particularly
regrettable that the flow of arms and ammunition across
its borders continues with impunity. The countries of
Central Asia should be united in the search for peace, and
not fuel the fires of war in Afghanistan. They should be
supporting, not undermining, the valuable efforts of the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan to find a
lasting settlement.

There is no doubt that the situation in Afghanistan
constitutes a serious threat to international peace and
security. We therefore share the concerns of Kazakstan,
Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan and
Uzbekistan, which called for this debate. The debate
could not have been more timely. The war in Afghanistan
could easily spread to the neighbouring countries and
engulf the whole region of Central Asia.

Undoubtedly, we are dealing with a very complex
situation. There is, however, no other choice but to
continue to assist the parties in Afghanistan to overcome
their differences. The active involvement of the
international community is indispensable to the search for

 

a peaceful solution to the human tragedy that is
Afghanistan.

