President Ahmed: Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your recent assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. I have no doubt as to your able
leadership and wisdom in guiding the deliberations of
the Security Council to a fruitful conclusion.

I wish also to extend my thanks to your
predecessor for the excellent manner in which he
presided over the Council last month.

I am very glad that the Security Council is seized
of the Somali issue.

I wish also to take note of the appeal of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, which is contained
in his report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of sustainable development in Africa. In
that regard, I should like to commend the proactive
engagement of the Security Council in conflict-prone
areas of Africa. Let me encourage the Council to
continue and further that engagement.

We are equally thankful for the Council's
continued interest in Somalia, and in particular for its
support to the Somali national reconciliation process.

The will of the Somali people was manifested in
the current all-inclusive political settlement and the
creation of the national federal Government. The
leaders of the armed factions are included in the new
Parliament.

We request the international community to assist
us in making sure that these leaders abide by their
commitments and national obligations. We have
succeeded in bringing about a political settlement and
we are in the process of establishing the basic
institutions of governance. However, the most difficult
challenges lie ahead.

Restoration of peace and security throughout
Somalia is one of the first challenges of the new
Somali Government. However, this new Government
possesses no trained army, no organized police or any
other security personnel at the moment. Based on past
experience, it is incumbent upon the new Government
to prepare a detailed plan for the mobilization and
deployment of a stabilization force and the
rehabilitation of the demobilizing militias. The
Government is working on the two main objectives of
consolidating reconciliation talks with the armed
groups and realizing a tangible peace-building plan. I
would like to reassure the Council that adequate
preparations will be taken to ensure the success of the
above-mentioned plans. In this context, we request the
Council to take the necessary steps to phase in a peace-
building mission, including the deployment of a
stabilization force in Somalia, in the most immediate
future.

We made a formal request to the African Union
for a stabilization force, composed of 15,000 to 20,000
troops. The deployment of such a force is no way
intended to impose the Government's will by force,
and the necessary parliamentary approval will be
sought by the Government at the right moment.
Concurrently, we need a national security force
composed of 20,000 to 30,000 troops, both police and
army. They will be recruited, trained and equipped to
take over from the peace-making force at the
appropriate time.

There are many regions in Somalia that live in
relative peace. A new Somali Government will work
hard to maintain and further peace and stability in
those areas. The Somali Government requests the
assistance of the international community in sustaining
reconciliation and reconstruction throughout the
country.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation and thanks to member States of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
for their historic contribution to the success of the
reconciliation process. We make a solemn promise to
our IGAD brothers that we will work tirelessly to
maintain peace in Somalia. Special thanks go to all
IGAD partners in this forum that have contributed to
this endeavour.

All the above-mentioned tasks required to bring
about peace and security to Somalia would need
substantial resources. The deployment of peace-making
forces from brotherly countries and the creation of a
national security force will require funding from the
international community. Therefore, I would like to
appeal to the members of the Security Council to take
the necessary steps to raise the funding required. It is
not expected that the Somali Government will generate
revenue for some time. There is an urgent need for
financial resources for the Government to function. I
would like to request the Council to take the necessary
measures to provide the financial and diplomatic
support that is urgently needed. In conclusion, your
support is critical.

