Mr. Ryan (Ireland): The Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Ireland, Mr. Brian Cowen, speaking in his
capacity as President of the Council of the European
Union, yesterday condemned the terrorist attack during
the Victory Day celebrations at the Dynamo stadium in
Grozny. Minister Cowen said:

"I condemn utterly this appalling act of terror in a
crowded stadium, which has claimed the lives of
many people, including the President of the
Chechen Republic, Mr. Kadyrov. I extend my
condolences to the families of all the victims of
this terrible act. No political cause can justify
terrorism."

As this morning is my first opportunity to address
the Council in the month of May, I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, and Pakistan on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council, and to thank
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Germany, for the excellent manner in which he and his
delegation executed the presidency in the month of
April. With your indulgence, Mr. President, I would
also like to note that this morning's statement to the
Security Council by the European Union is the first
since the enlargement of the Union, on 1 May.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
Montenegro; and the European Free Trade Association
countries Iceland and Liechtenstein, members of the
European Economic Area, align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union welcomes this opportunity
to express once again our support for the remarkable
achievements made since independence by the people
of Timor-Leste, with the assistance of the United
Nations, the support of the Security Council and the
commitment of the wider international community. In
that regard, I recall and refer the Council to the EU's
most recent statement on Timor-Leste, delivered here
in this Chamber on 20 February 2004.

The European Union supports the efforts of the
Government of Timor-Leste to consolidate the political
institutions, to promote the social and economic
development of the country and to uphold the rule of
law while building a new nation. In particular, the
European Union welcomes developments such as the
largely calm security situation, the continuing positive
relationship between Timor-Leste and Indonesia, the
continuing development of the country's public
administration, the fact that the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation continues to
provide a community-based solution for less serious
crimes committed in connection with the political
conflict, and the assumption of responsibility for
routine policing throughout the country by the national
police force.

In addition, and in the context of ending impunity
and promoting a culture of accountability and
transparency, the European Union notes with interest
the continuing process of prosecuting those accused of
serious crimes. The European Union will continue to
follow closely the relevant trials in Dili and Jakarta.

Much remains to be done in all these fields and,
while the primary responsibility for a successful
transition lies with the Timorese people themselves, it
remains incumbent on the international community to
help consolidate the progress that is so evident in
Timor-Leste. In this regard, the European Union looks
forward to the planned conference of development
partners in Dili on 19 May.

The EU recognizes that a critical element of the
success so far has been the hard work of the men and
women of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET), and we commend them, and
those countries which have supported them in their
efforts, for their dedication. The European Union
recalls the advice of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, that
the international community should consider carefully
the completion of UNMISET's drawdown while also
taking stock of what has been achieved, reflecting on
the remaining tasks to be completed, and deciding on
the best way forward to fulfil the legitimate needs of
Timor-Leste in the post-May 2004 period.

In that regard, the European Union thanks the
Secretary-General for his most recent report on and
assessment of the current situation in Timor-Leste. The
EU welcomes the report's assessment that the
extraordinary progress that has taken place has left no
doubt as to the momentum of transfer of responsibility
to Timor-Leste. In particular, the European Union
welcomes the reported progress towards the adoption
of legislation for key public institutions.

Notwithstanding the progress made to date, the
European Union shares the Secretary-General's view
that further assistance will be needed to consolidate the
achievements already made. In this regard, a
continuing though modified presence for UNMISET
seems required. The European Union looks forward to
the outcome of the Security Council's consideration of
the Secretary-General's analysis and his
recommendation for an extension of UNMISET for a
further one-year consolidation phase, with appropriate
modifications to its mandate and composition.
