Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): This
morning, the Security Council listened to a statement
that represented a new standard - in terms of legal
and political ugliness - in Israeli statements before
the Council. Let me cite a few specific points to
demonstrate that. The Israeli representative said

(spoke in English)
"killing the innocent is wrong."
(spoke in Arabic)

I should like to add that the killing of innocents is
wrong, regardless of whether those innocents are
Israelis or Palestinians. That is precisely the difference
between the attitude of the Palestinian side and that of
the Israeli side. There is the difference between him
and me, and that is one of the reasons for the situation
we are currently facing.

My second point: the Israeli representative said
that Israel has no choice but to build this wall. The
only correct and possible option, as indicated by
several previous speakers, is that it be built either along
the armistice line of 1949 or within Israeli territory.
The Israeli representative failed to cite a single reason
for building the wall deep inside Palestinian territory.

My third point: the Israeli representative spoke of
the wall as if it were another kind of wall, to the point
that he denied the existence of any wall that isolates
any portion of Palestinian society - as simple as that,
right in front of the Council, even while the entire
international community was looking at pictures of the
wall. The city of Qalqilya alone - which has a
population of 40,000 - is surrounded by the wall on
all sides and has only one exit. That has not happened
anywhere else in the world, even under the most
horrendous circumstances.

My fourth point, which is perhaps the most
serious: the Israeli representative, after stating that the
Green Line is not a border line and that there is no
sovereignty over the West Bank and Gaza, touched on
his central point - that he considers the Palestinian
territories to be not occupied territories but disputed
lands. That is precisely the essence of the problem.
What has changed is that the Israeli representative had
the audacity to declare that position before the Security
Council, despite the norms of international law and
international humanitarian law and scores of relevant
resolutions. In effect, the Israeli representative declared
the Government of Israel's rejection of peace, of the
road map and of any basis for a peaceful settlement
between the sides. In effect, he rejected peace and
declared that the crisis would last until the dissolution
of the Government of war that he represents. That
position must be strongly condemned, because with
that position there will never be peace in the Middle
East region. That is why there is a wall and settler
colonialism on our lands. That is also why they reject
the national existence of the Palestinian people.

I wish finally to raise a couple of points with
regard to another matter. First, the Palestinian side
welcomes the two proposals put forward this morning
by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation. We are fully ready to cooperate with the
delegation of the Russian Federation here at the United
Nations regarding the idea put forward by the Russian
Foreign Minister Mr. Ivanov, at the Quartet meeting.
We hope, of course, that this will take place after the
Council has been able to take a clear stand regarding
the expansionist wall, so that there will be concrete
meaning for the steps that follow.

Secondly, we would like to express our
appreciation to the sponsors of the draft resolution
submitted to the Council today (S/2003/980). It is our
hope that the Council will take action before the day is
out and will act on the draft text, and it is our hope that
it will be adopted so that the option of peace and the
two-State option will remain viable.

