Mr. Al-Hakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his annual report
on children and armed conflict (S/2013/245), which is
before the Security Council today, and to congratulate
the United Kingdom on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month. We are also very grateful to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
for her role. Through her work she is helping to shed a
light on the suffering of children in armed conflict. We
would also like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Luxembourg for her work in this respect.

The report refers to incidents involving children
that have been caused by terrorist organizations
included in the list of parties responsible for violations
against children. As all know, Iraq is currently
suffering a spate of terrorist attacks and violations
against children. Groups are exploiting children to use
them in these terrorist attacks. The incidents involving
children are not very numerous if we consider that half
the population is under 18 years.

The Iraqi Government, however, has taken
preventive measures to prevent terrorists from
exploiting children. Foremost among these is the system
of compulsory education, ensuring that children are
enrolled in school and following up on their registration
to ensure they keep attending. This is to prevent
their exploitation by terrorists. The Government is
also responsible for rehabilitating children who have
been sentenced by the judicial system, and works to
reintegrate them into society.

With regard to the participation of children under
18 years in troops of the Awakening Councils, as noted
in the report, Iraqi law forbids those under 18 years from
joining the armed forces. Moreover, the Awakening
Councils troops have been incorporated into the regular
armed forces. The minimum age for joining the armed
forces is 18 years. To be a volunteer in the security
forces requires a written waver and authorization from
one's parents.

In addition to the constitutional requirements, Iraq
has signed the Convention on the Rights ofthe Child and
its Optional Protocols. This is essential for protecting
the rights of children. A national, cross-ministerial
body has been created to protect Iraqi children and
counter the phenomenon of school drop-outs. This body
also attends to the special needs of children from poor
areas by directly following up on their cases and raising
children's awareness of their human rights, which is
part of the school curriculum. It is also undertaking
other activities to prevent children being recruited
by terrorist groups. Iraqi society is conservative and
attaches particular importance to family, children and
social interaction.

Finally, we would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflicts and her entire team. We reaffirm
that we will continue to cooperate with United Nations
bodies to guarantee the rights of children in general and
as a priority of the Iraqi Government. We look forward
to the next visit of Ms. Zerrougui to Iraq.

