Mr. Koyma (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this debate, which gives States under
sanctions regimes an opportunity to express their views
with regard to problems linked to respecting Security
Council sanctions, the implementation of which are
ensured by the committees of the Council, established
by various resolutions. My thanks also go to the
representatives of Sweden and Chile for their important
contributions to this debate. As 22 delegations have
already discussed issues relating to transparency,
regime length and procedures, my delegation will limit
itself to listing the problems facing the Central African
Republic.

Regarding the fight against the proliferation
of weapons, all it takes for a sanctions regime to be
rendered ineffective is for a neighbouring State to
support a rebellion or a listed entity or individual.
That is why, among other measures aimed at ensuring
effectiveness, strong political and diplomatic pressure
must be brought to bear when needed on the States
neighbouring the State under sanctions.

With respect to the travel-ban issue, it so happens
that recently in the Central African Republic a person
under sanctions was moving about freely, going in and
out of the territory at will. Since that person's identity
was no secret during border crossings, we have to
question the role of INTERPOL in the implementation
of sanctions regimes, as well as the monitoring by the
panel of experts of the implementation of the sanctions
imposed by the Security Council. This raises once
again the issue of the binding nature of the resolutions
of the Security Council with respect to Members of the
Organization that deliberately violate the provisions
and principles of the Charter.

Turning to the arms embargo, one of the challenges
facing the effective implementation of the arms
embargo on the Central African Republic is the fact
that it shares its north-eastern and eastern borders
with Sudan and South Sudan, which are dealing with
rebellions of their own as well as the Lord's Resistance
Army, which flout not only the sanctions regime but
also the treaty governing the uncontrolled circulation
of and trade in arms, despite the political goodwill of
those brotherly States.

To be effective, the embargo must be complemented
by border control. However, the Central African
Republic faces the issue of vetting, which is a process
of reform of the defence and security forces that is very
lengthy and costly for this fragile country.

These are some ofthe challenges facing the Central
African Republic with respect to the effectiveness of
the sanctions regime.

The meeting rose at 1.15 pm.
