Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by thanking you, Sir, for convening this
important meeting dedicated to the political situation
in Burundi, and to congratulate you on your country's
accession to the rotating presidency of the Security
Council for July. I would also like to thank all the
other members of the Council for their ceaseless and
most outstanding efforts to help resolve the crisis in
Burundi. I also congratulate and thank Mr. Zerihoun
and the High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
briefings, which have given us more information about
that crisis, although my delegation cannot agree with
certain implications.

My delegation notes the content of the Secretary-
General's report on the United Nations Electoral
Observation Mission in Burundi issued on 7 July. I
will not refer to it in detail because it covers the period
before the elections of 29 June. Certain passages of its
66 paragraphs are therefore no longer relevant, and
new information regarding positive developments has
become available. I will therefore address the Council
on the current situation, as demanded by recent events.

Before I do so, however, I will make a short
comment on the passage in the report regarding the
excessive use of force by the national police of Burundi.
That accusation is no longer valid, because one of
those involved in the abortive putsch of 13 May, a
certain Leonard Ndikumana, has just publicly claimed
responsibility for the grenade attacks and other
violence committed against the police and the civil
population during the uprising intended to prepare the
way for the coup d'etat and, after the putsch, to prevent
and torpedo the elections. The claim was made through
a Kenyan television company and was relayed by a
number of western networks, including Radio France
Internationale, TVS and Deutsche Welle.

By publicly taking responsibility for the attacks
that took place in the country, including the grenades
mentioned by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, which were thrown at women selling fruit next
to the central market, those behind the putsch have
proved once again that the international community
missed the mark when it blamed the attacks on young
people affiliated to the ruling party and the national
police. Responsibility for the grenade attacks has
been claimed and the perpetrators are known. The
entire international community should condemn such
mindless violence, for which responsibility has been
publicly claimed, and demand the immediate arrest
of those behind the putsch in the countries that are
sheltering them. Now that the perpetrators are known,
they must be held responsible for their acts and answer
for them in court.

To return to the present, as I had occasion to say on
Friday before the Council (see S/PV.7473), on the eve
of the legislative and communal elections of 29 June
my Government faced a difficult choice between
two options: to postpone the elections, as certain
partners were requesting, and voluntarily agree to
enter an institutional vacuum, with all of the attendant
consequences; or to proceed with the elections forthwith
and give the country democratic institutions in line
with the Constitution of Burundi.

In View of the risk of a constitutional vacuum, my
Government decided to proceed with the elections,
which allowed the people of Burundi to vote freely
on 29 June. As we all saw, the elections took place
as planned in a calm and tranquil atmosphere, and
no major incidents were reported on election day. All
national and regional observers, in particular those
from neighbouring countries, gave favourable reports
on the conditions in which the elections were held. A
single observer mission expressed doubts in its report,
for reasons known to all. I will not return to that case;
I spoke of it yesterday to the Burundi configuration of
the Peacekeeping Commission.

We thank the people of Burundi for turning out in
force for these two elections, at which they chose their
local councillors and their members of parliament. The
turnout of 75 per cent sent a clear message, not only to
all Burundians but also to Burundi's partners, that the
silent majority, which did not participate in the Violent
demonstrations designed to make media headlines, was
eager to vote. The message is also that nothing other
than voter turnout can confer legitimacy on an election.
The people of Burundi have spoken, and their voice
must be respected.

As I said earlier, peace, calm and security
characterized the double election, which certain
detractors of Burundian democracy had described, for
several months before it was even held, as not being
credible.

Participation in the elections of 29 June was
impressive, even massive, and free, transparent and
peaceful. It was eloquent testimony to the resolve of the
Burundian people to restore the country's institutions
so as to ensure that mandates were upheld pursuant
to basic national law. In the capital, in spite of a few
isolated incidents of deliberate intimidation in recently
restive neighbourhoods - which, happily, were foiled
by law enforcement agents - residents were able to
vote freely, thanks first and foremost to the relocation
of certain voting centres, which limited major incidents
on election day.

In the interior provinces and the 1,001 hills of
Burundi, the behaviour of consitituents surprised many
national and international observers. Indeed, by noon
of election day, more than 95 per cent of registered
voters had already voted. That, too, sent a message that
our people yearned to vote and that they had done so
early in the morning before going to work in the fields.
It also proved that what was being demanded in the
endless reports had taken hold of the silent majority
who wanted to vote come what may.

We note the participation of several political and
independent parties on election day. Some of these
sought to play what I would call an in-and-out game
by pretending to boycott but also going door to door to
convince Burundians to vote for them. That door-to-
door exercise has also been noted by the United Nations
Electoral Observation Mission in Burundi (MENUB)
report (S/2015/510). I wish to stress that the Independent
National Electoral Commission never received from
any of the parties, coalitions or independent candidates
formal requests for the withdrawal of their candidacies
for the Communal Council or the legislative election.

Thus, some parties, coalitions and independent
candidates had voters who voted for them despite the
so-called boycott announced through the media. In
upholding civil and political rights recognized in the
Burundian Constitution, in particular the right to elect
and to be elected, the Commission attributed votes and
distributed seats in line with the votes cast. Ifa political
party, coalition of parties or independent candidate
does not claim the seat obtained, for whatever reason,
the Electoral Code will be applied in line with article
138 of the Electoral Code for the National Assembly,
article 185 for the Communal Council, and article 143
for the Senate. In brief, the call for a boycott by the
Abibenga Amizero y'Abarundi coalition, headed by
Agathon Rwasa, was simply a tactical ploy compounded
by nefarious speculations.

Regarding the outcome of the legislative elections,
according to a report issued by the Independent
National Electoral Commission of 7 July, the
incumbent party - the Conseil national pour la
defense de la democratic-Forces pour la defense de la
democratie - took 77 ofthe 100 seats, the Union pour le
progres national took 2, and the Amizero coalition took
21. Although this makes a total of 100 seats, in order
to adhere to the Arusha Agreement, a number of new
seats will also have to be assigned so as to balance the
parliamentary membership along gender and ethnicity
lines. We hope that Agathon Rwasa will not make the
same mistake he made in 2010 by renouncing the seats
he had obtained due to political capriciousness. That
would be a serious error for that politician to make, and
would represent total disdain for his constituents. We
count on our partners to advise him not to tilt further
towards the wrong side of history.

I take this opportunity to thank the entire
Burundian people, the territorial administration, and
the law enforcement and security forces for their joint
efforts to ensure the security of voters and voting sites
on electional day. I also thank and congratulate the
many national, regional and international observers
who remained in the hills and neighbourhoods in order
to closely follow the elections of 29 June. More than
200 regional and international observers, in addition to
those of MENUB, enjoyed national accreditation, as did
thousands of national observers. We therefore believe
that the accredited electoral observers contributed
significantly to strengthening peace and democracy in
our country.

We thank the Foreign Ministers of the Central
African Republic, the United Republic of Tanzania,
the Republic of Uganda and the Republic of Kenya,
who, through a political statement, congratulated the
Independent National Electoral Commission on having
organized and led the first communal and legislative
elections in full transparency and with exemplary
freedom, and in which all political partners were
invited to participate. The statement demonstrated that
the Burundian people did indeed want elections and
democracy.

In this regard, I would make my usual point
underscoring respect for the regional dimension. It is
difficult for us to understand the disconnect between
the perceptions inside and outside Africa regarding the
assessment of the elections in my country. In the future,
we shall have to try to reconcile the positions of New
York with that of the region. As I said, the report of
the regional observers reinforced the role of regional
actors and the importance of respect for the regional
dimension on the part of those outside the continent.

At the same time, I would be remiss were I not to
thank all the countries and international organizations
that had the courage to support the national sovereignty
and the legitimate right of the Burundian people to
democratically choose its own representatives to
various institituions, and to promote the regional
dimension here at Headquarters. The representatives
of those countries know who they are. I also deeply
thank the civil society and religious organizations
that courageously supported the elections and acted as
observers with true professionalism and neutrality. We
especially thank those the observers from the political
parties, who braved hunger and exhaustion for the
love of their country in order to monitor the elections
throughout the cycle, from beginning to end.

We further thank the countries that hosted
Burundian refugees during a media and political
onslaught that was rife with lies and rumours calling
on Burundians to flee their country. We call on those
countries to assist Burundi in the repatriation of
those refugees by showing them that peace has been
restored and that the reasons for which they fled were
not founded. My Government is of course determined
to establish conditions conducive to the return of our
compatriots who ran away on the basis of those rumours.

We take this opportunity to thank those thousands
of Burundian refugees who are returning to the country.
They were not mentioned by the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, but we believe that approximately
40,000 of them have already returned to the country.
The international community is often interested in
those who flee countries, but not in those who return.
Intellectual honesty requires me to stress the many who
have already returned.

Regarding the follow-up to the process and the
Emergency Summit of the East African Community
(EAC) held on 6 July in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, I
should like to inform the Council that we welcomed
the conclusions of the Summit. Burundi participated
actively at the Summit, during which the region's
leaders issued pertinent resolutions to find a peaceful
solution to the crisis in Burundi, which we were pleased
to welcome as a whole. We also welcome the fact that
President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni was named to guide
the inter-Burundian dialogue. Similarly, we are very
pleased that the East African Community has taken
the lead at the highest level, which serves to strengthen
coherence and a focus on regional issues in resolving
crises and differences in Africa.

The Council is not unaware that the United Nations
is well positioned to promote greater coherence among
subregional, regional, continental and international
aspects in response to the resurgence post-conflict
crises. Experience on the ground in Burundi in recent
times has proved that greater regional and subregional
coherence is a key element is supporting efforts to
resolve differences and crises. It continues to be crucial
to integrate a regional and subregional perspective in
the mediation efforts.

Many countries, including Burundi, prefer to
receive assistance and advice from neighbouring
countries and regional organizations, which know
our country, culture and political history and are
better placed to provide quite effective advice to find
appropriate solutions to the crisis in Burundi. Under the
principles of proximity and subsidiarity, the African
Union is called upon to support subregional initiatives
and once again cede the leading role to subregional
actors in the East African Community in carrying out
the dialogue.

I should like to mention that the appointment of
a presidential-level mediator and the EAC's leading
role in the inter-Burundian dialogue is in line with the
operational part of the African Union Peace and Security
Council communique adopted at its five hundred and
fifteenth meeting, wherein the Council calls on the
Chair of the African Union Commission immediately
to launch consultations for the operationalization
of international facilitation under the aegis - and I
emphasize this - of the East African Community.

With regard to the postponement of the elections
proposed by the Summit, the date of 30 July has
been put forward. While the Government welcomes
that recommendation, I would like to point out that
the provisions of the Constitution of Burundi do not
allow a postponement to that date. In line with the
Constitution, the country's President must be elected
one month prior to the end of the preceding mandate.
The term of office of the current President will end on
26 August, which means that the next President must be
elected no later than 26 July. In addition, 15 days must
be factored in for a second round of voting - that is,
between 15 and 26 July. We are quite willing to accept
a week's postponement - say, 21 or 22 July, which
would pose no problems pursuant to the Consitution.
Burundi is currently discussing this with the leaders
of the region, and I think a compromise will in fact be
achieved on the exact date for the elections.

Before concluding, let me say that we often talk
about the crisis and the political problems; but we must
also discuss the economic problems Burundi will face
in the coming months. And I would also like to mention
the immediate challenges the Government must face in
the next few days.

The first challenge is to restore confidence
among Burundians. We must continue to undertake
extraordinary efforts to bolster national unity. To that
end, the inter-Burundian dialogue will have to continue
beyond the elections. A week or two is not a long time,
and we cannot expect things to be resolved by magic.
The Government is fully prepared to do that, which is
also in line with the call made by EAC Heads of State.

In addition to national unity and the restoration
of trust among Burundians, we must also restore trust
between the Government of Burundi and various
partner countries that have taken staunch positions on
the Burundi crisis. Given the evolution of events, we
should act in line with political reality to restore trust
with our partners. The next Government will therefore
have to take steps to bring our partners together and
regain that lost trust.

We will also face the challenge of proceeding
with the disarmament programme. Disarming the
civilian population is very important. We have a major
disarmament programme in place but, given the electoral
context, it must be sped up vis-a-vis all groups. No one
group is to be singled out. We are talking about overall
disarmament of the civilian population.

We will have to strengthen the private sector in
order to generate jobs. We must find alternatives to
Violence for young people. People with jobs do not turn
to violence. Most of the young people one sees in the
street are unemployed. We must therefore also have
the support of our partners to boost the private sector,
create employment and help youth find alternatives to
violence.

The foregoing also applies to Burundi's politicians,
most of whom expect to hold on to their political posts
forever. But not everyone wins elections. We have to
start to think about how to find other employment for
politicians who lose elections, so that they can find
alternatives in the private sector rather than turning to
Violence after they leave office.

I should like to conclude with a brief comment on
something said by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights. In speaking about disarmament, I thought
he singled out a particular group - young people. I
emphasize that disarmament is about everyone. With
regard to young demonstrators throwing grenades,
they were not thrown by youth of the party in power.
Those were claimed from Nairobi, and we know who is
responsible. But I repeat, disarmament is about everyone.
Singling outjust one group is counterproductive.

