Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I have the honour to speak today on behalf of
the troika of observer States to the Lusaka Protocol -
Portugal, the Russian Federation and the United States
of America.

We are delighted to welcome Foreign Minister
Joao Bernardo de Miranda back to the Security
Council, and, through the presidential statement that
we will soon adopt, to reassure him of our collective
commitment to peace in Angola based on the Lusaka
Protocol and on the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

We are pleased also to be joined today by Under-
Secretary-General Ibrahim Gambari and look forward
to his upcoming visit to Angola later this month. As
always, Mr. Gambari's visit has our full support, and
we hope that the Government of Angola will continue
its engagement with him.

Since it has been only six weeks since we met
privately with the Minister of the Interior, Mr. Dias dos
Santos, we do not wish to repeat all of the elements of
our last troika statement. Our views on sanctions were
clearly expressed at that meeting and remain
unchanged. In this meeting, we want to focus on some
other areas.

We have always believed that there is no military
solution to the Angolan conflict and that therefore
dialogue is the only path to peace. The quest for peace
has been ongoing for much of the last decade. This
process resulted in the signing of the Bicesse Accords
and of the Lusaka Protocol, which, in our view,
continue to represent the only viable basis for long-
term peace in Angola.

Though the military wing of UNITA continues to
wage war, we believe that the political life of the
country must continue. Ordinary Angolans must always
be able to talk to each other across the political divides
within their country. Such discussions reflect the belief
that their country's suffering can be resolved only
through dialogue.

One of the new voices in Angola calling for
dialogue in the pursuit of peace is that of the growing
civil society movement within Government-controlled
areas of the country. The emergence of a dynamic civil
society movement that includes the churches is a
positive trend in Angola's development. We believe
that this should continue to be encouraged by the
Government as part of its commitment to Angola's
political evolution.

Regrettably, the development of a civil society
movement remains limited to the parts of Angola that
are controlled by the Government. In areas of the
country under UNITA's control, there has never been a
civil society movement other than UNITA. There is no
freedom of expression, no freedom of association, and
no freedom of movement. UNITA's military faction
represents one of the last holdouts of totalitarianism in
Africa.

We hear the calls for dialogue from our Angolan
friends, and we support them in this. However, just as
we believe that many things may be subject to debate
and compromise, we believe that some things are not.
A dialogue conducive to durable peace must be rooted
in the common and non-negotiable principles of the
Lusaka Protocol and focused on their implementation.

In the case of Angola, the troika believes that
these principles can be summed up in seven words:
"One country, one elected Government, one army." In
other words, the fundamental pillars of the Lusaka
Protocol must remain intact. State Administration must
be extended to all areas of the country. UNITA military
personnel must disarm and be permanently
demobilized. The option must remain open for UNITA
to enter into the political life of the country as a
political party, pursuing the aspirations of its
membership through free and honest political activity.

We continue to support the Lusaka Protocol
because we believe that these are the principles on
which ajust a lasting peace will rest.

We are often asked when the dialogue will start.
Our response remains that it will start when UNITA
renews its commitment to the fundamental principles
that its leadership accepted in the Bicesse Accords and
the Lusaka Protocol. When that is done, the road ahead
will be clear.

In the meantime, the political life of the country
must progress. No faction or individual can ever be
given veto rights over the future of Angola. Above all
else remains the principle that defines our policy and
dictates our actions: that the democratic process is the
only path to political power in Angola.

