Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first of all like to welcome and thank you, Sir, for
presiding over today's important debate. I welcome
the commitment of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Senegal to participating in the debate and in making a
statement.

The Middle East region has become a theatre
in which military conflicts have become the norm,
with an increase in hotbeds of tension and the growth
in number of strongholds of non-State groups. The
question of Palestine is the only item that remains on
the agenda of the Security Council 70 years after being
first taken up in 1946. The international community
ignores the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people,
thereby fuelling terrorism and extremism, promoting
the recruitment of young people and destroying
their future. We are seeing these phenomena spread
throughout the Arab world and beyond, in the form of
the presence of foreign terrorist fighters.

We recall once again the importance of not
allowing the international community's attention, and
particularly the Security Council's, to be distracted;
we must shoulder our responsibilities to the Palestinian
cause, the occupied Syrian Golan and other crises in the
region. Egypt calls on the international community and
the Security Council to concentrate on the agenda item
covering the Middle East and the Israeli occupation.

Twenty years have gone by since the agreement that
should have led, five years later, to the establishment of
a Palestinian State based on the 4 June 1967 borders,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. Over the past
15 years, we have only seen an expansion of settlement
activities, the Judaization of the Palestinian capital,
violations of holy sites, the dislocation of Palestinian
territories and the creation of the wall of separation
on which the International Court of Justice has issued
the advisory opinion. Twenty years have gone by and,
instead of working to help the Palestinian people enjoy
their inalienable rights, some have decided to use the
issues of land and the Palestinian cause for other ends.
International calls to put an end to the occupation have
gone unheeded, as have efforts to improve the situation
of Palestinians living under occupation.

Some have even gone further, casting doubt on
the role, independence, neutrality and legitimacy of
this international Organization. They have benefited
from the destruction wrought by Israel as a pretext to
criticize resolutions of international legitimacy and the
role of the international Organization and its bodies,
as if United Nations resolutions that uphold rights
were the very ones impeding a peaceful solution of the
crisis and as if international legitimacy were supposed
to apologize for the occupying Power. This is an
unprecedented and messy situation and a disgrace to
the international community. The United Nations, with
all of its bodies, must remain the only guarantor of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people until they
recover the rights that they have been stripped of.

Egypt reaffirms that the parameters for the peaceful
settlement of the conflict are clear. The claims of the
Palestinian people to their unquestionable legitimacy
are also clear. Palestinians and Arab States accepted the
two-State solution and, in 2002, presented the historic
Arab Peace Initiative to address the situation. Having
historically rejected it, they accepted the normalization
of relations with Israel as long as a lasting solution would
be found. However, the Initiative has not been taken up.
We reiterate once again our commitment to the Arab
Peace Initiative and its clear parameters, which are in
line with resolutions of international law and take into
account the right of Israel to exist in security.

We remain baffled about a core question that is
repeated often in the international community: what
does Israel really want, and on what moral and political
basis? Certain Powers stand with Israel, and there has
been no answer to this question. Egypt believes that the
two-State solution is not a slogan to shore up political
aims. It is, instead, a necessity to achieving peace and
coexistence among the peoples of the region. We cannot
systematically weaken the Palestinian peace partners or
refuse invitations to negotiations or expand settlements
or seize Palestinian lands. According to statistics, 70 per
cent of Area C, which is more than 60 per cent of the
Palestinian territory, has been annexed by Israel. Israeli
practices are not constructive. There are questions as
to the chances of success for the peace process and its
future, the equality of the rights of Palestinians and of
Israelis and the possibility that Israel could become an
apartheid country.

The Security Council must uphold its responsibilities
with regard to this situation. The Council has adopted
various politically expedient positions to justify
not being able to put an end to the occupation or its
expansion. This is unfortunate. Even if the Security
Council were to adopt real policies and continued to
follow the question, the situation on the ground will
not wait for political compromises. The expansion
of settlements and the dispersion of the Palestinian
people and the seizure of their land will continue to
impose a new state ofpeace. There is no accountability,
while expressions of condemnation and rejection have
gone unheeded, The solution for peace is becoming
increasingly remote, owing to an aggressive policy
without any humanity in the framework of our
commitment to a peaceful solution and the principle of
land for peace, as well as the Arab Peace Initiative.

Given the absence of solutions, the ongoing
suffering of the Palestinian people and the seizure
of land and attacks on holy sites for Muslims and
Christians, we reiterate that we will work with our
partners in the Security Council to safeguard the two-
State solution and provide the Palestinian people with
international protection, particularly in light of the
study prepared by the Secretary-General.

