The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing.

History's verdict on the conflict in Syria is not
yet written. There have been plenty of missteps,
miscalculations and willful negligence throughout the
course of the war. There has been evil, there has been
honour and many things in between. I would say that
it should be cause for deep shame on the part of those
members of the Council that have fought relentlessly
to shield the Al-Assad regime from accountability.
Instead, those members have made a clear display of
their cynicism, their penchant for brutality and their
lack of capacity for shame.

Still the competition for how the Syrian war will be
remembered - as an example of humanity at its worst
or at its best - goes on. Today's meeting is devoted to
chemical weapons, but we should make no mistake - an
Al-Assad regime offensive on Idlib would be a reckless
escalation even if chemical weapons were not used. It
is up to Russia to keep this from happening, and we
will discuss the humanitarian consequences of the Idlib
offensive in greater detail tomorrow. In the meantime,
the Russian Federation has recently been building up
its naval forces off the coast of Syria, signaling that
Moscow is pre-positioning itself once again to abet the
murder and mayhem of the Al-Assad regime. As on
numerous occasions in the past, there are signs that the
Assad regime is planning to use chemical weapons to
finish off the siege of Idlib.

As in the past, the Syrian regime and its Russian
and Iranian allies are spreading lies about who is behind
chemical weapons attacks in Syria. Their claims are
baseless. They are the definition of fake news. In fact,
ifthe past is any guide, the Syrian and Russian attempts
to blame others for the use of chemical agents are an
indication that the Syrian regime still believes that it
can use these horrific weapons with impunity, and an
indication that the Syrian regime may be preparing
to use these horrific weapons in future attacks. No
one - I repeat - no one is fooled.

Here are the terrible facts of the war in Syria.
Five years ago, the Al-Assad regime launched missiles
containing a cocktail of deadly gas at the people of
Ghouta, killing 1,429 people. On 4 April 2017, the
Al-Assad regime dropped sarin gas from the sky on
the people of Khan Shaykhun. The attack killed over
70 innocent Syrians, including dozens of children. An
independent investigative group, the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), found the
Al-Assad regime responsible for the attack. The fact
that the Russians later succeeded in killing the JIM
does not change its conclusions. Their findings were
credible and definitive. Al-Assad killed his own people
with chemical weapons at Khan Shaykhun.
Then, in April 2018, over 40 people died
and hundreds received treatment for exposure to
chemical weapons in Douma. In all, the United States
estimates, conservatively, that the Al-Assad regime
has used chemical weapons on its own people at least
50 times since the war began. That amounts easily,
conservatively, to 1,500 innocent children, women
and men killed by the Syrian regime with chemical
weapons - 1,500 murders covered up by the Russian
regime and 1,500 reasons to disbelieve the claims that
others are responsible for the atrocities.

As these ridiculous claims are repeated again and
again, I ask everyone listening to remember that the
Syrians' and Russians' lies do not exonerate them.
The Syrians" and Russians' lies only reveal Al-Assad's
guilt. The United States will not stop pushing back
forcefully against these lies. We will not abandon the
Syrian people.

Along with France, the United States has announced
new sanctions against individuals and entities that
support Al-Assad's chemical and conventional
weapons programme. In June, the special sssion of
the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention decided that the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons should identify
the perpetrators of chemical attacks in Syria. Even
though the United States believes that the primary
responsibility for addressing the use of chemical
weapons belongs to the Security Council, we welcome
this decision. Anything that brings us closer to bringing
the Al-Assad regime to account for its crimes enhances
the security not just of the Syrian people but of us all.

In referencing accountability, we have a message
for the Al-Assad regime and anyone contemplating
using chemical weapons in Syria. In the past, 18 months
I have spoken in this Chamber twice promising that the
United States would respond to the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. Both times, my Administration
followed through. The United States and its allies
forced the Al-Assad regime to pay the price for its
crimes. We therefore want to take this opportunity to
remind Al-Assad and his Russian and Iranian partners
that they do not want to bet against the United States
responding again.

The story of the war in Syria is still being written.
There is still time for those who believe in human
dignity to shape history. There is still time for the
nations of the world to come to their aid. And there is
still time for those who would commit additional acts of
human savagery to reconsider their actions. The choice
is theirs and it will dictate our response in the time and
the manner of our choosing.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

