Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala voted in favor of resolution 2098 (2013), just
adopted. We did so in part owing to our unwavering
commitment to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO), in which Guatemala has
participated since March 2005. We were moved to do
also out of respect and admiration for the diplomatic
work undertaken by the Secretary-General, as well as
for the leadership of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, the African Union and the
Southern African Development Community, all of
which gave rise to the Framework for Peace, Security
and Cooperation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region.

Nevertheless, we wish to place on record some of
our concerns - concerns that caused us to waver in
joining the consensus and that have not yet been fully
dissipated - with regard to the resolution just adopted.
There are three concerns.

First, we still have serious difficulties in
terms of the involvement of the United Nations in
peace-enforcement activities, as such activities may
compromise the neutrality and impartiality that we
deem so essential to the Organization's peacekeeping
activities. As a matter of principle, we believe that,
when domestic armed groups challenge the host-
country State, the United Nations mission must offer its
good offices, mediate and even take a proactive stance
in resolving the dispute. But its presence should be
perceived by all parties as that of an honest broker, not
a potential party to the conflict.

In this instance, we understood the reasons for and
the logic behind the Secretary-General's proposal to
deploy a dedicated specialized Intervention Brigade
to be established within MONUSCO. We would have
preferred, however, that the Brigade, mandated with
offensive capabilities, be defined as a self-contained unit
with specific responsibilities, clearly distinguishable
from the mandates of the other MONUSCO brigades,
which would then be entrusted with the more
conventional duties of robust peacekeeping operations,
including the protection of civilians.

We are concerned that the entire MONUSCO runs
the risk of indirectly becoming a peace enforcement
mission. That would raise many conceptual, operational
and legal considerations that, in our view, have not
been adequately explored in the course of negotiating
the text. We trust that we will have the opportunity to
undertake that in-depth analysis in the future with all
the actors involved, including, of course, the troop-
contributing countries.

That brings me to our second concern, which
is more procedural in nature. The resolution is very
complex, and we feel that not enough time was devoted
to properly considering all its various angles. While a
sense of urgency is understandable given the changing
situation on the ground, we feel that Council members
should have had more time to express and resolve their
concerns.

Our third concern is related to the broad public
support that peacekeeping has enjoyed to date among
Guatemalan public opinion, which is something that we
greatly value. In that context, it should be recalled that
it is little more than seven years since our country lost
eight MONUSCO personnel in Garamba National Park
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo while they
were implementing its mandate. We could have expected
an outcry from the Guatemalan people, questioning
why our troops had to sacrifice their lives in such a far-
off country that is virtually unknown to our citizens.
But that did not happen. Our people understood that
peacekeeping is a noble activity wherever it takes place
and that, by contributing to peacekeeping, Guatemala
was making a contribution to all humankind. However,
we are not sure that our country would be similarly
understanding were more of our soldiers to make the
ultimate sacrifice combating insurgents in a distant
country while trying to undertake a role that clearly
falls to the national army of that country. That is why
we insist that we wish to separate, as far as possible, the
mandate of the Intervention Brigade and the activities
appropriate to a robust United Nations peacekeeping
mission.

In conclusion, we wish to thank our colleagues in
the Security Council for having adequately taken into
account the concerns that I have mentioned to make our
vote in favour possible today.

