Mr. Dinh (Viet Nam): My delegation wishes to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
quarterly open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. I also thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his informative briefing
and continuous efforts.

Peace cannot be sustained in the Middle East unless
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is resolved. For over half
a century, the international community, and the Security
Council in particular, have been making tireless efforts
to address the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. However,
hope for achieving a just and viable peace process
through meaningful dialogue and negotiation is waning
during a period in which provocations, violence, the
demolition and seizure of Palestinian structures, the
injury and killing of children and innocent civilians
and the implementation of unilateral actions occur
every single day.

According to the Protection of Civilians Report for
1 to 14 October 2019 of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, during the
first half of October one Palestinian was shot dead and
261 Palestinians, including 127 children, were injured
by Israeli forces in protests in Gaza; while another
37 Palestinians, including 2 children, were injured in
protests in the West Bank. We also note with great
concern that the Israeli authorities continue to demolish
or force people to demolish Palestinian structures in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem. It is very worrisome
that the movement of people and commodities in the
occupied Palestinian territory is still restricted when
the economic and humanitarian situation in Gaza
is worsening.

There is an urgent need to act and make many more
efforts to avoid further deterioration of the situation on
the ground. In such an alarming and critical situation, I
would like to stress the following three points.

First, tension on the ground must be de-escalated;
that is the first step towards creating an environment
conducive to dialogue and negotiation. We condemn all
attacks on Palestinian and Israeli civilians, including
firing on Palestinian demonstrators and rocket launches
into Israel. We therefore urge all concerned parties to
strictly comply with international law, refrain from
all acts of provocation or violence and end attacks on
Palestinian and Israeli civilians. We also commend and
encourage all Palestinian efforts, as well as initiatives
of the United Nations and its Member States, aimed at
fostering unity among the Palestinian people in their
national quest for an independent and prosperous State.

Secondly, illegal occupation is the root cause
of the conflict and illegal settlement constitutes the
biggest obstacle to the peace process. Negotiations are
impossible in the context of ongoing construction of
illegal settlements. We call on Israel to immediately
cease all its settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory and fulfil its obligations pursuant
to resolution 2334 (2016).

Thirdly, we call on Israel to lift its restrictions on
the movement of people in the occupied Palestinian
territory and urge all parties concerned to take more
action to improve the living conditions of the Palestinian
people in Gaza. We reiterate our full support for the
mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

In conclusion, Viet Nam reaffirms its unwavering
support for the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian
people for their inalienable rights, including their
rights to self-determination and establishment of an
independent and sovereign State. We firmly believe
that the only viable solution is to establish a Palestinian
State on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, living side
by side with the Israeli State in peace, security and
mutual recognition.

