Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Russia is deeply concerned about the scale
of the humanitarian crisis in Iraq, with its very serious
consequences. The Secretary-General's report to the

 

Council contains an exhaustive picture of the truly
disastrous situation of broad sectors of the Iraqi people. The
present food ration for the Iraqis is still inadequate. The
problem of chronic malnutrition persists. United Nations
observers note a serious deterioration in the health
infrastructure and a continuing shortage of basic medicines
and medical equipment, all of which lead to an increase in
the mortality rate, particularly among children, and there is
a growing threat of epidemics.

In referring to the reasons for inadequate supplies of
humanitarian goods, we should not evade the question of
the blocking of contracts in the sanctions Committee. The
blocking of humanitarian applications, particularly in the
early stages of the implementation of the "humanitarian
resolution", led to months of delay and the destabilization
of the whole dynamics of the delivery of basic supplies,
including the most necessary medicines. An overwhelming
proportion of the goods provided for under resolution 1111
(1997) have still not reached Iraq, to say nothing about the
question of distributing them among the people.

One strong element of the Secretary-General's report
is the comprehensive approach he takes to the problems of
food and health. It is unthinkable that we can solve those
problems if parallel measures are not taken with regard to
electricity and water supplies and to agriculture. The
quantity and range of the spare parts and equipment
supplied are insufficient to provide the population with
drinking water, and there is a continuing drop in the
production of electricity, which undermines the real value
of the humanitarian inputs.

We fully support the approach reflected in the
Secretary-General's report aimed at increasing revenues in
order to meet the priority humanitarian needs of Iraq.
Together with other members of the Security Council, we
welcome the leadership shown by the Secretary-General in
addressing the issue of overcoming the humanitarian crisis
in Iraq. The establishment of the Office of the Iraq
Programme will help in this effort.

The intensive consultations held over the past two
days led to substantive discussions about ways of
implementing the oil-for-humanitarian goods formula.
Proposals were made by, inter alia, my own delegation
which, in one way or another, were finally reflected in the
draft resolution. In particular, the draft resolution states that
the present distribution plan will continue to apply to
foodstuffs, medicine and health supplies, pending the
Secretary-General's approval of a new plan, to be submitted
by Iraq within a month. This would ensure that there would
be no interruption in the process of providing
humanitarian supplies to Iraq.

In general, we start from the premise that the
decision we are going to take today is interim in nature.
It is a kind of prelude to a thorough review in the
Security Council of the main issues relating to the
implementation of the oil-for-humanitarian goods formula.
Such a review will take place within the context of the
consideration of the supplementary report to be submitted
by the Secretary-General in January 1998, with
recommendations about specific ways of improving the
implementation of the humanitarian programme and
allocating additional funds for this purpose.

Russia believes that the amount of oil exports must
be increased to some $4 billion per six-month period.
This is the only way to provide adequate financing for
humanitarian purchases. Of course, this will make sense
only if the practice of blocking humanitarian contracts in
the sanctions Committee is ended. There has long been a
need to rescind the so-called interim quota of $1 billion
per quarter, which applies to oil exports from Iraq. It is
an artificial limitation that has already led to serious
complications in the implementation of resolution 1111
(1997). In this connection, the draft resolution contains an
important provision, which expresses the Council's
willingness, in the light of the Secretary-General's
supplementary report, to change the time-frame and to
consider the possibility of additional resources. In this
context, we should also return to the question of the
interim three-month quotas.

We would have preferred the draft resolution to be
stronger and for other ideas, expressed by many
delegations, to be reflected in it. However, as it stands it
represents a step forward, and on the whole it meets the
need for the continuation of the humanitarian programme.
Accordingly, and taking account of its interim nature, the
Russian delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

