Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): It is indeed
remarkable that the Council's last substantive meeting
this year is being devoted to the situation in Angola. It
is important that the Security Council continue to stay
genuinely engaged in the situation in that country and
to follow closely the progress in the peace process.

It is a pleasure to see the Secretary-General
among us, participating in today's meeting.

My delegation is grateful to Under-Secretary-
General Ibrahim Gambari for his extremely interesting
and informative briefing on the recent visit to Luanda
and for his comprehensive analysis of developments on
the ground. We see a lot of optimism in Mr. Gambari's
presentation today and I wish to hail his efforts in
trying to advance the peaceful settlement of the
quarter-century-old conflict that continues to ravage
Angola and to bring suffering to the people of the
country.

The recent decision of the Government of Angola
to request the churches to act as intermediaries between
the Government and Savimbi-led UNITA is an
important step towards the resumption of dialogue and
the revitalization of the peace process in the country.
My delegation wishes to underline, as we have on
previous occasions, that a negotiated settlement of the
conflict remains the only viable alternative to the
prospect of another long decade of guerrilla warfare.
We would like to express our strong conviction that the
resumption of dialogue with UNITA should be based
on the principles of the Lusaka Protocol and aimed at
its implementation, not at its renegotiation.

In this situation, it is important that the
international community and the United Nations
maintain the pressure on UNITA, urging it, including
through a consistent sanctions policy and other means,
to remain engaged in the dialogue with the Government
of Angola. Mr. Savimbi must show his commitment to
a peaceful settlement and give up his policy of
continuing the terror campaign. UNITA's sustained
military activity is unacceptable and gives the lie to its
repeated declarations that it seeks a peaceful resolution
of the conflict.
We are most satisfied to see the increasing role of
civil society in the political life of Angola. Recent
events have clearly demonstrated the enormous
potential of this movement, not only in the
advancement of the peace process, but also in the
building of a democratic and stable future for the
country. I wish to emphasize in this connection the
importance of the steps taken by the Government of
Angola in the past months and years, aimed at
promoting the democratisation process, the rule of law
and the protection of human rights. This has had a most
positive impact on the strengthening of civil society as
an indispensable part of the democratic institutions of
the country. We also welcome other forward-looking
measures taken by the Government, which have
become a valuable contribution to peace and
reconciliation in Angola.

Real success will be difficult to achieve without a
steady improvement in relations between the
Government of Angola and the United Nations and the
strengthening of an atmosphere of trust. We urge the
Secretary-General and his Special Adviser on Africa to
continue playing an active role in the search for peace
and reconciliation in Angola. In this connection, I
would like to ask Mr. Gambari what the next steps will
be in the resumed process of dialogue between the
Government and UNITA. Does he see any new role for
the United Nations if this dialogue continues - and
continues successfully?

Finally, I wish to use this opportunity to reaffirm
Ukraine's strong support for the peace process in
Angola. We will continue to do our utmost to
contribute to achieving this goal and will work together
with the Security Council and the Government of
Angola on this path.

