Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and to convey our appreciation to your
predecessor, Ambassador Emyr Jones Parry.

As members of the Council know, Israeli
warplanes attacked a site north of Damascus, the
capital of sisterly Syria. There is no doubt whatsoever
that this marks new Israeli aggression against the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. It is a
violation of the Charter of the United Nations and the
norms of international law. In the course of this action
against Syria, Israel also violated Lebanese air
space- which constitutes aggression against yet
another Arab country.

Today's action may be added to the long list of
acts of Israeli military aggression against many Arab
countries, and confirms Israel's determination to use
aggression and force and to violate international law.
We vigorously deplore and condemn this most recent
Israeli aggression against Syria and call upon the
Security Council to join in vigorously condemning it.
We call upon the Council to demand that Israel cease
such acts of aggression and such violations of
international law, as set out in the Arab draft resolution
that has been placed before the Council.

The Israeli aggression threatens to extend the
cycle of confrontation to the entire Middle East, adding
to the great dangers that we already face in that region.
We speak today as the victims of systematized Israeli
aggression and of the bloody Israeli campaign against
us of the past three years, including repeated war
crimes. We are victims of settler colonization,
expansionist policies and the denial of our national
right to an independent Palestinian State with its
capital in East Jerusalem.

Despite long years of colonization, we take the
position of responsibility in standing against all illegal
acts undertaken from our occupied territories against
civilians in Israel. On that basis, the Palestinian
leadership condemned the suicide bombing that took
place yesterday in the city of Haifa and called for the
full and immediate cessation of such acts.

On the other side, Israel must admit that such acts
are the consequences of colonization and of its policies
and actions, and not vice-versa. Israel must also stop
linking its dirty acts to the international community's
struggle against terrorism. Israel must also cease its
illegal campaigns, including its building of a wall
around our country; its threatening the life of the
Palestinian leader, elected by the Palestinian people;
and its intimidation of Arab countries, including
sisterly Syria.

