Mrs. Rodriguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful to China for holding this open debate
on such an important topic.

We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

We believe that, in confronting global challenges
and threats, it is imperative to preserve and promote
multilateralism, especially by strengthening the central
role of the United Nations and promoting international
cooperation. In that regard, Cuba reiterates its firm
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, which form the basis of
multilateralism and of the international system that we
have built within the framework of the Organization.
The principles of international law enshrined in the
Charter 4 namely, sovereign equality among States;
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of States; non-intervention in
matters under States' domestic jurisdiction; refraining
from the threat of the use or use of force; and the
peaceful settlement of disputes 4 must continue to be
the basic foundation of international law and should
guide the actions of States and international relations
at all times.

Attempts to impose domestic policies; enact and
apply extraterritorial laws, such as the economic,
commercial and financial blockade imposed by
the United States on Cuba for almost 60 years in
contravention of international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and 27 General Assembly resolutions;
the vulgar manipulation, politicization and double
standards concerning matters of global importance,
including human rights, by the Government of the
United States and its pressure, reprisals, sanctions
and financial blackmail against the United Nations,
are an attack on multilateralism and pose enormous
challenges and threats to the peaceful norms governing
the coexistence of States. Disregarding previously
agreed international commitments and obligations,
such as the withdrawal of the United States from
international agreements of enormous consequence for
addressing global phenomena, such as climate change,
for example, only demonstrates a profound disrespect
for international norms and puts the equilibrium, well-
being and security of our planet in jeopardy.

We reject in the strongest terms this morning's
statement by the Permanent Representative of the
United States in this Chamber against the Government
and the people of Cuba. The Government of the United
States does not have even slightest moral authority
to criticize Cuba or any other entity in the area of
human rights. We recall that Cuba is a State party to
44 international human rights instruments, while the
United States is a State party to only 18. It does not
respect the right to life, peace, development, security
or food security, nor does it recognize the rights
of children. It flagrantly violates the human rights
of its own citizens, especially African-Americans,
Hispanics, minorities, refugees and migrants, whom
it jails in cages, including children. It has carried
out extrajudicial executions, kidnapping and torture,
including in the prison of Naval Station Guantanamo
Bay, which illegally occupies our territory. We all know
that the United States Government is responsible for
crimes against humanity. It used nuclear weapons on a
civilian population. It established military dictatorships
in Latin America, organized bloody coups d'etat and
intervened unscrupulously in the electoral processes
and internal affairs in the majority of States of the
world. Certainly, none of that honours multilateralism.

In a global environment characterized by
increasing threats to international peace and security;
unconventional wars; gross Violations of States'
sovereignty; policies of domination through the use of
force; attempts to re-impose a unipolar order; breaches
of international law; the ominous and arbitrary breaking
of international treaties; the proliferation of unilateral
sanctions and trade wars, the only possible response
is to preserve and revalidate multilateralism, based
on strict respect for the principles of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations. To that end, the
reform of the United Nations aimed at achieving a truly
democratic and participatory Organization - with
a transparent and democratized Security Council
and a revitalized General Assembly 4 is imperative.
Cuba reiterates its unshakeable commitment to
continue working together with the United Nations
and its Member States towards the establishment of a
democratic and just international order that responds
to the demand for peace, development and justice of
peoples throughout the world and that guarantees the
preservation and strengthening of multilateralism.

