Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to express
its gratitude for the work of the delegation of the United
Kingdom in drafting of resolution 2444 (2018), which
we just adopted unanimously. We also welcome the
representatives of Djibouti, Eritrea and Somalia to this
very important Security Council meeting.

Bolivia has been closely following the development
of the events in the Horn of Africa. We reiterate our
appreciation of the new approach of understanding
and liaising undertaken by the countries of the
subregion, which is beginning a renewed phase of
peace and friendship that we are confident will promote
cooperation in fundamental areas such as the economy,
social and cultural affairs and, of course, security. In
this regard, we believe that the progress made to date in
the region must be reflected through commitments to
confidence-building measures among States. We also
believe that the important developments occurring in the
Horn of Africa highlight the importance of leadership
and the primacy of policy, as well as the need for dialogue
and the support of the international community.

My delegation has reiterated on many occasions
that sanctions are not an end in themselves. The Charter
of the United Nations sanctions should be assessed in
the light of the evolving situation and the context on the
ground. This was a special case in which the necessity
of lifting sanctions was, of course, imperative.

With regard to the situation in Somalia, my
delegation also categorically condemns the recent
terrorist attack that took place in Mogadishu. We
express our concern about the risks that come with the
continued presence ofAl-Shabaab in Somalia and in the
subregion, in addition to the threat posed by the presence
of factions of Da'esh, the use of sophisticated techniques
and asymmetric attacks. In that regard, we believe that
the Council and the international community in general
must continue to support an inclusive political process
ofpeace and reconciliation that is guided and owned by
the Somali people themselves.

