Mr. Taula (New Zealand): New Zealand very much
appreciates the initiative in proposing this debate. So
often Council members have to respond to immediate
crises. There are too few opportunities to step back
and view the wider picture and even rarer is the chance
to look at the historical factors that shape the present
security environment. Yet we all know that those who
ignore history tend to repeat it.

It is timely that this debate occurs in the year when
we will reflect on the commencement not only of the
First World War but also of the genocide in Rwanda. In
1993, perhaps if Council members had reflected more
on the history of Rwanda, they might have been better
prepared to recognize and deal with the underlying
tensions and so prevent the crisis and the tragic
collective failure to respond that followed in 1994.

However, learning from history should not be
limited to absorbing lessons from past decades. There is
much to learn also from recent history. Lessons learned
from the delayed action over the crisis in Mali should
have better informed Council action on the situation in
the Central African Republic.
Past conflict is tragically an all too common
indicator of future conflict. Many thematic debates in
the Security Council in recent years have underlined the
importance of the Council's role in conflict prevention
and peaceful resolution but that thematic narrative is
often poorly implemented. The Security Council has
developed many tools for Chapter VII action but is much
less well adapted for peaceful action under Chapter VI.
Adapting the Council's work to that end is vital.

New Zealand urges the Council to employ more
flexible working methods so that it can be more nimble
in its consideration of situations that present the risk of
conflict and more inclusive in terms of participation.
Whatever the format, the time needs to be made so
that Council members and those that are affected or
that can help are better able to assess where threats to
international peace and security are emerging and what
early response might help.

Addressing the historical roots that lead to conflict
is not just a way of quickly identifying a potential
problem. It is also critical to devising solutions that
will be sustainable. A key element in enduring peace
is national reconciliation. It is therefore most welcome
that you, Mr. President, have brought reconciliation
processes into focus today.

New Zealand recognizes that in the past the Council
has frequently affirmed the importance of national
reconciliation but all too often that aspect is missing in
mandates. We therefore warmly welcome the innovative
suggestions made by Jordan and are supportive of the
Council developing appropriate mechanisms.

Like all Council tools, such mechanisms must
be tailored to national needs and circumstances. In
our Pacific region, in recent years, New Zealand
and our regional partners helped to provide a secure
environment in Solomon Islands to enable the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission to investigate the causes
of conflict there in order to foster national unity. That
process recognized the importance of local ownership.

The Council should make more use of reconciliation
processes. The Peacebuilding Commission and the
Council's Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa could play a helpful role by
cooperating closely. They could help the Council to
understand the particular historical risk factors that
point to conflict and to support local development of
reconciliation mechanisms to address the factors that
underpin tensions and division.

New Zealand looks forward to further follow-up
work in understanding what history can contribute
to the Council's work both in identifying the risk of
conflict and in avoiding it in future.

