Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this debate,
which, as the Ambassador of Singapore has said,
allows us to check where we stand in the
implementation of one of our resolutions, which
actually is our roadmap, as it was adopted by the heads
of State themselves. It was good to hear this morning
the views of the Ambassadors of non-members States
of the Council regarding our work. Sweden spoke on
behalf of the European Union and made a wide-ranging
statement. As you had asked, Sir, I would like to
respond to this morning's statements, as well as to
those made this afternoon, in the spirit of an interactive
debate, which is often lacking in our work.

I shall refer to five comments that were made in
the context of this debate. The first comment relates to
the effectiveness of Security Council decisions. This
morning Mr. Kofi Annan emphasized that adopting
resolutions is fine, but it is even better to implement
them in the field. This morning several countries
addressed this point insistently: Argentina, Algeria,
Pakistan and Croatia. Political will to implement
resolutions is vital.
This is a real message being sent to the 15
members of the Council. But by definition it is also
being sent to the entire international community, since
the implementation of resolutions often goes beyond
the 15 members of the Security Council. I am thinking
particularly about the parties to a conflict themselves.
They are the ones who are first called on to implement
Security Council resolutions. There is a message here:
from near or far, we are all involved in the
implementation of resolutions we adopt in this
Chamber, beginning with the parties to a conflict, to
which most of the resolutions are addressed.

My second comment relates to the role of
regional organizations. This is a difficult issue, but I
think the Security Council has made progress in this
regard. Several delegations-Canada, Sweden on
behalf of the European Union, and Argentina-
addressed that issue at great length this morning. They
emphasized the importance they attach to this
cooperation between the Council and regional
organizations. I think I can safely say that, in this
Chamber, Council members feel exactly the same
desire to work with the regional organizations on an
ever-increasing basis. The truth is, that is what we are
doing.

Yesterday - and I think this was a first since the
United Nations was established-we heard the
Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), because that organization is
responsible for the Kosovo Force. Earlier, in January,
we heard the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Romania
on behalf of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe. As to Africa, we have hosted
the ministers of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) with increasing frequency,
last month under the presidency of Tunisia and in June
under the French presidency. In February and June, we
hosted ministers from Central Africa, members of the
Political Committee of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, who came to discuss the crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I therefore believe that cooperation exists. The
problem is how to implement it in a satisfactory
manner. I think that there are two difficulties in this
respect. First, regional organizations themselves -or,
even more frequently, subregional organizations, which
are just beginning to emerge and do not always have
the necessary cohesion, much less the means to
implement their decisions -turn to the Security
Council for that purpose. However, we have problems
when the Security Council is not involved early on in
the preparation of such decisions, because we are
sometimes assigned missions in which the Council
does not wish to become involved. For instance, the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement calls upon us to disarm
the negative forces - the Interahamwe and the former
Rwandan Armed Forces. I think there is a unanimous
belief among its members that the Council cannot
perform that function. Dialogue is good, but it must
occur at a very early phase when a regional or
subregional organization may later wish the Council to
assume a mandate or undertake a mission.

The other difficulty is finding the proper balance
between the respect that the Council owes to
subregional and regional organizations that wish to do
their work for peace and the primary responsibility of
the Security Council. It seems to me that the resolution
that we adopted this morning on the crisis in West
Africa and the role of Liberia demonstrates that, after
many days of sometimes painful but ultimately
productive dialogue, we achieved consensus, not only
among the 15 members of the Council, but also
between the Council and ECOWAS. This morning's
resolution is a good example of persistent and
ultimately constructive dialogue between the Security
Council and a subregional organization.

My third comment relates to criticism addressed
to the Security Council by several speakers this
morning regarding its pusillanimity. We are not bold or
courageous enough; we could do more. The
Ambassador of Singapore said this with his customary
eloquence. We can all think of many instances when
we should have done more or better. This may be true,
but we must ask ourselves what we want to do.

I would respond to the Ambassador of
Singapore's reference to figures. Currently, there are
45,000 personnel from the Atlantic Alliance in Kosovo,
which contains some 5 per cent of the territory and no
more than 10 per cent of the population of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. His implicit
question was whether the Security Council is ready to
send 500,000 people to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. To put the question in these terms shows that, if
we are being logical, we cannot send the same mission
to the Congo that we have assigned to NATO
leadership in Kosovo. There, we are imposing peace
with the necessary means to do so. As to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, it was decided after
a lengthy debate that we would abide by the will of the
parties themselves and observe their disengagement
and withdrawal. Each crisis must be judged in the light
of what it represents and of the ways and means that
the Council can realistically hope to put together.
Here, we need to go above and beyond the Council and
turn to the Members of the Organization. How many
people can we assemble to go to the Congo or to Sierra
Leone?

This leads me to my fourth comment on
peacekeeping operations themselves. We have the
guidelines from our heads of State, as well as the
Brahimi report, which we would like to implement in
its entirety. In this respect, I wish to return in greater
detail to the subject of the Congo and the
United Nations Organization Mission there, because
several representatives who spoke this morning asked
whether we were right or not. The Ambassador of
Singapore rephrased the question. Since we discussed
this just before the adoption of resolution 1341 (2001),
I think we might enlighten our colleagues outside the
Council. There was a genuine discussion as we
wondered whether or not to go in. We said yes, we can
go; in any case, we must go. Once again, the mandate
we have given the Mission is not to impose peace -
we are not able to do that-but to monitor the
implementation of the Agreement that the parties
themselves have signed and claim to wish to
implement.

If our task is indeed to monitor the
implementation of a disengagement agreement, there
are sufficient means to do so. In that first phase, we
were to assist a dynamic for peace, to the existence of
which the ministers who came to New York attested.
That, however, is only the initial phase, which must be
followed by others, including the genuine withdrawal
to the borders of all foreign forces. In involving
ourselves in that second phase, we will need to review
the mandate and the necessary means to fulfil it. That
is the task that awaits us when we visit the region in
mid-May.

The true message to peacekeeping operations is
the partnership that we commit ourselves to entering
into with the parties to a conflict themselves. Here, we
must make the international community as a whole
understand that this is a sealed agreement and that
when it is violated, as it was in Sierra Leone, the
Security Council has to act and do its utmost. That is
what we did this morning.

My fifth and last comment refers to sanctions, the
necessary complement. Between words and weapons,
we have sanctions. Sanctions were criticized by some
this morning and France itself has some reservations
about them. Above and beyond our questions, we must
acknowledge the fact that our Council has made great
progress in recent months in preparing a truly new,
sharper and better targeted doctrine that can gradually
be put into effect. In all the resolutions on
Ethiopia/Eritrea, Sierra Leone, Afghanistan and, this
morning, on Liberia, we have progressively improved
the targeting of the sanctions, not against the
population but against the principal leaders.

Secondly, we have increasingly established clear
objectives and clear, verifiable criteria for the lifting of
sanctions.

Thirdly, we take care to make prior assessments
of the humanitarian impact of sanctions on a
population. This is a real step forward.

Fourthly, I think I can say that four times out of
four in recent months we have adopted time-bound
sanctions. That is not a sign of weakness, but of the
Council's willingness to re-evaluate the situation and to
consider whether and how we should continue at the
end of the one-year period. I believe this is progress.

Finally, our sanctions serve more as incentives
than as punishment. The aim is to induce those targeted
to redress their behaviour and to return to stricter
respect for international law.

For all these reasons, France considers that we
need a modest permanent monitoring mechanism, and
we appeal for the establishment of such a mechanism.

I would like to say in conclusion that this debate
is useful because it allows us to reflect interactively on
what we are doing and helps us understand that there is
still a long road to travel. It is for the Ambassador of
Singapore to say this, with his sharp-edged lucidity, but
France would also like to take the liberty of saying that
we have already travelled some of that road.

