Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
expressing our deep appreciation to Joint Special
Representative for Darfur Mamabolo for his
comprehensive briefing on the quarterly report of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2018/912).

Like previous speakers, we are encouraged
by the continuing improvement in the security
situation in Darfur, as well as the overall reduction
in intercommunal clashes, criminal activities and
human rights incidents. The ongoing arms-collection
campaign and the deployment of Government security
forces have contributed to improved security conditions
and consolidated the Government's authority in Darfur.
Kazakhstan welcomes Khartoum's commitment to
enhance the prevention of conflict-related sexual
violence and the delisting of Government forces from
the annex to the Secretary-General's annual report on
children and armed conflict. We believe that Khartoum
has demonstrated its political will to sustainably address
the challenges in the region. We therefore support the
need to review the sanctions regime as well.

However, we are concerned by the insufficient
progress in the peace process. My delegation underscores
the need for a permanent ceasefire agreement to create
an environment conducive to the resumption of peace
talks and reinvigorate the outstanding provisions of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We call on
all parties in Darfur to meaningfully participate in an
inclusive political process led by the African Union
(AU) High-level Implementation Panel and supported
by Joint Special Representative Mamabolo.

Another issue of concern is the ongoing clashes
in the Jebel Marra area, which have a negative impact
on the humanitarian situation in Darfur. We believe
that the Security Council should consider appropriate
measures to increase the pressure on those who refuse
to cease hostilities and continue to obstruct efforts
towards lasting peace.

Other areas that need attention include food
insecurity in Darfur and the large number of internally
displacedpersons (IDPs) with insufficient access to basic
economic and social services. There is certainly a need
for a paradigm shift in our approach by transitioning
to peacebuilding efforts. All measures should be taken
to address the root causes of the conflict, including
the provision of basic services in remote areas and
finding durable solutions for IDPs by implementing the
UNAMID-United Nations country team's integrated
strategic framework for Darfur for the period from
2017 to 2019. The success of our actions will require
better coordination among all United Nations entities,
as well as greater and sustainable financial support to
the Government of the Sudan by the United Nations
system and donors.

In turn, the Government's continued cooperation
with the United Nations and the AU and increased
efforts on its part to improve the effectiveness of land
management, provide access to basic services and
ensure the right of return and property restitution, as
well as increase the presence of police and the rule of
law, are also crucial. Genuinely including women in
decision-making and providing education for children
and employment for youth are also important for
enduring stability.

With regard to implementing UNAMID's
reconfiguration, we welcome the finalization of a new
mission concept aimed at preventing a relapse and
preparing for the mission's exit in 2020. We therefore
look forward to the conclusion of integrated planning
to implement the envisaged reconfiguration. We once
again underscore that the success of that concept will
require greater investment by the United Nations system,
while delivering as one United Nations. We therefore
note the importance of a resource mobilization strategy
that ensures long-term financial support for sustaining
peace in Darfur.

Finally, we thank Joint Special Representative
Mamabolo, UNAMID personnel, Special Envoy
Haysom, the AU High-level Implementation Panel and
others for their tireless efforts towards achieving peace
and stability in Darfur.

