Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Due to the lateness of the hour, I will be very brief in
my statement. We welcome your presence, Sir, and
your chairing our meeting today. Your presence fully
testifies to the fact that you, your country and other
members of the Council, including China, attach great
importance to the question of Africa. I would like to
thank the Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Fall,
Ambassador Koonjul, Ambassador Kolby, Ambassador
Simonovic' and all previous speakers for their
statements.

First, I would like to congratulate Ambassador
Koonjul. Thanks to his outstanding leadership, the
work of the ad hoc Working Group is gradually
unfolding. He has come up with the future programme
of work. Our meeting today is an important one.
Listening to the views of the wider membership,
especially the African countries, will greatly help the
Working Group in the discharge of its mandate. We
hope and demand that the Working Group, following
this meeting, seriously consider the various
recommendations and incorporate them into its future
work.

The challenge of resolving African conflicts is,
needless to say, daunting and complicated. It calls for
the joint efforts of the international community,
including the Security Council. A case in point is
Sierra Leone, which has made remarkable progress in
the peace process. We should draw lessons from the
experiences gained in that country. We also believe that
the international community should continue to help
Sierra Leone and other countries in their post-conflict
economic reconstruction and in the reintegration of
former combatants into society in order to consolidate
the peace that has been achieved.

Resolving the African conflicts remains an
arduous task. We believe the key to better solving this
issue lies in the proper handling of the following
aspects. First, we should reaffirm that the international
community attaches the highest priority to the question
of Africa. It should ensure that, in terms of political
will and resources, Africa should be awarded top
priority on our agenda.

Secondly, any attempts to end conflicts in Africa
should address both the symptoms and the root causes.
While trying to solve conflicts in Africa, we should pay
more attention to tackling the root causes by taking
effective measures to help African countries to
eliminate poverty and to develop their economies.

Thirdly, the various efforts of the international
community should be combined to form a driving
force. In this respect, we should fully take into account
the views of the parties to the conflict, as well as those
of neighbouring States.

Fourthly, parties to the conflict should also
demonstrate their political will by responding and
cooperating with international efforts. Only in this way
can international organizations, including the United
Nations, play a better role.

In the last century, we saw the African continent
besieged by turmoil, conflicts, poverty and famine. It is
also the continent with the largest number of least
developed countries. That situation cannot continue in
the new century. Building a peaceful, stable and
prosperous Africa is a task to be shouldered by not
only Africa. It is a common task for the international
community. China stands ready to continue offering its
support to the Working Group, the Security Council,
the Economic and Social Council, the Organization of
African Unity and the subregional organizations in
their work. At the same time, we are also willing to
make our own contribution to the earliest possible
achievement of peace and development in the African
continent.

Before I conclude, I would like to mention
Assistant Secretary-General Fall. I had the honour of
working with him for an extended period of time when
I was in Geneva. I am fully acquainted with his skills
and dedication. Before he assumes his new post of head
of the United Nations Office for West Africa, I would
like to wish him all the best and great success in his
future endeavour. I hope that he will be able to make
great contributions to the African countries.

