Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of Foreign Minister Mauro Vieira,
I thank Minister Rodolfo Nin Novoa of Uruguay for
having organized this important debate.

(spoke in English)

I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
briefing, and I wish to acknowledge the interventions
by the Permanent Representative of Israel and the
Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine.

Earlier this month, the Security Council held
an open debate (see S/PV.7606) on the protection of
civilians - an issue that is, and must remain, central
to this organ and to its discussions on the Middle East
in particular. We all have been appalled by the abuses
and deliberate attacks against civilians and civilian
facilities in Gaza, Syria, Yemen and elsewhere. Such
disregard for international humanitarian law and
international human rights law is unacceptable and
deserves our strongest condemnation. It is our duty
to look after vulnerable populations in conflict zones
and protect them, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.

It is equally important, however, to care about those
who have had to flee their home countries to survive war
and persecution. We cannot turn our backs on them and
allow racism and xenophobia to dictate policy choices
and political narratives. As pointed out by former
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Antonio Guterres, it remains a matter of great concern
that refugees confront hostility in places where they
had thought they would be safe and, worse still, they
are made scapegoats for a number of existing problems,
from criminality to economic hardship. The United
Nations has a prominent responsibility in fostering
tolerance and countering the spread of xenophobic
and sectarian platforms. It is not only the credibility
of the affected countries that is at stake, but the very
credibility of the whole international community.

The year 2015 was an especially challenging one for
the Middle East. The conflicts in Syria, Libya and Yemen
deteriorated significantly, with serious implications for
the region and beyond. While some progress has been
achieved in Iraq, the security situation and the threat
posed by Daesh and other terrorist groups continue to
be of extreme concern.

For Israelis and Palestinians, 2015 was another
year marked by heightened fear, increased violence
and civilian casualties. Without any credible political
horizon, the occupation of Palestine remained
unchanged, while tensions and illegal action, such as
the expansion ofIsraeli settlement activities, continued.
Simply put, the occupation must come to an end.

In spite of these unacceptable circumstances, the
Security Council once again has not lived up to its
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations.
The request for international protection by President
Mahmoud Abbas remains unanswered and a draft
resolution aimed at the resumption of negotiations
was sidelined. We reiterate our call on the Security
Council to act swiftly and establish parameters to
promptly reach a two-State solution. Brazil remains
convinced that effective prospects for peace require the
establishment of a Palestinian State that is sovereign,
economically viable and territorially contiguous, living
side by side with Israel in peace and security within
internationally recognized borders based on the 1967
lines. Brazil welcomed the hoisting of the Palestinian
flag at the United Nations during the opening of the
seventieth session of the General Assembly as a
necessary reminder that the two-State solution is long
overdue.

We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2254 (2015) on Syria. After years of a brutal conflict
that has claimed more than 250,000 lives, caused
extensive destruction and wreaked havoc in the region,
no effort should be spared to move forward a Syrian-led
political process based on full respect for human rights
and the independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Syria. Brazil encourages the parties to fully
implement the road map set forth by resolution 2254
(2015), including by engaging in formal negotiations in
good faith and establishing a nationwide ceasefire. We
reaffirm our unwavering support for the work carried
out by Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, as well as to
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
headed by Mr. Paulo Sergio Pinheiro.

Regardless of the establishment of a ceasefire,
all attacks against the civilian population must cease,
including the use of barrel bombs. Unhindered access
to humanitarian assistance is non-negotiable. As
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has firmly stated,
the deliberate starvation of the civilian population
is a war crime. We applaud the work carried out by
United Nations agencies to help millions of people
in need and the generosity of countries in the region,
including Lebanon, Turkey, Jordan and Egypt, which
have been receiving the bulk of Syrian refugees. Brazil
has contributed to these efforts by issuing close to
9,000 entry visas on a humanitarian basis for Syrian
residents affected by the crisis and by providing food
and medicine to the refugees and displaced people in
the region.

The Brazilian Government expresses its deep
consternation at the terrorist attacks in the Syrian
city of Deir ez-Zour. Brazil condemns in the strongest
terms any act of terrorism, religious intolerance and
indiscriminate use of violence practised under any
pretext against civilian populations.

In Yemen, the escalation of hostilities has further
aggravated an already dire humanitarian situation.
Widespread air strikes and the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas, as well as attacks on health-care
facilities, schools and other essential infrastructure,
have taken a heavy toll on civilians. We deeply regret
that attempts to establish a durable ceasefire have failed
once again. After one year of military intervention,
no concrete progress has been achieved in moving a
political process forward, while thousands of civilians
have died and 80 per cent of the population is in need of
humanitarian assistance.

Brazil calls on all parties to the conflict to
immediately cease hostilities and comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. We reaffirm our firm
support for the efforts of the Special Envoy Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed to bring the parties to the negotiating
table and engage them in seeking a diplomatic solution
without any further delay.

Finally, reinstating national unity in Libya remains
a challenge, notwithstanding the signing of the
Libyan Political Agreement facilitated by the United
Nations. Brazil urges the parties to fully implement the
Agreement and work together towards the establishment
of a functional Government of national accord. This
is a unique opportunity not to be missed to advance
towards national reconciliation and the reconstruction
of Libya.

