Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Several
weeks ago, France proposed that an observer mission
be sent to the Palestine territories to contribute to
ending the violence and to protecting civilians. The
violence has claimed far too many victims, most of
them Palestinians. I want to repeat here how moved we
are by that tragic toll, and that we condemn the
excessive use of force.

Over the past few weeks, France, along with the
United Kingdom, has tenaciously argued in favour of
an agreement on creating an observer mission. On 17

S/PVAZAS

 

November, on the basis of a French proposal, the
Council unanimously entrusted Mr. Kofi Annan with

"the task of conducting consultations with the
two parties to examine the possibility of, and
define acceptable modalities for, the presence of
United Nations observers in the territories".
(S/PV.4226 (closed)).

On that basis, the Secretary-General initiated contacts
with the parties, and last Friday he informed us that he
intended resolutely to pursue them. On 8 December, at
Nice, the European Council, on a French initiative,
spoke out along the same lines.

The bilateral dialogue between Israeli and
Palestinian leaders has resumed, and it will continue in
coming days at Washington. Mr. Vedrine's recent visit
to the region contributed to that outcome.

In that context, France wonders about the
timeliness of adopting this evening the draft resolution
upon which we are to vote. I wish to stress that France
has no difficulty with the substance of the text, and I
wish to thank the non-aligned members of the Council,
with which we have worked in the most constructive
spirit. But France considers that, in the light of the
ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General and of the
resumption of bilateral negotiations, this is not the
most suitable time; we would have preferred to await
the outcome of the ongoing discussions before
proceeding any further. For that reason, and that reason
alone, my delegation will abstain in the vote on the
draft resolution before the Council.

In no way is France giving up the possibility of
sending observers, which we consider to be more
necessary than ever before. Just as we have always
done in the past, we shall continue to make every effort
to promote peace in the Middle East.

