Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing today, for his efforts and for
his good offices.

Last weekend, reports once again began to emerge
ofhorrifying allegations ofthe use of chemical weapons
in Syria, this time in Douma, with reports of a large
number of civilian casualties. Like many others, we
were alarmed by these extremely serious allegations,
and we called for an immediate, impartial and thorough
investigation to establish the facts. In that regard, we
welcome the fact that the Fact-finding Mission of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), which we fully support, has been deployed to
Syria. Full access and cooperation by all parties must
now be ensured.

I want to reiterate once more that Sweden will spare
no effort to combat the use and proliferation of chemical
weapons by State or non-State actors anywhere in the
world. We unequivocally condemn in the strongest
terms the use of chemical weapons, including in Syria.
It is a serious violation of international law, it constitutes
a threat to international peace and security, and their
use in armed conflict is a war crime. The international
disarmament and non-proliferation regime must be
safeguarded, which is best achieved through true
multilateralism and broad international consensus.

We share the outrage and the frustration of many
in this Chamber about chemical-weapons use in
Syria. Those responsible for such crimes must be held
accountable. We cannot accept impunity.

The conflict in Syria is in its eighth year, and we
are at a dangerous moment. We fully share the deep
concern expressed by the Secretary-General about the
risks of the current impasse and the need to avoid the
situation escalating and spiralling out of control and to
pay further attention to the divides, tensions and fault
lines in the region, as described again by the Secretary-
General this morning.

We remain deeply disappointed that the Security
Council has been unable to agree and move forward
on a substantial, swift, and unified response to the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. We deeply regret
that Russia once again used its veto and blocked the
Council from taking action this week (see S/PV.8228).
Over the past few days, we have tried to ensure that
all peaceful means to respond have seriously been
considered. We are working tirelessly to ensure that no
stone is left unturned in efforts to find a way forward
in the Security Council. The Secretary-General offered
to support such efforts through his good offices, which
is an opportunity that should be seized. That is why
yesterday we circulated yet another proposal that asks
for four things.

First, it condemns in the strongest terms any use of
chemical weapons in Syria and expresses alarm at the
alleged incident in Douma last weekend, because the
use of chemical weapons constitutes a serious violation
of international law.
Secondly, it demands full access and cooperation
for the OPCW Fact-finding Mission, because we need
facts and evidence about what happened in Douma
last weekend.

Thirdly, it expresses the Council's determination
to establish a new impartial, objective and independent
attribution mechanism based on a proposal by the
Secretary-General, because the perpetrators of
chemical-weapons attacks must be identified and held
to account, and, to that end, we need a new mechanism.

Fourthly, it requests the Secretary-General to
dispatch immediately a high-level disarmament mission
to Syria because we need to resolve all outstanding
issues on chemical weapons and rid Syria once and for
all possible chemical weapons that might still exist in
the country. Such a mission would add political and
diplomatic leverage to the necessary technical and
professional work of the OPCW. We therefore call on
all members of the Council to muster the political will
and respond to the appeal by the Secretary-General so
as to come together and move forward.

The use of chemical weapons is a grave threat to
international peace and security. It is indeed deplorable
that the Council has not yet been able to come together
and agree on a timely and firm response. Even though the
use of chemical weapons in itself violates international
law, any response must comply with international law
and respect the Charter of the United Nations. The time
has now come to urgently revert to a political process
under United Nations auspices for a political solution
in line with resolution 2254 (2015), and for Syria
and the Astana guarantors to move forward without
further delay and live up to their commitments so that
resolution 2401 (2018), which demands the cessation of
hostilities and humanitarian access, can be fully and
urgently implemented. That is the only way to end to
the suffering of the Syrian people and end the brutal
seven-year-long conflict.

We firmly believe that there is a way for the Council
to shoulder its responsibilities under the Charter. We
believe that there continues to be a way for the Council
to come together. We believe that we need to ensure
that we have exhausted every peaceful effort and every
diplomatic option to stop further atrocities from being
carried out in Syria, hold those responsible to account,
come to terms once with the chemical-weapons issue
in Syria, cease hostilities and find a political solution.

