Mr. Cardi (Italy): I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for South
Sudan, Mr. David Shearer, for his update on the
situation in South Sudan. We are pleased to hear of
the implementation of some measures to improve the
protection of civilians and create weapons-free zones.

The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) can continue to count on Italy's support. I
also wish to thank the Chair ofthe Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan, Ambassador Seek, and Ambassador Ciss for
their report on the Committee's activities.

As others have recalled, on 23 March the
Security Council adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/4 on South Sudan. We feel the need to
repeat the five points that South Sudan is called upon
to respect: immediate ceasefire; removal of obstacles
to humanitarian assistance; support for the mediation
efforts of the United Nations, the African Union (AU)
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD); the removal of obstacles to UNMISS and
the Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism and deployment of the regional protection
force; and ending attacks on humanitarian personnel
and facilities.

We cannot but observe that with only a few days
left until the expiration date of 30 April, set by the
presidential statement, the situation has deteriorated on
all five points. Despite the IGAD statement of 25 March,
the ceasefire has not been announced in South Sudan.
As the Secretary-General's letter (S/2017/328) indicates,
the clashes are contributing to the exodus of the civilian
population from the country. The final report of the
Panel of Experts on South Sudan established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) (S/2017/326) explains that
military action is continuing along ethnic lines, the
delivery of humanitarian assistance continues to
be met with attacks on personnel and the national
dialogue announced by the Government has been
indefinitely postponed.

The result is that the Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan keeps
being violated, fighting widens in the country and there
is no national dialogue. South Sudanese women and
children are the first victims of that non-compliance.
The tragedy is driven by human rights violations, the
use of child soldiers, sexual and gender-based violence
as a war tactic, and the impunity guaranteed by the
delays in establishing the Hybrid Court of South Sudan.

There can be no peace without accountability.
Anyone who thinks that the differences can be solved
through military means must be deluded. The only
result would be a divided, indebted country filled with
resentment i a situation which would weigh on the
population for generations to come. We ask all parties
to comply with the relevant resolutions, to cooperate
with UNMISS and allow the immediate deployment
of the regional protection force. We will continue to
support the shuttle diplomacy of Special Representative
Alpha Konare, with the assistance of Mr. Shearer,
Special Envoy Haysom, President Mogae and IGAD.
We call on the regional stakeholders to act in unity
and without further delay so that the parties may cease
their hostilities.

In South Sudan today, there is no peace and there
is no security. The impact of the conflict on the region,
in terms of refugees and arms flow, for example,
is increasingly destabilizing. During last month's
ministerial briefing, we observed that the time to
contain that immense tragedy was ending. Today we
observe, with regret, that our assertion is more pressing
than ever. Therefore, in the next few weeks, the Council
will have to carefully examine the options available in
order to convince South Sudan that stability must be
restored in the country.

