I would like to thank the Republic of the Niger and its Permanent Representative, Mr. Abdou Abarry, for convening this important open debate on the cooperation between the United Nations and the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF). My delegation followed with great interest the statements of Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, and Mrs. Louise Mushikiwabo, Secretary- General of the OIF, who gave a comprehensive overview of United Nations- OIF cooperation and showed the OIF's key role in the promotion of sustainable development and international peace in all its aspects. Indeed, as was emphasized in these remarkable briefings, cooperation between the two entities is generally excellent. There is no longer any need to prove the OIF's relevance in advancing the global agenda of the United Nations Secretariat. Through its various activities on the international scene, the OIF actively contributes to the resolution of economic, social, intellectual and humanitarian problems, while providing a space for harmonizing the efforts of nations. To the multisectoral achievements outlined in the concept note (S/2020/880), we can add the establishment, in 2017, of the Boutros-Ghali Observatory, a framework that allows francophone States to take more ownership of peacekeeping issues and participate more actively in the preparation and strategic management of peace operations. Nevertheless, that achievement cannot hide the multiple challenges that persist in many areas. Given the format of the meeting, I will address only the issue of multilingualism and the use of French as a working language within the United Nations and in peacekeeping operations. The General Assembly, through numerous resolutions on the issue, considers multilingualism to be a fundamental value of the Organization and believes that it contributes to the achievement of the objectives set forth in Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations. However, in practice, it is clear that English is clearly and concerningly predominant, despite the appointment, in December 2015, of a coordinator in charge of the generalized application of multilingualism throughout the Secretariat. That discrimination, often justified by financial contingencies, constitutes a serious handicap for users of other languages and particularly for French-speaking users, whose development and effectiveness it mitigates. Many representatives give up speaking at meetings at Headquarters because they cannot express themselves clearly in English, and they spend a great deal of time reading and understanding documents that are often available only in English. In the theatres of operation, the predominance of the English language is unquestionable. That undermines the performance of French-speaking troop- and police-contributing countries, which struggle to fully grasp working documents such as regulations, directives, standard operating procedures and other manuals essential to the understanding and accomplishment of a mission. Much of that documentation is available only in English, even though 50 per cent of peacekeeping operations are deployed in the Francophone space. It is my pleasure here to salute the commendable ongoing efforts of OIF countries to help French-speaking troop-contributing countries overcome the handicaps associated with this tyranny of English. These include, most recently, the 2019 publication of a guide in French taking into account the conduct of peacekeeping operations since the force generation and the organization, during the same year, of a seminar to inform and update military and police advisers of French-speaking Permanent Missions to the United Nations on the contingent-owned equipment manual. Another example is the recent commissioning of an itinerant team of experts who travelled throughout French-speaking countries to familiarize the heads of their contingents with the contingent-owned equipment manual and United Nations procedures prior to deployment. Finally, because the Action for Peacekeeping initiative gives pride of place to the performance of peace operations, we must now give the same special attention to language capabilities as we do to specific military capabilities. The sharing of a common language by peacekeepers and the populations they are tasked to protect builds trust and facilitates interaction. That is why, in many respects, it is a real performance factor that the United Nations would do well to enhance. While aware of the financial implications, I remain convinced that the United Nations must fully take on French as a working language by reconsidering the place of multilingualism in its priorities. For its part, the OIF, which encompasses more than 45 per cent of United Nations members, in conjunction with the Group of Francophone Ambassadors, must absolutely insist that the Secretariat make available the documents that govern the work of the Blue Helmets in at least both working languages - English and French - before they enter into force. In the same vein, the OIF should continue to work towards the establishment of a permanent internal fund dedicated to the translation of documents while this issue is definitively taken up by the United Nations.
