Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by expressing our condolences with regard to all of
those killed or affected by the tragic aeroplane crash
in Ethiopia.

Let me also thank our briefers today: first, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto,
given that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) continues to do vital work in
very difficult circumstances; next, National Security
Adviser Mohib, whose personal commitment to reform,
women's empowerment and credible elections taking
place later this year are very encouraging to us; and,
finally, Ms. Tapesh, whose words on the importance of
involving women in all aspects of the political process
and in safeguarding women's rights in Afghanistan
were very powerful.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
condemn the recent attack on those Afghans attending
the commemoration of Abdul Ali Mazari's death and
express our deepest sympathy for those affected.
That recent attack was a very tangible demonstration
of the challenges we face collectively in ensuring the
protection of civilians and politicians of all ethnicities
and space for peaceful dialogue in Afghanistan.
We join the representative of the Dominican
Republic and other speakers today in being deeply
concerned by the 10,993 recorded civilian casualties of
the armed conflict in 2018 and the 11 per cent increase in
civilian deaths registered by UNAMA in the past year.
As the Security Council, we must remind old parties
that any targeting or killing of civilians is a serious
violation of international humanitarian law. We support
UNAMA's efforts to ensure that protection remains at
the core of the humanitarian response in Afghanistan.

We often sit in this Chamber and talk about what
a crucial time we are entering in terms of defining
Afghanistan's future. This is especially true today
as we approach important elections that underpin
political stability in the country. As my Indonesian and
Belgian colleagues already recognized today, it is very
important that lessons from October's parliamentary
elections be learned and rapidly addressed to ensure
that this year's presidential vote is transparent, credible
and inclusive.

We recognize the efforts by Afghanistan's electoral
management bodies to address many of these issues.
But the new election commissioners face a formidable
task. There is a great deal still to be done to deliver
a credible vote on 20 July. We urge UNAMA to work
closely and urgently with the new commissioners to
identify priorities, highlight where key milestones are
not being met and lead the international community's
response. We would also welcome a clear and pragmatic
plan for the voter-registration and verification systems
that will be used for July's vote.

Once again, we would ask the Mission to consider
what more UNAMA can do and what additional
resources it needs to strengthen support ahead of the
forthcoming elections. We would welcome the detailed
updates from the United Nations on this priority issue
in the coming months.

The forthcoming elections are crucial for
Afghanistan. Both the international community and
the Afghan Government can and should focus on this
even while we continue to support and drive progress
towards a long-term political settlement to the conflict.
We are therefore strongly supportive of all efforts aimed
at starting a credible and sustainable Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace process to resolve the conflict.
As the representative of Germany already noted today,
the current opportunity for peace is unprecedented, and
Afghanistan, its neighbours and the wider international
community should do everything possible to seize it.
TheforthcomingKabulprocessmeetingwillprovide
a good opportunity for the international community
and the region to take stock and work out how best
to support Afghan peace efforts. We are particularly
supportive of the efforts being led by United States
Special Representative Zalmay Khalilzad, including
to kick-start the intra-Afghan dialogue, which must lie
at the heart of any effort towards an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned political settlement.

I would like to turn now to the points made by
Ms. Tapesh earlier today. As progress is being made on
the path towards women's meaningful participation in
all levels of decision-making, from the local community
to the negotiations table, it is essential that we maintain
momentum. That is not just because it is the right
thing to do. It is also because analysis suggests that
the sustained and empowered involvement of women
makes any peace process much more likely to succeed.
It is positive that there are an increasing number of
women on the High Peace Council, but more can be
done to ensure that women's voices are represented.
Any political settlement should protect the progress
achieved on human rights and gender equality in
Afghanistan over the past 18 years.

That will require patience, given the distrust
between the parties and the history of the conflict. It
will also require the international community to be
united in its demand for the Taliban to sit down with
other Afghans and, in particular, representatives of the
internationally recognized Government. The Taliban
claims that it is serious about peace. It must realize
that peace requires compromise and dialogue. All other
parties are ready to engage in such dialogue with an
open mind. We should all call upon the Taliban to do
the same.

