Mr. Sc'epanovic' (Montenegro): First of all, I
would like to congratulate Australia for successfully
presiding over the Security Council this month and for
organizing this open debate. I commend your country's
commitment and leading role in this matter, Sir. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
earlier today and the two Chairs of the Security Council
Committees for their presentations.

Montenegro welcomes the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/23, on international cooperation
in combating terrorism and violent extremism, adopted
earlier today, and fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
However, I would like to add some remarks of particular
importance to my country.

The current upsurge in terrorist activities
underscores the fact that they constitute one of the
major threats to global security in the twenty-first
century. Terrorism and violent extremism are both
highly concentrated and globally distributed. The fight
against that global challenge demands an integrated
and well-coordinated international response and the
commitment of all States to continuing to analyse and
monitor all aspects of potential threats and to acting
appropriately to prevent them.

Strengthening international cooperation in order
to prevent, detect and suppress terrorist activities and
violent extremism requires the full implementation
of the relevant international counter-terrorism
conventions, as well as the resolutions of the Security
Council in that area. Fully cognizant of the fact that
international cooperation, as the most effective and
irreplaceable tool, has to be a priority, Montenegro
actively participates in the prevention and suppression
of terrorism at all levels, multilateral and bilateral, and
contributes to the strengthening and development of
counter-terrorism cooperation.
Montenegro condemns terrorism and violent
extremism in all their forms and fully commits itself to
fighting such phenomena. The fight against terrorism,
violent extremism and their root causes is now viewed
as a collective effort on the part of all members of the
international community. We share the view that the
role of the United Nations in that fight is crucial, both
at the global level and in assisting Member States in
their efforts to strengthen their ability to prevent such
acts. Montenegro strongly supports the efforts of the
United Nations to promote the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which serves as the foundation for an effective and
comprehensive response to counter-terrorism at
all levels. We also recognize the important role of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
which works to promote and coordinate international
cooperation in this field, and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism, with which
Montenegro is also actively cooperating.

The threat that foreign fighters pose to our security
system is far greater today than it has ever been before.
Not only is terrorism increasing, but its breadth is
increasing as well. We recognize that there is no military
solution to the problem. We therefore stress the need to
work together to counter violent extremism, which can
radicalize, recruit and mobilize individuals to engage in
terrorism and violent extremism. In that light, I would
like to refer to the recently adopted resolution 2178
(2014), which Montenegro was pleased to co-sponsor.
Once again, I would like to convey our commitment to
actively implementing that resolution by amending our
Criminal Code with respect to prescribing penalties for
the participation of mercenaries in third countries.

With regard to fighting terrorism, we must not
forget that fundamental freedoms, such as human
rights and the rule of law, are essential institutional
pillars that must be respected, even in the most difficult
situations. We must, therefore, take all necessary
measures to ensure that our fight against the threat
we face complies with international law, international
humanitarian law and international refugee law. All of
the means and methods of preventing terrorism present
a litmus test for the sustainability of those instruments
and for the rule of law as a whole, and we must not fail
in that task. In that light, I would like to emphasize
the critical role that the United Nations Ombudsperson
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entitieshas been playing in ensuring
that human rights are fully respected in the fight against
terrorism and violent extremism.

Montenegro has never faced a terrorist act, but given
that terrorism and organized crime pose a serious threat
to international peace and security, we are continuously
improving our system for preventing terrorist activities.
Such measures call for cooperation among the relevant
institutions at the national and international levels.
Allow me to recall that Montenegro is a party to all
major international counter-terrorism instruments and
is dedicated to promoting cooperation in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
international conventions and other mechanisms. In
order to establish strong international cooperation in
the fight against terrorism and violent extremism in all
its forms, our Governments must take appropriate steps
in their national agenda, especially in countering the
financing of terrorism.

International cooperation in adopting international
legal instruments, applying conventions and protocols,
and exchanging information, experience and good
practice in the implementation of counter-terrorist
measures will remain our priority in order to strengthen
efforts in international legal assistance for fighting
terrorism.

In closing, I would like to reiterate my country's
commitment to take decisive action to create a strong
front against the core source of terrorism wherever
it may arise and to work with all other delegations to
promote cooperation so we can eliminate terrorism and
violent extremism.

