The President (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I
should like to acknowledge the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Haris Siladeie, Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. On behalf of
the Security Council, I extend a warm welcome to
Mr. Silajdiie.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Croatia and
Serbia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Vilovic'
(Croatia) and Mr. Starcevic' (Serbia) took seats at
the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Inzko to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
2
the consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.
If I hear any objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Serrano.

There being no objection it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to document S/2010/235, containing a
letter dated 14 May 2010 from the Secretary-General
transmitting the thirty-seventh report of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko, to
whom I now give the floor.


