At the outset, allow me to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Assistant Secretary-General Coninsx for the in-depth analysis of the situation regarding countering the threats posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). The eleventh report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/774) provides a comprehensive overview of the situation on the ground, including insights on how the terrorists adapt to the circumstances of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We note with appreciation that this document duly reflects assessments of those trends provided by various States, including Russia. At present, the level of the global terrorist threat, despite the failure of the leaders of ISIL to build a pseudo-caliphate in Syria and Iraq, remains high. The principles of organization and tactics used by ISIL suggest that it has now fully transformed into a network structure with a high degree of autonomy of branches and sleeper cells in various countries and regions of the world. The high command of the organization has sufficient financial resources to restore mechanisms for coordinating and planning terrorist attacks in the border area between Syria and Iraq, and is doing just that. At the same time, the terrorists do not intend to abandon plans to revive the caliphate in Iraq. ISIL continues to build up its combat potential and is seeking to expand the area and scope of terrorist attacks in the country. The determination of ISIL to focus on expansion across the African continent is now obvious. At the same time, in addition to the States of the Sahara-Sahel zone, where ISIL branches are already actively operating, the countries of Central and Southern Africa are in their sights. A difficult situation is developing in Afghanistan, where approximately 4,000 ISIL fighters are present. The main units are concentrated in the eastern provinces of Kunar and Nangarhar, where their numbers reach 2,000 terrorists. According to various estimates, there may be an additional 2,000 fighters in the north of the country. Supporters of the world caliphate regularly carry out large-scale terrorist attacks in various cities of the country, mainly against the Shiite minority. Recently, the leaders of the international terrorist organization have shown increased interest in South and South-East Asia, which, in their opinion, are promising for recruiting new supporters. The spread of COVID-19 provoked large-scale socioeconomic turbulence around the world and diverted the attention of many States from the counter-terrorism agenda, which in turn paves the way for the international terrorist organizations to increase their deadly potential. Terrorists are seeking to use the coronavirus pandemic to increase the number of supporters, primarily at the expense of those dissatisfied with the actions of the authorities in the context of the crisis, and in order to carry out hybrid attacks that combine terrorist attacks, biothreats, the spread of propaganda and the incitement of terrorist acts. Recently, there has been a noticeable increase in the activity of international terrorist organizations on the Internet, where calls for supporters to take various actions in order to increase panic in society are spreading. ISIL leaders are brainwashing their supporters and urging their followers to intensify their activities. At the same time, the pandemic has somewhat disrupted the relocation of terrorists to various hotspots and made it difficult to deliver funds and weapons to conflict zones. Some terrorist cells lack money and arms. In particular, branches of ISIL in North Africa can no longer profit from smuggling and human trafficking due to the closure of borders between countries. However, despite those obstacles, international and regional terrorist groups are rapidly adapting to the pandemic and gaining supporters. There is undoubtedly still huge room for improvement in the area of international cooperation, especially with regard to the repatriation of foreign terrorist fighters and their family members to their countries of origin. Among the most vulnerable in that connection are the women and children associated with foreign terrorist fighters, currently trapped in camps and detention facilities in the Middle East. The Secretary-General's report once again sheds light on the insufficient repatriation rates and the horrific conditions in which these people have to fight for their lives. Unfortunately, this is the battle from which some of our colleagues, including in the Council, decided to withdraw. It is totally unacceptable to prioritize human rights issues while denying innocent children their right to live. Russia calls on the Council to ensure support for the repatriation efforts of States. All counter-terrorism resolutions must recognize that problem.
