Allow me at the outset to congratulate France on assuming the presidency of the Council for this month and to thank it for organizing this important and timely debate, at a time when the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to sweeping across the globe, severely impacting people, including children. I also would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, and the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund, Henrietta Fore, for their comprehensive briefings, as well as for their leadership in their respective fields. Lebanon is proud to have joined the statement supporting the Secretary- General's appeal for a global ceasefire amid the COVID-19 pandemic. Lebanon, alongside 168 countries, signed the joint statement "Protect our Children" in response to the Secretary-General's call on countries to prioritize children's education, food, health and safety amid the pandemic. In the statement, we reiterated our firm commitment to leave no one behind and no child behind. Lebanon believes that children should be allowed to be children and should never be recruited in conflicts or used as soldiers, because they are not soldiers and should never be exploited as such. Accordingly, Lebanon has been working on concrete steps to build a better, safer and more secure future for children. In this respect, let me underline that the Higher Council for Children, a governmental institution under the Ministry of Social Affairs of Lebanon, is currently working on updating and streamlining the national action plan to prevent and protect children associated with armed violence in Lebanon. The action plan was adopted in 2014 in the light of the Secretary-General's latest annual report on children and armed conflict (S/2014/339). Since the solution to that problem should be comprehensive in its approach, the Ministry of Social Affairs and the Higher Council for Children have been cooperating with international partners, including UNICEF, and the relevant ministries and institutions - the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Education, the Lebanese Armed Forces, the internal security forces and the General Directorate of General Security. The plan aims at providing a legal review that will lead to the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, which Lebanon signed in 2002. It will also establish coordination, awareness-raising and capacity-building mechanisms and will propose rehabilitation and reintegration programmes. In parallel, the Higher Council for Children, in partnership with various stakeholders and civil society organizations, is carrying out a number of activities with the aim of raising awareness and disseminating information about the involvement of children in armed conflict. Furthermore, Lebanon is working towards the adoption of national strategies on counter-terrorism and cybersecurity, which will encompass online recruitment. The General Directorate of General Security has launched several awareness campaigns to educate people, and children in particular, on how to protect themselves against online recruitment attempts by terrorist groups. With regard to the situation of militants inside Palestinian camps in general and children in particular, the Lebanese army prioritizes the humanitarian situation, as well as the interests of civilians and children, and focuses on spreading awareness and providing facilities to governmental and non-governmental humanitarian organizations working in the camps and in the field. I thank the President again for organizing this important debate and assure him of Lebanon's firm commitment to do more and to work with our partners, especially the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, to further advance the children and armed conflict agenda.
