Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I also wish to thank
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for his report and for
comprehensive briefing today. I want also to commend
him for the work under way and for the efforts that his
Office is undertaking to establish the truth and
investigate all facts and evidence relevant to assessing
criminal responsibility under the Rome Statute.

In that regard, we welcome the close cooperation
that the Prosecutor's Office continues to benefit from
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, as well as the synergy between the
Office and the United Nations Commission of Inquiry,
as stressed in the Prosecutor's report. We also welcome
the contacts that the Office continues to maintain with
Libyan authorities, the Government's expressed
support to the Court and the acknowledgement of the
positive role that the ICC plays in preventing further
violence in the country.

Portugal stresses the importance of accountability
and the need to fight impunity for serious violations of
human rights. Those are universal goals that guide the
United Nations and are at the core of the international
community's concerns.

We thank the Prosecutor for his update on the
cases of Muammar Al-Qadhafi, Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. The information
provided highlights the procedural steps undertaken to
bring to justice the last two accused and the various
contacts between the Office and Libyan authorities, as
well as with other relevant entities, to ensure that they
will be brought to trial. We shall follow closely future
developments on those procedures, bearing in mind the
important role that the Statute confers upon the Court
in deciding the admissibility of the case against Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi following the procedural
challenge filed by the Libyan Government. We fully
trust the Court in its evaluation of the situation in order
to make sure that the trial is undertaken in full
compliance with international standards. Likewise, we
have the same expectation concerning the case against
the other accused and the need for his prompt
presentation for trial.

We also thank the Prosecutor for the information
provided on the ongoing investigations. We look
forward to further developments concerning the
investigation of gender crimes and the two patterns of
rape identified in the report (A/HRC/ 17/44) of the
Commission of Inquiry. In that respect, we appreciate
the concern of the Office in ensuring the protection of
victims during its investigative efforts, thus preventing
situations where victims could be further victimized
through exposure and retaliation.

The report gives us a disturbing account of other
serious violations identified in the Commission of
Inquiry's report as having been committed in Libya,
during and after conflict, which are now under the
scrutiny of the Prosecutor's investigation. Violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law are
violations irrespective of whoever may be found
responsible for them. Acts of retaliation are
inadmissible, and every person has the right to a fair
trial. Cases of arbitrary arrests and enforced
disappearances must stop and be accounted for. The
same applies with regard to acts of retaliation against
civilians believed to be Al-Qadhafi loyalists, such as
suggested by the actions against Tawerghan civilians
identified in the report. Those are serious findings that,
if proven, must be accounted for. Under the ICC's
jurisdiction, no amnesty is possible for war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

In conclusion, we look forward to a full and
complete investigation of allegations of all serious
crimes committed in Libya. We encourage the
Prosecutor and his Office to continue their efforts, in
cooperation with Libyan authorities, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and all relevant entities in order to identify those
responsible for such crimes and make sure that they are
brought to trial, as we believe that justice is the
cornerstone of peaceful and democratic societies and,
thus, a fundamental element of Libya's institution-
building.

