Mr. Alyas (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate on the working methods of the Security Council.
I would also like to associate myself with the statement
made by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, as well as that to be delivered on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The international community's attention is focused
on the Council more than ever before. Innocent people
throughout the world yearn for the Security Council to
save them from the scourges of war by implementing
its mandate for the maintenance of international peace
and security without further delay, which will make
the world a safer place. On that basis, the process of
reforming the Security Council and its working methods
must be inclusive, comprehensive and designed to
strengthen the Council's ability to fulfil its mission,
reflect contemporary realities and the diversity of the
international community, and take into consideration
the interests of the entire United Nations membership.

The change in the Security Council's structure
should reflect the current situation, as well as new
developments in the international arena. It should
reflect the equitable geographic distribution of Member
States and preserve its ability and effectiveness in
fulfilling its duties, including in preventing conflicts
and international disputes before they escalate and lead
to grave consequences. The Security Council should
benefit from the expertise of regional and subregional
organizations in solving and preventing conflicts.

We emphasize the need for all States to abide by the
Council's resolutions equally and without selectivity.
The Middle East has long suffered from continuous
violations of international peace and security without
effective and efficient intervention. That has led to
calamities in the region and within the international
community. We are perplexed by the double standard
applied to the Middle East. Instead of the Council
preserving the prestige of the United Nations and
safeguarding its efficiency and credibility, that double
standard will definitely lead to a loss of confidence
among the peoples of the region in international
institutions, in particular in the Security Council.

With regard to the situation in the occupied
Palestinian Arab territories, the Security Council
has considered that issue almost since the day it was
established. It is unable to maintain international peace
and security or restore the rights of the legitimate
holders. Israel persists in violating international law
and in changing the situation on the ground.

The Syrian crisis has festered without being
addressed in a manner conducive to achieving the
aspirations of the Syrian people and reflecting the
will of the international community, as represented
in the resolutions on the issue adopted by the General
Assembly, which have not been appropriately translated
into reality by the Council. That confirms once again
the gravity of delaying the adoption of appropriate
resolutions at the right time to achieve peace in the
region and the world. Those delays lead to the spread of
anarchy, wars, killing and destruction.

My delegation emphasizes the need for the Council
to consider the aspirations and hopes of the peoples of
the world and the region.

