Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I join those who spoke before me in thanking
Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan, Special Adviser
and Head of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(UNITAD), pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017), for his
valuable briefing. We also welcome the appointment of
Ms. Salama Hasson Al-Khafaji, Deputy of the Special
Adviser, and welcome her participation with us in
this meeting.

We also recall our meeting with Mr. Khan during
the Council's visit to the Iraqi capital of Baghdad,
which was successful in achieving its goal of showing
support for Iraq, the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) and UNITAD.

We reiterate our every wish for the success of the
Special Adviser and his team with its international and
national members in their difficult and sensitive mission.
We hope that it will be carried out in accordance with
international standards and the investigation strategy
put forward by UNITAD for collecting and storing
evidence and protecting witnesses in support of local
and international efforts aimed at attaining justice for
the most atrocious crimes committed against the Iraqi
people. That is an important part of the comprehensive
framework to eliminate terrorism.
The mechanism established pursuant to resolution
2379 (2017) upholds achieving justice, ensures
providing redress to victims and is a response to the
request by the Iraqi Government to guarantee that
there be no impunity for those who perpetrated these
crimes, which may amount to the level of crimes
against humanity, war crimes and genocide, with full
respect for the sovereignty of Iraq and its jurisdiction
over crimes committed in its territory under Iraqi law
and Constitution.

We are well aware that the judicial responsibility for
dealing with all kinds of terrorism is of an international
nature. We support the efforts of the Government of
Iraq in combating terrorism and we appreciate the
determination that the country has demonstrated
to eliminate extremism, Violence and terrorism,
with the support of its friends and partners from the
international community and the United Nations. In
that regard, we welcome the ongoing cooperation
and collaboration between UNITAD and the Iraqi
Government in accordance with the Team's mandate,
which has contributed to expeditious progress in the
field operations of the Team.

We also note the international efforts of the Global
Coalition against Da'esh. However, much remains to be
done in the same unified international spirit, which we
believe to be necessary in combatting Da'esh sleeper
cells and completely eliminating their potential threat,
while exploring ways to deal with the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters and to ensure reintegration.

It is especially alarming that Da'esh continues to
threaten the security and stability of the region as a
whole. We all shoulder the responsibility of eliminating
Da'esh in a flexible and effective way that will curb
its ambitions and dry up its financing and resources,
ensure that its ideology does not re-emerge by resolving
the root causes of terrorism and violent extremism, and
guarantee a smooth transition to reconstruction and
the return of stability. We continue to support Iraq
in its efforts to overcome the ordeal that it suffered
under Da'esh within the framework of the International
Coalition aimed at defeating that organization, as
well as to face the great challenges that brotherly Iraq
continues to face following the defeat of Da'esh.

The Emir of our country, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad
Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, took the initiative by calling for
the convening of the Kuwait International Conference
for the Reconstruction of Iraq in February 2018, which
garnered pledges amounting to $30 billion that would
require the establishment of a follow-up mechanism to
ensure that these pledges are honoured and that stability
and security are restored in Iraq.

In conclusion, we reiterate our solidarity with Iraq,
its Government and its people in any step it takes to
combat terrorism. Moreover, we will spare no effort in
supporting Iraq and standing by its side in its attempts
to contain Da'esh and its practices, hold accountable
those who have perpetrated such heinous crimes and
reconstruct areas that have been damaged by Da'esh.
We will also support Iraq in its efforts to consolidate
national unity among all Iraqi people, based on its
territorial integrity and political sovereignty.

