Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank Special Representative Honore' for her briefing
today and for her continued leadership. Our gratitude
also goes to the troop- and police-contributing countries

to Haiti, the Group of Friends and the dedicated women
and men serving in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), who, like us, are
committed to Haiti's future. We, too, wish to offer
our sincere condolences for the loss of the late Force
Commander, Lieutenant General J aborandy.

Today, I would like to touch briefly on three main
topics: Haiti's elections, MINUSTAH's contribution
to Haiti's present and future, and the importance of
development. Haiti's upcoming elections are naturally
the centre of attention for many in the Chamber today
and for good reason. They represent a milestone for
how far Haiti has come in its political process since
the earthquake. One round of voting has been held and
the second round, which includes the first presidential
ballot, is fast approaching. The process has not been
without challenges and the international community
remains concerned about the scattered acts of violence,
poll interruptions and other misconduct. While not
widespread, we ask Haitian authorities to investigate
those incidents and bring the perpetrators to justice. By
prioritizing transparent elections this year, the Haitian
Government will give Haitians a renewed voice in their
governance.

In the coming months, we encourage all actors to
participate fully in the electoral process and to pledge
to a high standard of transparency. That is because
strengthened confidence in Haiti's political system
could, naturally, help attract investment and jobs. As
Haiti moves toward the completion of elections and
the formation of a new Government, we also note the
success of the continued drawdown of MINUSTAH
and the ongoing development and professionalism of
the Haitian National Police, who have continued taking
on increasing responsibilities for nationwide security.
We commend their admirable efforts to provide
election security during the first round of elections
and implement the security plan coordinated with
MINUSTAH. The role of the Haitian National Police
in providing security for the upcoming election rounds
is key. Given the high number of candidates registered
for the elections and the scale of the voting operation,
we urge additional planning and coordination for the
remaining rounds.

In the longer term, we are also working with
MINUSTAH through police and corrections advisers,
who are working to build the Haitian National Police
and Haiti's law enforcement capacity through training,
equipment, technical assistance and infrastructure
improvement. As part of that process, we support
MINUSTAH's commitment to continue developing
the Haitian National Police and assist the Haitian
Government as it takes on greater responsibility for its
own security and policing.

As the Haitian National Police grows and as Haiti
completes its ongoing elections, stability is crucial. For
that reason, we support maintaining MINUSTAH's
current force size and configuration. The terms of the
MINUSTAH mandate renewal must continue to be
conditions-based. We strongly believe that any decisions
on a further reduction of troop levels need to be taken
after the elections, preferably after a new Government
is seated and on the basis of a formal recommendation
from the United Nations following a thorough strategic
assessment that takes into account security. That leads
me to an important point on development.

Five years after the devastating 2010 earthquake,
Haiti is making the transition from recovery to
a period of long-term economic development.
Significant challenges continue, however, to face
the Haitian people, such as chronic poverty and high
unemployment. The Government of Haiti, with support
from the international community, needs to improve
the economic environment in the country. That means
investing in job creation, infrastructure and the
provision of key services, among other initiatives that
will ensure a better future for Haiti.

A sign of the strength of our partnership with Haiti
came earlier this week, when Secretary of State Kerry
visited Haiti at the invitation of President Martelly.
In a joint statement, both he and President Martelly
emphasized the importance of fair and peaceful
elections and encouraged all Haitians to go to the polls
on 25 October. His visit underscored the commitment
of the United States of America to the Haitian people.
As Haiti's neighbour and assistance partner, we have
a deep and enduring interest in ensuring Haiti's long-
term security, democratic development and economic
growth. Since the earthquake, the United States has
provided over $4.2 billion in assistance. We remain
firmly committed to the Haitian people and are working
with the Haitian Government to ensure a more secure,
stable and self-sufficient Haiti.

