Mr. De Alba (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
and the representative of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) for their very important and
informative reports.

We note that, in recent years, the normative
framework that governs the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts, particularly in the Security Council,
has improved significantly. Nevertheless, there is an
increasing gap between the progress that has been made
in terms of this normative framework and the situation
on the ground, where we witness repeated violations
of international law and international humanitarian

law, as documented in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2012/376).

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
depends on two fundamental principles: respect
for international law and accountability. In View
of the increased violations of these principles, the
Secretary-General has identified five core challenges
to the protection of civilians. Mexico reaffirms its
support for the promotion of specific measures and
actions to address these five challenges so as to ensure
effective protection of civilians. I shall briefly touch
upon a number of these actions.

First, in order to promote compliance with
international humanitarian law, it is essential that those
States that have not yet done so accede to the relevant
instruments of international humanitarian law and
recognize customary law applicable to those situations.
It is critical that we adopt measures to incorporate the
contents of those treaties within our national legislation
and practices.

It is also particularly worrying that, in current
armed conflicts, indiscriminate use has been made
of weapons, more in some cases than in others, such
as wide-area explosive weapons in densely populated
areas, as reflected in the Secretary-General's report.
Therefore, we endorse the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the use of these devices be
banned in such situations. In particular, we support
the Secretary-General's call on the Security Council to
play a more active role in that regard.

We agree with the Secretary-General and Ms. Amos
about the timeliness ofthe Diplomatic Conference to be
convened at the end of July to adopt an effective and
robust arms trade treaty to control irresponsible trade
in conventional weapons, which has a severe impact on
civilians in armed conflicts. Mexico has participated
actively in the preparation for the negotiation of the
aforementioned treaty to establish high standards to
prevent the trade in arms when there is a substantial
risk that they will be used to commit or to facilitate
serious violations of international humanitarian law or
grave and systematic violations of international law of
human rights.

We are also disturbed by the increased number of
attacks perpetrated against health and medical assistance
services in conflict situations, as we heard this morning
from the representative of the ICRC. Attacking or
impeding the provision of health services, as well as
imposing a blockade on humanitarian assistance, are
clear violations of international humanitarian law that
must be duly condemned and sanctioned.

At the same time, it is necessary to ensure
accountability in all cases where ofnon-compliance with
international norms. The primary responsibility falls
upon States to bring to justice those deemed responsible
for the commission of international humanitarian law
violations. In turn, the International Criminal Court
is an indispensible tool for contributing to curbing
impunity, as it is empowered to try the perpetrators of
these crimes when a State is unable or unwilling to do
so.

We therefore call on those States that have not yet
done so to ratify the Rome Statute and to fully cooperate
with the International Criminal Court. The power of the
Security Council under the Statute to refer situations
to the Court is crucial to efforts to prevent future
international humanitarian law violations. The Security
Council must closely follow up on situations referred to
the Court and on the States involved to cooperate fully
with the Court in order to ensure that its work can be
brought to a successful conclusion.

The Security Council undoubtedly plays a
fundamental role in the protection of civilians
in situations of armed conflict. However, I must
underscore that inaction on the part of the Security
Council undermines not only its own legitimacy, but
also the entire United Nations system, thereby giving
rise to greater impunity, which comes at a high human
cost, as we all know.

