Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1874 (2009). The resolution provides a
strong and united international response to North
Korea's test of a nuclear device.

The message of the resolution is clear. North
Korea's behaviour is unacceptable to the international
community, and the international community is
determined to respond. North Korea should return
without conditions to a process of peaceful dialogue. It
should honour its previous commitments to
denuclearizing the Korean peninsula. It should shun
provocations and proliferation. But for now, its choices
have led it to face markedly stronger sanctions from
the international community.

The resolution condemns North Korea's nuclear
test in the strongest terms. It strengthens and enhances
sanctions on North Korea in five critically important
areas by imposing a total embargo on arms exports
from North Korea and significantly expanding the ban
on arms imports; by creating a wholly new framework
for States to cooperate in the inspection of ships and
aircraft suspected to be carrying weapons of mass
destruction or other banned goods; by calling on States
and international financial institutions to disrupt the
flow of funds that could support North Korea's missile,
nuclear or proliferation activities; by committing to
designate for targeted sanctions additional goods,
entities and individuals involved in North Korea's
illicit behaviour; and finally, by strengthening the
09-36806
mechanisms to monitor and tighten the implementation
of this toughened new sanctions regime. These
measures are innovative, they are robust, and they are
unprecedented.

North Korea chose a path of provocation. As
President Obama has said, actions must have
consequences. Resolution 1874 (2009) has seen to it
that they do. The resolution will give us new tools to
impair North Korea's ability to proliferate and threaten
international stability. We are particularly grateful to
our colleagues on the Council who have come together
to help adopt the resolution. We thank them for their
tremendous hard work in this process, for their good
efforts and for their goodwill.

Above all, resolution 1874 (2009) reflects the
resolve of the international community and the
Security Council, which has spoken with one voice.
The United States stands firmly behind its provisions
and is committed to ensuring its implementation.

