Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): On behalf of the
Malaysian delegation, Ijoin earlier speakers in thanking
you, Sir, and the Senegalese presidency for convening
this open debate. The significant number of high-level
participants is a testament to its importance. I also take
this opportunity to acknowledge the commendable
role that Senegal has played and continues to play as a
major troop- and police-contributing country to United
Nations peace operations.

I thank the Deputy Secretary-General and all the
briefers for their valuable contributions and insights.

Former Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold
famously said, "The United Nations was not created
to take mankind into paradise, but rather, to save
humanity from hell". Since that time, the concept of
United Nations peacekeeping, which he pioneered, has
evolved into one of the most important instruments
available to the United Nations to support diplomatic
efforts in maintaining international peace and security.
It is clear that the need for United Nations peacekeeping
remains immensely pressing. In 1990, the total United
Nations peacekeeping deployment stood at roughly
70,000 personnel. Today, that figure stands at slightly
more than 116,000 personnel deployed in 16 active
missions, 9 of which are in Africa and out of which 5
are in francophone countries.

A key turning point in the evolution of traditional
United Nations peacekeeping mandates was the
inclusion of civilian protection elements as the core
mission mandate, first introduced by resolution 1270
(1999), concerning the situation in Sierra Leone. As
rightly noted, an increasing number of peacekeeping
mission, which have the protection of civilians as a core
mission mandate, are currently deployed in complex
geopolitical environments, including those that pose
significant asymmetric threats. The recent surge and
persistence of asymmetric threats against United
Nations peacekeepers complicate already precarious
security situations and threaten to unravel hard-won
gains and progress in the restoration of peace and
stability in concerned countries.

In the face of increasing asymmetric threats, one
approach could be to address such threats with similarly
asymmetrical thinking, focusing on such key areas as
networking, methods and ideologies. Another area of
priority should be to ensure that troops on the ground
are afforded the necessary and appropriate equipment
and training. On the other hand, new technologies that
could contribute to better intelligence and situational
awareness are critical. More opportunities for troop-
contributing countries to partner with relevant donor
countries or institutions to equip troops with new,
specialized skills - for example, to detect and disarm
improvised explosive devices - are equally urgent.

Malaysia continues to believe that a holistic
approach is the best solution to containing asymmetric
threats. To that end, we reaffirm our support for and
endorsement of the recommendations of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
the priorities outlined in the Secretary-General's
implementation report (S/2015/682). To further
contribute to this debate, Malaysia wishes to make the
following recommendations.

First, the host nation is encouraged to establish a
networking mechanism to allow information-sharing
with peacekeepers. This will assist in planning for
operations as well as in identifying possible threats
prior to the United Nations peacekeeping deployment.

Secondly, the host nation forces should be ready to
work hand in hand with United Nations peacekeeping
operations in addressing the threats. The host nations
force must be prepared from the beginning of the
deployment of peacekeeping operations to assume full
security responsibility for the missions.

Thirdly, the war on asymmetric threats will take
generations to resolve. The host nation should therefore
place greater emphasis on human resource development,
particularly focusing on young people and women. These
groups must be given the opportunity to participate
actively in any peace process and peacebuilding efforts
in order to make the process sustainable.

Fourthly, peacekeeping missions must be adaptable
and responsive to the various lessons learned in
past experiences in order to continue to improve
themselves in responding to new threats, including
asymmetric ones.

As a firm believer in multilateral approaches to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
Malaysia has been an active contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping. Since the 1960s, just three years
after achieving independence, Malaysia has to date
participated in more than 30 peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, I wish to reaffirm Malaysia's continuing
commitment and support.

In conclusion, let me pay tribute to the tireless and
dedicated efforts of the Blue Helmets serving around
the world. We salute them for their bravery, selfless
service and sacrifices.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Thailand on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

