The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Afghanistan in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhadi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council deeply deplores the
continuation of armed hostilities in Afghanistan, which
have brought death and destruction to the people and
property of the country and threaten the peace and
security of the region.

"The Security Council is particularly concerned
about the recent intensification of shelling and air
attacks in and around the capital city of Kabul and the
blockade of the city, which has prevented the delivery
of foodstuffs, fuel and other humanitarian items to its
population.

"The Security Council calls on the parties
involved to end the hostilities forthwith and not to
obstruct the delivery of humanitarian aid and other
needed supplies to the innocent civilians of the city. In
this regard, the Council commends the efforts of the
United Nations, the International Committee of the
Red Cross and other humanitarian agencies in
Afghanistan, which are working under the most trying
circumstances, and the airlift of food supplies from
Peshawar to Kabul, and urges the international
community to continue its support of those life-
saving efforts.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned that
the continued conflict in Afghanistan provides fertile
ground for terrorism, arms transfers and drug
trafficking, which destabilize the whole region and
beyond. It calls on the leaders of the Afghan parties
to put aside their differences and to halt such
activities.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full support
for the efforts of the United Nations Special Mission
in Afghanistan to bring about a peaceful solution to
the conflict through the establishment of a fully
representative, broad-based, authoritative council
acceptable to all Afghans. It calls upon all Afghans
to cooperate fully with the Special Mission as it
works towards this goal.

"The Security Council calls on all States in a
position to do so to take steps to promote peace and
stability in Afghanistan, in particular by urging the
parties to the conflict to cooperate fully with the
United Nations Special Mission. It also calls on all
States to refrain from interfering in the internal
affairs of Afghanistan and to prevent the flow to the
Afghan parties of weapons and other supplies that
can fuel the fighting.

"The Security Council urges the captors of the
members of the crew of the Russian aircraft in
Kandahar to release them immediately and without
any preconditions.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the full sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of Afghanistan.
It reaffirms its readiness to assist the Afghan people
in their efforts to return peace and normalcy to their
country, and it encourages all States, as well as the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, the
Non-Aligned Movement and others, to support the
efforts of the United Nations Special Mission to the
same end.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the situation in Afghanistan."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/6.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

