Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking all the speakers,
and in particular Ms. Sarabi and Ms. Safi, for their
informative briefings. I also thank the Netherlands for
taking the initiative to hold this important debate on
8 March, on the occasion of International Women's Day,
which is also being celebrated in French, as we heard
from Ambassador Vassilenko. The country of Simone
de Beauvoir, Marie Curie and Simone Veil - my
country - takes this day very seriously. President
Macron has made promoting equality between men and
women the major cause ofhis five-year term. I will make
four comments today on the situation in Afghanistan.

My first comment concerns the fragile security
situation, which Ms. Safi described to us and which is
illustrated in particular by the recent terrorist attacks
on Kabul and Jalalabad and their impact on the Afghan
population. France firmly condemns those terrorist
attacks, which once again targeted Afghan civilians,
especially women and children. We reiterate our
sympathy and support for the victims of that cowardly
and hateful violence and for their families.

As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/165)
emphasizes, the level of violence in Afghanistan has
grown in recent months as a result of the ongoing
threat posed by the Taliban and the increased presence
of Da'esh, which Mr. Yamamoto mentioned just now.
France calls for all parties to protect civilians and
welcomes the efforts of the Afghan authorities in that
regard, as well as the determination of the Afghan
security forces in their fight against terrorism. France
also welcomes the commitments made in Kabul on
28 February by all of Afghanistan's neighbours,
and other international partners, to increasing their
cooperation with the Afghan authorities in order to
combat the double threat of terrorism and transnational
organized crime. The ongoing efforts of the Government
of Afghanistan and its international partners to fight
drug trafficking deserve special emphasis and should be
further strengthened, including within the framework
of the Paris Pact Initiative.

Women are dying of terrorist violence in
Afghanistan, but they are also victims of other types of
violence related to the Afghan conflict. In particular,
we condemn the executions of women ordered by the
Taliban courts and the numerous cases ofsexual violence,
of which there have been more than 170 verified cases
in 2017. We welcome the Afghan Government's launch
of an action plan to eliminate early marriages for the
period from 2017 to 2021, which we hope will help to
end that deplorably widespread practice.

Secondly, I would like to refer to the ongoing efforts
to arrive at a lasting political solution to the conflict
in Afghanistan. Since our last debate, in December
2017 (see S/PV.8147), progress has been made with an
Afghan-led peace process. The proposal for peace talks
without preconditions, made by President Ashraf Ghani
to the Taliban at the second Kabul Process conference
on 28 February, is a positive development. Along with
the countries and international organizations that are
participants in the Kabul process, France supports this
peace proposal, which offers the Taliban recognition as
a political force. However, we also want to emphasize
our demand that the Taliban renounce all violence.
France welcomes the efforts of the Afghan authorities
to establish a broad national consensus in support of
the peace proposal and encourages them to continue
along this path, particularly by working to ensure the
cohesiveness of the National Unity Government and
avoiding the temptation to retreat into communities or
ethnic groups, as well as by ensuring women's active
participation at all levels of decision-making.

With regard to that last point, we should note the
significant progress that has been achieved, especially
in the increase in the number of women in the High
Peace Council, as Ms. Sarabi mentioned today. The
gradual implementation of the national action plan
on the women and peace and security agenda is
essential in that respect. The time has come to make
a qualitative leap and ensure that Afghan women can
fully participate in all decision-making processes. That
should begin, for example, with greater participation in
the joint secretariat of the High Council, in which there
are currently only three women. There can be no lasting
peace without the active and effective participation of
Afghan women in the process, and that must be an
integral part of the national consensus forged during
the second Kabul conference. Finally, France urges all
partners in Afghanistan, especially its neighbours, to
support and facilitate this inclusive peace process. The
Security Council should also make itself available in
support of that process.

My third comment concerns the elections, which
are the other high priority for Afghanistan in 2018 and
2019. While progress has been made with electoral
reform and the preparations led by the Independent
Electoral Commission, there is still a long way to
go. France encourages the Afghan Government to
continue its efforts to fulfil its responsibilities, with the
support of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and its international partners,
in order to guarantee the holding of free, transparent
and inclusive local and parliamentary elections before
the end of the year. In that regard, as resolution 2405
(2018), which we have just adopted, emphasizes,
it is essential to ensure that women are able to fully
participate in the electoral processes as voters and
candidates. That means renewed efforts to make sure
that people understand the importance of everyone's
vote, including through awareness-raising campaigns.
That participation also means that women who have
decided to run as candidates must be protected and
assisted, and that those who have not yet dared to run
should be encouraged to do so. On this 8 March, we
also hope that the willingness of the Afghan authorities
to give women their rightful place will result in equal
access to education.

My fourth and last remark concerns the importance
of international support, and in particular UNAMA, for
Afghanistan. Following the Council's visit to Kabul in
January, the unanimous adoption of resolution 2405
(2018), renewing the Mission's mandate, is another
demonstration of the international community's
unwavering support for Afghanistan. By endorsing the
recommendations of the strategic review conducted in
the summer of 2017, the resolution enables UNAMA to
refocus on its core missions in support of peace efforts
and the preparation of the elections.

I pay tribute to the remarkable work done by
your delegation, Madam President, in the conduct
of the negotiations and I congratulate you on this
excellent result.

Finally, I welcome the Secretary-General's
decision to host the next ministerial conference in
Geneva in November, two years after the Brussels
Donors Conference. It will demonstrate once again our
collective and lasting commitment to peace, security
and development in Afghanistan.

Allow me in conclusion to reiterate France's full
support for the Afghan Government in the search for
lasting peace for all Afghan women and men, and
for United Nations personnel working in particularly
difficult conditions.

