The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which he requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a place at the Council
table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the
continued fighting around Bihac and deplores the
serious humanitarian situation in the Bihac area. It
reaffirms its support for the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and UNPROFOR.

"The Security Council recalls the statement of
the President of the Security Council of 6 January
1995 (S/PRST/ 1995/ 1). It reiterates the importance
it attaches to full compliance with the agreements
between the Bosnian parties on a cease-fire and on
a complete cessation of hostilities in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina concluded on 23 December
1994 and 31 December 1994 respectively
(S/1995/8). A11 involved must now make a concerted
effort to consolidate what has been achieved so far
to avoid the risk of a renewed outbreak of hostilities.

"The Security Council demands that all forces
in the Bihac area cease fighting immediately and
cooperate fully with UNPROFOR in achieving an
effective cease-fire. The Security Council reiterates
its condemnation of the continued violations of the
international border between the Republic of Croatia
and the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

"The Security Council condemns the recent
obstruction of humanitarian convoys destined for the
Bihac area by the Croatian Serb and Abdic forces.
It welcomes the fact that convoys are now getting
through, and calls upon all parties and others
concerned henceforth to facilitate the unhindered
flow of humanitarian assistance and complete
freedom of movement for UNPROFOR."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1995/8.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 7.30 pm.

