Mr. Siddig (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this very important meeting. It is a great pleasure for my delegation to have participated in this extremely important debate. Our thanks also go to Ms. DiCarlo, Ms. Mohammed and Mr. Dieye for their comprehensive briefings. For the first time ever in my country, the Prime Minister, Mr. Abdullah Hamdouk, wastargetedbyabomb on Monday morning, 9 March. Such an assassination attempt is an extraneous phenomenon to the Sudanese people. The Prime Minister escaped unscathed while he was going to his office, although some members of his convoy were injured. If that cowardly terrorist attack had succeeded, it would have torpedoed security and stability in my country. It goes without saying that instability and insecurity in the Sudan would pose a threat to the stability and security of the broader region and thereby threaten international peace and security. The Sudanese authorities are currently carrying out an investigation to identify the parties operating in the dark that orchestrated and attempted to carry out that ignoble act. Those responsible for it will be prosecuted and held accountable. My delegation sincerely thanks the Secretary- General of the United Nations, the Secretary-General of the African Union (AU), the League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), along with all sisterly and friendly countries that have condemned that heinous act. I would like to express our solidarity with the victims of terrorism around the world and also with all the countries that have suffered terrorist attacks. The Sudan reaffirms the vital importance of having in place an effective multilateral regime, in line with international law, with a view to better addressing the multifaceted and correlated challenges and threats that face our world. We also emphasize the main role played by the United Nations, particularly in view of the fact that we live today, more than ever before, in an interconnected and globalized world. No country can live isolated. We therefore recognize that our collective security depends on effective cooperation to withstand transnational challenges. The Sudan has ratified all international conventions related to counter-terrorism, in addition to regional conventions at the African and Arab levels. My country is working hard within the context of the efforts undertaken by the OIC to counter terrorism. We consider the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy to be one of the most important legal frameworks for offering guidance to national mechanisms that deal with anti-terrorism laws and legislations. The war that we are waging against terrorism today is one that we wage first and foremost to defend our humanitarian values and principles, as well as to consolidate human rights, the rule of law and peaceful and prosperous coexistence. The Sudan therefore condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and we emphasize our involvement and cooperation in implementing the United Nations Global Counter- Terrorism Strategy within a comprehensive, sustained and coordinated approach based on the four pillars of the Strategy, with a view to achieving a balanced and comprehensive approach. The primary responsibility for the implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is borne by the Member States, while taking into consideration that the United Nations must play an important role in enhancing coordination and consistency at the national, regional and international levels. The United Nations is to provide support to Member States, upon their request, in order to ensure the balanced implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The Sudan was one of the first countries to submit its report on the implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in line with the report of the Secretary-General (A/74/677) on the activities of the United Nations system in implementing the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. There is a need more than ever before for the Security Council to participate alongside Member States and regional organizations and institutions in efforts to prevent conflict in Africa. The Security Council plays an important role in ongoing coordination and cooperation with regional and subregional organizations, in particular the institutions of the African Union. Putting an end to conflict throughout Africa will depend on the participation of the parties concerned. Efforts to prevent and end conflict require a unified international position and a commitment to our common goals. The partnership between the United Nations and the African Union on issues of peace and security must be strengthened, particularly in light of the fact that the African Union and its institutions are making great efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals included in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Those Goals are aimed at addressing poverty and inequality, strengthening State institutions and promoting the principles of human rights, among others, in line with the mission included in the African Union Agenda 2063. Our national efforts to counter terrorism and further regional and international cooperation within the context of the United Nations Global Counter- Terrorism Strategy require technical support to build capacities and enable national mechanisms to play their role to the fullest, on the basis of mutual cooperation and respect, without undermining national ownership and sovereignty. That is a joint effort between the State and various civil society organizations, in addition to the media and research and study centres that monitor various phenomena and provide in-depth studies, while leading awareness and enlightening campaigns.
