Ms. Mogashoa (South Africa): At the outset, let me
join others in thanking the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, as well as Ms. Anny Tenga Modi, of the
civil society organization Afia Mama.

South Africa welcomes the peaceful holding of
the elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We congratulate the millions of Congolese people
who went to the polls. True to his promise to not hold
onto power, former President Joseph Kabila Kabange
peacefully transferred power to the opposition-party
leader President Fe'lix Tshilombo Tshisekedi. We
commend that young leader's positive legacy in the
Central African region.

We encourage the Congolese people and political
actors to continue with their peaceful conduct during
the local Government elections and approach those
elections with the same spirit as they did in the
presidential and legislative elections. We furthermore
encourage reconciliation in the post-election period to
build a peaceful Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We commend the opening up of the political space by
President Tshilombo Tshisekedi, marked by peaceful
demonstrations and access to media.

South Africa welcomes the important role played by
national and regional observation missions, including
by the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) and the African Union. In that regard, South
Africa calls for a sharper focus on the situation in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
while acknowledging the importance of addressing
the intercommunal violence in provinces such as Mai-
Ndombe and Kasai. We therefore support the Secretary-
General's call for MONUSCO's adjustment to redirect
the priorities of the Mission to the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where instability
and violence remain prevalent.

South Africa supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation for a 12-m0nth extension of the
mandate of MONUSCO. That will enable adequate time
for a more comprehensive review of MONUSCO, in full
consultation with the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Government, as well as SADC and all the relevant
stakeholders. In that regard, South Africa would like
to emphasize considering a 12-month mandate renewal,
taking into cognizance that there is a newly appointed
Government. As such, South Africa believes that the
new Government should be given time to determine
and outline its priorities prior to the drawdown of
MONUSCO, while mitigating a security vacuum.

The South African delegation therefore further
supports the Secretary-General's proposed strategic
review of MONUSCO. Furthermore, any consideration
of an exit strategy should be based on the positive
evolution and evaluation of the security situation
on the ground. South Africa therefore calls for the
strengthening of the multidimensional nature of
MONUSCO in order to address the challenges ofpeace,
security, governance and development in a concurrent
manner, based on the understanding of the nexus
between peace and development.

South Africa welcomes the contribution made by all
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We further call on all TCCs and
police-contributing countries to make a concerted effort
to increase the participation of women peacekeepers in
MONUSCO to address those and other challenges.

South Africa welcomes the positive developments
in the Kasai region with the laying down of arms. As
such, we encourage other regions to do the same.

South Africa reaffirms the importance of
fully supporting the Force Intervention Brigade, in
collaboration with the Forces armees de la Republique
Democratique du Congo, in order to neutralize
belligerent groups, such as the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda, the Allied Democratic Forces and
other armed groups that continue to threaten the stability
of the entire region. We commend the complementary
support provided by the Force Intervention Brigade in
containing the Ebola epidemic.

South Africa emphasizes that it is of the utmost
importance to uphold and implement the protection-of-
civilians mandate, which should be conducted without
any hindrance and in a manner that strengthens the
trust among the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Government and MONUSCO.

Ultimately, South Africa sees the protection of
civilians in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as
dependent upon the broader stabilization of the country.
In that regard, we call for a more proactive approach
through mechanisms such as the International Security
and Stabilization Support Strategy in order to support
and fulfil the implementation of the broader Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region. South Africa
calls on the Security Council to reaffirm its calls for
all signatories to the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework to implement their commitments under the
Framework to ensure long-term, sustainable peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

South Africa also emphasizes the need for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
strategies and support provided by MONUSCO to
take into account the socioeconomic environment
and economic prospects of demobilized combatants.
We call for support to be provided for skills
development for demobilized individuals in order to
facilitate reintegration and economic development
in communities.

South Africa continues to support a zero-tolerance
policy against sexual exploitation and abuse. In
that regard, South Africa has institutionalized in
its legislation the zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse. In that regard, we call for the
necessary support and mechanisms to be established to
support victims of sexual exploitation and abuse and
enable the reporting of such incidents.

South Africa encourages all those countries and
partners that have economic interests in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to ensure that the natural
resources of the country are used for development and
the benefit of the Congolese people.

