Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania) (spoke in Arabic): Once again, an open meeting of the Security
Council has been convened to deal with the situation
resulting from Israel's reoccupation of Palestinian
territories under the control of the Palestinian
Authority, in blatant violation of the agreements it has
signed with the Palestinian Authority and with the only
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, the
President of the Palestinian Authority, Mr. Yasser
Arafat.
The repetition of such meetings reflects the
inability of the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities with respect to the situation in the
Middle East. Why is that? How can there be further
hesitation or manoeuvring when we see the destruction
and killings that have taken place in the Jenin camp
and in the occupied towns and villages, and when we
witness the crimes that have been committed against
civilians - women, children and the elderly alike.

The Islamic Republic of Mauritania, which, like
the rest of the international community, had hoped that
the Madrid statement made by the "quartet" would lead
to a positive outcome and that the mission of Secretary
of State Colin Powell would succeed, wishes to

condemn Israel's actions- the massacres, the
destruction, the savage and unjustified aggression
against the Palestinian- and calls on the Security

Council to adopt the following measures.

First, the Security Council should send an
international mission of inquiry to the Palestinian
territories, in particular to Jenin, to ascertain the facts.

Secondly, it should enforce immediate respect for
Security Council resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002), thereby ensuring the full and unconditional
withdrawal of the Israelis from the occupied
Palestinian territories, with a view to enabling the
resumption of the peace process on the basis of the
outcome of the Madrid Conference and of resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

Thirdly, the Council must ensure access by
humanitarian organizations, so that they can carry out
their activities without hindrance.

Fourthly, it must send an international force to
protect the unarmed Palestinian people.

Fifthly, the Council must hasten to lift the siege
on President Arafat's headquarters, in order to enable
him to resume his work in service of the Palestinian
people and of peace, which he has always striven to
achieve.

