Ms. Uwizera (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court, for her sixth report on the
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011) and for the
additional information she has provided today.

Let me begin by acknowledging the efforts
undertaken by the Government of Libya and its people
in rebuilding their State institutions, particularly the
judicial system, at a moment when the country continues
to face challenges on the security and political fronts.
Rebuilding State institutions is not an easy task; it
requires the time and concerted efforts of all actors.
In that regard, we call upon all key partners of Libya
to continue providing the necessary support and to
enhance collaboration with the Government of Libya.

In the cases of Abdullah Al-Senussi and Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, it has always been our belief
that the primary responsibility to investigate and
prosecute the crimes against humanity of which those
individuals are accused lies with the Libyan national
jurisdiction. We therefore welcome the recent decision
by the Pre-Trial Chamber to uphold its principles of
complementarity by recognizing the steps already
taken by the Libyan courts in prosecuting Al-Senussi.

As far as Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi is concerned,
the Government has begun legal proceedings at home,
thus showing the ability and the willingness of the
national judicial institutions to uphold their duty. We
hope that demarche of the Libyan Government will be
considered a demonstration of goodwill and on the same
path of ensuring accountability, hence upholding the
same principle of complementarity. It should be noted
that the Libyan Government has taken steps recently in
its legislative development. We believe that this is an
indication that Libya is willing to prosecute those who
committed crimes and to put an end to impunity.

However, let us encourage the Government of Libya
to Show its goodwill by putting into practice the laws
promulgated, including the transitional justice law. We
particularly stress the need for the Libyan Government
to ensure that article 28 of that law, related to ending
the detention of those associated with the former
regime without due process, is fully implemented. In
that regard, we are concerned about the reported crimes
committed against the Tawerghan civilians who, to
this day, have been unable to return to their homes in
Tawergha. We hope that the Libyan Government will
ensure the equal protection of its citizens.

From our experience of the gacaca jurisdictions,
we believe that national initiatives like the fact-finding
and reconciliation commission in Libya can implement
strategies that could address allegations of crimes
committed at the local level, such as those committed
in Misrata and Tawergha in 2011. The international
community shall provide the necessary assistance in
supporting and strengthening that mechanism. We
stress that, fundamentally in order for the Libyan
people to reconcile, justice has to be rendered by the
Libyans themselves.

As for the other perpetrators of crimes against
humanity committed during the uprising who may
reside outside Libya, we encourage the Government of
Libya, in collaboration with the concerned countries
and other partners, to ensure that those who committed
crimes and who may continue to pose a threat to the
Libyans are brought to justice.

To conclude, let me reiterate that the International
Criminal Court should be used as a court oflast resort. It
is therefore important for the international community
to support and provide assistance to enhance national
capacities - in this case, Libyan capacities - to deal
with past crimes, promote the rule of law, establish a
sound judicial system and investigate and prosecute
serious crimes. Only by strengthening national capacity
are we really fighting impunity.

