Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
briefing and for focusing the attention of the Security
Council on the threat to international peace and

security posed by international organized crime and
drug trafficking. I am also very grateful to Mr. Yury
Fedotov for his informative briefing.

International organized crime and drug
trafficking have a profoundly negative impact on our
global society. They are corrosive influences that cause
pain and suffering to individuals, families, businesses
and communities. Organized criminal groups act across
international borders, exploiting conflict, poverty and
weak governance.

Estimates put the cost of organized crime to the
United Kingdom alone at between $30 billion and
$65 billion per year. Worldwide, the figures are
staggering, with the international drugs market alone
estimated to be worth $320 billion. The United Nations
estimates that the most powerful organized crime
syndicates can earn $1.5 billion per year. In practice,
this means that criminal groups have access to
resources many times greater than those of the
countries in which they operate.

Conflict and poverty, alongside poor governance,
create the conditions for organized crime to thrive.
High levels of corruption allow organized criminals to
operate, while the pervasiveness of organized crime
increases corruption, undermines institutions and
threatens stability in fragile countries. This underlines
the importance of coordinated international
engagement, often with a strong peacebuilding focus,
to build capacity in countries and regions most at risk.

Time and again, when we look at areas Where
organized crime is thriving, we see that weak judicial
systems and lack of effective policing capacity are a
significant part of the problem. Past experience has
also shown that where autocratic regimes have
suddenly collapsed, the resulting vacuum has allowed
the development of serious organized crime problems.
We must remain particularly alert to that threat in the
Middle East and North Africa, and look to quickly
support emerging new legal and governance structures.

The scale of the challenge requires a coordinated
response from the international community. As we
have heard today, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) can play a vital role in this
regard. The United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and the Convention
against Corruption remain the cornerstones of the
international legal framework in the fight against
transnational organized crime and corruption. We urge
all States to ratify and implement the provisions of
these treaties.

It is also vitally important that both Conventions
have robust and transparent review mechanisms to
ensure widespread implementation. It is for this reason
that last week in Vienna the United Kingdom, along
with 41 other Member States, agreed to a peer review
under the Convention against Corruption process. As
part of our peer review, the United Kingdom has
committed to holding a country visit, involve civil
society and publish the final report of our review this
year

As we have heard today, UNODC, through its
expertise and field-based projects, is coordinating the
international community's efforts to tackle organized
crime and drug trafficking. One example is the
UNODC counter-piracy programme, to which the
United Kingdom recently contributed more than
$7 million. The UNODC's work in this field is a prime
example of the international community working
together in the face of organized criminals feeding off
instability, poverty and weak governance.

Organized criminals will continue to be attracted
to what is undoubtedly highly lucrative illicit activity.
But we do know that such groups can be constrained
and defeated by effective law enforcement activity and
by combating the underlying causes. Our aim must be
to reduce the threats to our collective interests from
organized crime by working to ensure that the risks to
organized criminals outweigh their potential profit, to
reduce our collective vulnerabilities to organized crime
and to ensure that organized criminals have fewer
opportunities. A task of this size demands a
coordinated and sustained effort to help protect our
citizens and maintain peace and security. We look
forward to working with other Member States and with
the UNODC to achieve this.

