Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Skender Hyseni,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Kosovo, for their presence and their statements. I
commend the work of Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and that of all
the members of his Mission.

More than two years since its declaration of
independence, Kosovo continues to make progress,
stabilize its institutions and demonstrate its resolve to
meet European standards. An increasing number of
States are joining those that have already recognized
Kosovo's independence. Such recognitions, 68 to date,
of which 22 are members of the European Union, help
the young State to strengthen and take its place on the
international scene.

Kosovo's status has already been the subject of
endless negotiations under various auspices. Such
negotiations, which have explored all possible avenues,
have made clear the impossibility of reaching a
mutually acceptable compromise. In that context,
independence, which is the expression of the will of
the great majority of the Kosovar people, was the only
solution. That is an undeniable and irrevocable fact.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2010/ 169), the security situation on the ground has
improved, with a decrease in incidents during the
reporting period. We welcome that, but any incident -
be it a case of common crime or inter-communal
violence and regardless of whether it targets Albanians
or Serbs - is unacceptable. The Kosovo authorities,
supported by the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, must therefore prosecute the perpetrators of
such crimes and step up efforts in that area.

Regional cooperation is also growing owing to
calmer dialogue between political leaders and civil
society throughout the Western Balkans. In that regard,
we call on Serbian and Kosovo leaders to take
advantage of opportunities to participate jointly in
regional meetings.

While the future presence of Serbia and Kosovo
in the European Union is, in our View, assured, it is
equally clear that it cannot come about until both
countries have taken the paths to dialogue and calmer
neighbourliness and have learned the lessons of a
reality that transcends vain and dangerous rhetoric. As
our Foreign Minister and the European Minister for
Foreign Affairs have pointed out, that is not a
condition, but a political necessity.

Kosovo must focus on its basic priorities and to
continue to make progress on the rule of law and good
governance. We also call on the Kosovo Government to
do its utmost for those belonging to national
minorities. Such twofold efforts will enable Kosovo to
advance on the path towards membership of the
European Union.

France will continue to give the situation in
Kosovo the highest priority and to promote, to the best
of its ability, dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo and
their mutual European rapprochement.

