Mr. Ahmad (Bangladesh): May I begin by
thanking you, Sir, for convening this meeting on the
very tragic and deteriorating situation in the Middle
East. We gather here today against the sombre
backdrop of continued violence in the occupied
Palestinian territories. It is taking a heavy toll on
human life and destroying property. Each act of
violence pushes back the hope for peace.

Bangladesh strongly condemns the upsurge of
attacks on civilian populations. Let me take this
opportunity to express our deepest condolences to the
families of the victims.

The persistence of violence has never before done
so much damage to the peace process and the agreed
basis of negotiation. This damage may well be
irreparable if no remedial steps are taken now.
Continued occupation, economic strangulation and
blockades have condemned the Palestinians to lead a
subhuman life in the occupied territories. These actions
by Israel have only succeeded in seriously eroding
mutual confidence between the two sides and in
breeding frustration. Recent events show that such a
blatant disregard for human life and dignity cannot
ensure security for anyone. Clearly, there is a need to
prevent further deterioration of the situation. We have
remained quite passive in the Council until this
moment and have witnessed unmistakable signs of
great instability in the region, with grave consequences
for international peace and security.

Over the last two weeks, laudable efforts at
mediation have been made by all sides involved. That
they have not been very successful would be a fair
assessment. We are therefore convinced that the
Council must respond to the dire situation on the
ground and be responsible for the obligations placed on
it by the Charter.

What can the Council do to respond to this
situation? In our View, at this hour we need to call on
both sides to stop all violence forthwith and return to
peaceful negotiations. Setting any kind of conditions
would be tantamount to taking sides, which the Council
can ill afford. It would be prudent for the Council to
refer to the Mitchell Committee recommendations,
which have been accepted by both sides and for which
the Council has expressed its support. Both sides must
start taking steps immediately for comprehensive
implementation of the recommendations. Doing so will
pave the way for a return to negotiations within the
Middle East peace process for a final settlement of all
outstanding issues on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace.

The draft resolution reflects all the above
elements in a balanced and constructive manner. We
believe that it provides us with an opportunity to
demonstrate the capacity of the Council to act - and
act constructively. Bangladesh therefore fully supports
the resolution and will vote for it.

