Mr. Belinga Eboutou (Cameroon) (interpretation from French): First of all, I should like to say how
pleased we are to see you, Sir, presiding over the work of
the Security Council in the month of April and over the
present discussion on Africa. You represent a country
whose commitment to peace and development in Africa
is demonstrated anew each day. The first Tokyo
International Conference on African Development, and
soon the Second, are witness to that. We feel sure that
under your guidance the Council will give a new impetus
to the relationship between the United Nations and Africa.
I would also pay tribute to the positive actions of your
predecessor, Ambassador Sallah of the Gambia. Finally,
I would like to thank you for allowing me to speak here
before this assembly on the occasion of this debate, which
is important on two grounds.

It is important, first of all, because it deals with
international peace and security and the development of
Africa.

It is equally important for the United Nations, and
more specifically for the Security Council. The
international community's reluctance in the last few years
to take the appropriate financial and political risks in
order to deploy peacekeeping operations and to ensure
development in Africa was already giving rise to a
number of questions. A feeling of marginalization was
developing here and there, and even of abandonment of
a continent presumably doomed only to war, disease and
poverty. The present debate thus comes at a good time, so
that this Organization and the Security Council can regain
credibility among the people of Africa - particularly the
Security Council, which has done so much in the past for
the liberation of our continent.

We would also take this opportunity to congratulate
the Secretary-General for his courageous report. The
document does indeed describe the true state of Africa; it

 

is an in-depth and detailed study of the causes of conflicts
in various parts of our continent and of the elements that
could provide possible solutions.

We are also pleased that he has drawn the attention of
the Security Council to the current economic situation in
Africa, which will become a threat to international peace
and security if it is not dealt with. As the Security Council
recognized in its presidential statement when it met at the
level of Heads of State and Government on 31 January
1992,

"The absence of war and military conflicts
amongst States does not in itself ensure international
peace and security. The non-military sources of
instability in the economic, social, humanitarian and
ecological fields have become threats to peace and
security." [S/23500, eleventh paragraph]

On the question of conflicts, Cameroon fully endorses
the recommendations of the Secretary-General on
preventive diplomacy and the restoration and maintenance
of peace. Priority should be given to preventive diplomacy,
which has three tasks: to detect as soon as possible
situations that may give rise to conflicts and put an end to
them before violence emerges; to ease tensions before they
lead to conflicts; and to act quickly where conflict has
already broken out in order to contain it and eliminate its
underlying causes.

Action to maintain peace and prevent the thundering
of guns cannot be delayed under any circumstances. That
is the vital duty of the Security Council: to prevent the
thunder of guns. Here we should commend and thank the
Secretary-General for the initiatives he has taken with
respect to conflicts in some African countries, by deploying
missions of investigation, mediation and good offices and
by sending special representatives. In this connection, the
recent establishment of the Executive Committee on Peace
and Security under the authority of the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs should be lauded.

Cameroon, which has made peace the main pillar of
its policy within and beyond its borders, expects the United
Nations, and the Security Council in particular, to
implement preventive diplomacy with determination, in
order to keep disputes between States from degenerating
into armed conflicts and to shift potential conflicts from the
battlefield to a forum of peaceful resolution.

As a member of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa and as
a signatory of the Non-Aggression Pact between the
States of Central Africa of July 1996, Cameroon is
concerned about the proliferation of illegal weapons in
Africa. The statistics in this regard are clear and
particularly enlightening. At the end of the cold war the
arms industry converted to the production of light
weapons. The blame for the proliferation of illegal arms
in Africa belongs to the operators of the black market.
They sell those weapons at such low prices that they are
now available to the ordinary citizen. We can see the
gravity of such a situation.

That is why Cameroon endorses the Secretary-
General's proposal to compile and publish a list of the
names of these merchants of arms and death in order to
permit the international community to take concerted
action to put a decisive end to their illegal and deadly
activities.

Peace and development are intrinsically linked.
Development is even the new name for peace, but there
can be no sustainable development without lasting peace
and no lasting peace without sustainable development. We
have come to realize that these elements are
interdependent and that there can be no real progress
without the advancement of these elements.
The lack of development can become a threat to
international prosperity, peace and security. As the means
of communication continue to develop, the distance
between different parts of the world shrinks. In the
twenty-first century we will not be able to content
ourselves with having little islands of prosperity and
opulence amid an ocean of suffering and misery. This
means that Africa's current economic backwardness
remains a major challenge to us, a challenge that we can,
and must, face together.
 

The stability of the world and our very survival depend
upon it.

The Secretary-General has done well to identify the
causes of this situation: the drop in official development
assistance. the excessive debt burden. the reduction in
investment and tariff barriers that block the access of our
products to international markets. The Secretary-General
has also done well to suggest some solutions to these ills.

We support his recommendation that the international
financial institutions review the conditions imposed on
countries in crisis or that have just emerged from crisis, in
order not to compromise the peace process through
measures that are too rigorous. We think that it is necessary
to go even further and to ask financial institutions to do this
for all African countries.

Of course, it is not the role of the Security Council to
finance development, but, since development is linked to
peace. the Council could call on the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the international financial
institutions to take up the report of the Secretary-General
and. in add on. to concern themselves more with the
economic situation in Africa on a priority basis.

