Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Sir, and the delegation of Costa Rica for taking the
initiative to organize this debate of the Security
Council on the issue of strengthening collective
security through general regulation and reduction of
armaments. I thank you for personally presiding over
today's debate.

I would like to extend a warm welcome to
Mr. Samuel Lewis-Navarro, Vice-President and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Panama.

As we debate the issue of general regulation and
reduction of armaments as a means to strengthen
collective security today, global military expenditure
and the arms trade represent the largest spending in the
world at over $1 trillion a year and keep rising. At the
same time, nearly 1 billion people in the world are
living in extreme poverty, with all sorts of threats
posed by global issues, such as epidemics,
environmental pollution, climate change and terrorism,
which are difficult to solve owing to, among other
things, the lack of funds.

Those realities in the context of the post-cold-war
period, the end of which promised the contrary, once
again point to what the Secretary-General of our
Organization rightly said back in 2004 in his note on
the findings on the relationship between disarmament
and development since 1987:

"Excessive armament and military spending can
have negative impact on development and divert
financial, technological and human resources
from development objectives [because]... their
spread and availability can threaten physical
safety, endanger stability and welfare and
diminish social and economic confidence, thus
discouraging investment and economic
development and contributing to a cycle of
poverty, underdevelopment and distress."
(A/59/ZZ9, para. 18)

The outbreak or the continuation and
intensification of hostilities in hot spots under
examination by the Security Council, especially in
Africa and even in the heart of Europe recently, further
points to the fact that what the Secretary-General has
warned of as a possibility was and continues to be a
reality and makes more pertinent the commitment of
Member States, as enshrined in Article 26 of the Charter,

"to promote the establishment and maintenance
of international peace and security with the least
diversion for armaments of the world's human
and economic resources".

Sharing the common understanding that the
reduction of armaments and development are two
distinct, yet mutually reinforcing processes that are
linked by security in all its aspects, my delegation also
shares the widely-held View that measures aimed at
achieving the regulation and reduction of armaments as
a means to strengthen collective security must be based
on and carried out in the spirit of multilateralism and in
accordance with international law and the United
Nations Charter.

In that connection, we stress the central role of
the United Nations, especially the General Assembly -

whose membership has increased nearly fourfold since
the birth of the Organization and its Charter - as well
as its disarmament-related bodies, such as the
Disarmament Commission and the Conference on
Disarmament, which, to the general dismay of Member
States, have been idle for many years without
substantive agendas or work programmes.

While witnessing the constant rise in global
military spending to more than $1 trillion per year, as I
mentioned above - nearly 40 per cent higher than it
was 10 years ago - but with only about $20 billion
per year to spend on its programmes in all areas, the
United Nations, which was founded with the purpose
of maintaining international peace and security and
achieving international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social, cultural
or humanitarian character, must be able to contribute to
narrowing the gap between what countries are prepared
to allocate for military means, on the one hand, and to
alleviate poverty and promote economic development,
on the other.

By its resolution 1809 (2008), the Security
Council underlines the importance of strengthening the
capacity of regional and subregional organizations in
conflict prevention, crisis management and
post-conflict stabilization. Regional organizations
obviously play an important role in enhancing the
security of the States of their region and reducing the
risk of regional conflict, thus contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security by
promoting regional disarmament, taking into account
the specific characteristics of each region and in
accordance with the principle of undiminished security
at the lowest level of armaments. The establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones in various parts of the
world testifies to the role that regional organizations
can play and indeed have played in nuclear
disarmament and the non-proliferation regime, which
is high on the agenda of the Security Council.

In the changed international context and with the
emergence of terrorism, the tendency - here and there
and now and then - to move away from seeking
multilateral solutions to questions of disarmament and
security, the phenomena of underdevelopment and
poverty and the continued arms race in many regions
of the world are contributing factors to the insecurity
of many countries. It is therefore more important than
ever to strengthen cooperation and coordination
between the Security Council and other United Nations
bodies - above all, the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission - as well as with regional and

subregional organizations, in promoting collective
security, armament regulation and disarmament, and
demobilization and reintegration. Those should be
complementary measures for peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts and for ensuring implementation
by Member States of their commitments under the
international treaties to which they are party. Viet Nam
looks forward to contributing to strengthening such
cooperation and coordination.

Once again, I thank you, Sir, and your delegation
for this initiative and for the draft presidential
statement, which we are ready to support.

