Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
condemns the bombing that occurred in Afghanistan
on 17 September. China expresses its sympathy to the
Government and the people of Afghanistan. We hope
that the victims and their families will rebound from
that tragedy as soon as humanly possible.

China is pleased by the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2489 (2019), on the technical renewal of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), as it meets the expectations of the Afghan
people and enables UNAMA to continue its work to
fulfil its mandate. It also addressed all parties' concerns.

As an immediate neighbour, China would like to see
nothing more than peace and stability in Afghanistan.
China hopes for the realization of development and
prosperity in that country. China places the utmost
importance on the interests and well-being of the Afghan
people. The interests of the people of Afghanistan are
a most sincere priority for China. In order to achieve
lasting peace in Afghanistan, we strongly believe that
there must be impetus for economic development.

In order to maintain security and stability in
that country, we must resolve security concerns. The
unity of the Security Council must be maintained,
and, to that end, we must respect the past consensus
that we achieved. It must be stressed that helping the
Afghan economy is vital to achieving lasting peace and
stability in the country. That is what the Afghan people
want, and no country has the right to deprive them of
a better life.

China continues to emphasize that now is not the
time to adopt a comprehensive resolution. A resolution
concerning a technical renewal is the only solution.
China has always participated in consultations with
a responsible and constructive attitude on extending
UNAMA's mandate and proposed revisions on adopting
a comprehensive resolution. We regret that several
countries refused to keep the consensus text previously
agreed and to address other parties' core concerns. The
text also failed to address the possible security vacuum
in Afghanistan. All of that led to serious divisions
among parties.

It must be pointed out that someone said that
promoting Afghanistan's regional cooperation and
connectivity has nothing to do with the UNAMA
mandate. That is an utter distortion of the UNAMA
mandate. China would welcome the return of the
countries concerned to the pathway of consultations
on resolving problems and reaching consensus on the
technical renewal of UNAMA's mandate. Facts show
that confrontation is not the answer. We can rely only
on cooperation to resolve issues, which is the shared
expectation of the international community for the
Security Council.

The situation in Afghanistan is at a critical
juncture. China supports Afghanistan in the holding
of its general elections as scheduled, advancing the
peace process, strengthening the capacity-building of
the Afghan security forces and actively participating
in regional cooperation and connectivity to lay a solid
foundation for achieving lasting peace and stability.

China hopes that UNAMA will continue to act
in accordance with its mandate to help Afghanistan
with the holding of elections, connectivity, regional
cooperation, security, counter-terrorism, anti-narcotics
efforts and reconstruction, among other areas. China
will continue to contribute to achieving peace, stability
and prosperity in Afghanistan.

