Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Ambassador Gary Quinlan
for presenting his report on the activities of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). The Committee must continue
to work impartially and objectively and in the interest
of a political and diplomatic solution concerning Iran's
nuclear programme.

The Committee undertook intensive work during
the reporting period: a programme of work was adopted
and the final report of the Panel of Experts, among
others, was considered (see 8/2013/331, annex). Efforts
also continued in the main areas of the Committee's
activity, including investigation into possible sanctions
violations and processing information received
concerning agreements and drafts of various documents.

We note the useful work of the Panel of Experts
to provide the Committee with tangible assistance.
We have always believed that the Panel should work
in a balanced and objective manner and carry out its
activities under the Committee's guidance. At the same
time, we would like to recall that the members of the
Panel act in a personal, not a national, capacity.

In the context ofthe investigation ofcases ofpossible
sanctions violations, we should like to emphasize that
the Committee's conclusions and assessments should be
based only on reliable and verifiable information, with
a thorough analysis of all circumstances surrounding
an incident. Hasty conclusions not based on facts must
be avoided.

We welcome the statement by Iran's President-elect,
Mr. Hassan Rowhani, with regard to Tehran's readiness
to demonstrate more openness, including on the nuclear
programme. Transparency in the monitoring of the
process is precisely what the international community is
striving for through the six international mediators and
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We
trust that those intentions will be borne out in practice,
both on the IAEA platform and at the negotiating table
between Iran and the six mediators.

We hope that, soon following the assumption
of office by the new President of Iran, another full-
scale round of dialogue will take place between the
six mediators and Iran, especially as the substantive
work to move towards initial negotiated solutions has
already been done. We see no alternative to a political
and diplomatic settlement. Efforts in this area should be
based on the principles of gradualism and reciprocity
and be in line with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. However, we are convinced that
collective actions by the international community to
resolve issues related to Iran's nuclear programme are
being undermined by unilateral sanctions. In a number
of cases, such sanctions are extraterritorial in nature,
which is categorically unacceptable from the point of
view of international law. Russia will continue to do
its utmost to achieve progress in settling the situation
concerning Iran's nuclear programme.

