Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate.

Ireland aligns itselfwith the statement made earlier
by the observer of the European Union. We would like
to provide the following remarks in a national capacity.

Ireland began participating in United Nations
peace operations in 1958, three years after becoming
a State Member of the United Nations. The nature of
international conflict has changed considerably since
then. We have today deliberate attacks on civilians and
on their hospitals and schools. We have the proliferation
ofnon-State armed groups and their asymmetric tactics.
We have blatant disregard for international human rights
and humanitarian law, along with a culture of impunity.

The three high-level reviews of last year pointed
to ways to address these issues. First, mandate design
must be improved and the needs of civilians must be
placed at the centre. No two conflicts are the same;
it follows therefore that no two mandates should be
identical. Unfortunately, this has not always been the
case in United Nations peace operations. We have, too
many times, followed a template-style format when
designing mission mandates rather than asking the
difficult questions: What are the specific needs of this
country? Ofthis conflict? Ofthese people? And how can
we help to meet these needs? While 10 out of 16 peace
operations now have protection of civilian mandates,
the aim to protect civilians is the intrinsic reason any
mission exists. The protection of civilians must be at
the heart of the planning process, with more proactive
and robust political, civilian and military interventions
for protection allowed for throughout all missions.

Secondly, our peacekeeping and protection efforts
must be grounded in respect for international law.
Peace missions are often deployed in situations where
there has been an almost complete break-down in the
rule of law. At the World Humanitarian Summit in
Istanbul, Ireland made a specific commitment to ensure
that our personnel deployed on overseas peacekeeping
missions operate at the highest standards in accordance
with international humanitarian and human rights law.
We also committed to ensuring accountability for any
failure that would amount to a crime under international
law, and we are pleased to be among the growing list of
Member States that have endorsed the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians.

While it is important to advance and propagate
international frameworks for the protection of civilians,
we need to ensure that this is felt on the ground. Next
week, the United Nations Training School Ireland
will host training for both national and international
students on the protection of civilians. Now in its
second year, this Irish Defence Forces initiative allows
participants to share best practices from the ground,
while delivering valuable training, including in the
area of international human rights law. Furthermore,
we cannot allow impunity for violations of some of the
most basic tenets of international law in the area of the
protection of civilians. Tackling the issue demands a
comprehensive approach to capacity-building from
Member States and the international and regional
system alike.

Thirdly, the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda is a valuable tool to advance
the protection ofcivilians. Resolution 1325 (2000) was a
milestone for the Council. It acknowledged that women
and girls face specific risks in conflict settings, which
require specific actions for protection. Ireland works
to mainstream gender throughout military operations
by appointing gender advisers in each brigade and
formation, and we have prioritized diversity in our
Defence Forces' recently launched recruitment drive.
The first workshop of gender advisers from across
regional organizations, which Ireland hosted this month,
is another firm step towards ensuring the participation
of women in peacekeeping. Furthermore, Ireland is
resolute in its belief that the heinous crime of sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers can be fully
stamped out, including by strengthened predeployment
and ongoing professional training programmes.

I conclude on a potentially paradoxical note.
Ireland believes that every discussion of peacekeeping
operations should include the following question: How
can we prevent the deployment of those operations in the
first instance? A successful whole-of-United Nations
approach to peacebuilding and conflict prevention will
require embedding in peace operations the objective of
tackling the root causes of their deployment.

