Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your presentation
of the report of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). We recognize your committed
work as Chair of that subsidiary body of the Security
Council.

The report shows that the 1737 Committee continues
to work hard; however, we also note the absence of
progress on a number of cases of which the Committee
is seized. It is regrettable that, despite the efforts of the
Chair of that Committee, none of the recommendations
in the final report of the Panel of Experts has yet been
adopted. Those recommendations were nevertheless
balanced. They had been presented unanimously by the
Panel of Experts, whose exemplary work I commend.
The implementation of the recommendations would
allow us to make the sanctions regime more operational.
We must continue to ensure that the Committee pursues
its consideration thereof.

Another important issue is the firing of Shahab-l
and-3 ballistic missiles during the Great Prophet VII
military exercises. More than a year has gone by since
that flagrant violation of the provisions of paragraph
9 of resolution 1929 (2010) took place. It is time for
the Committee to adopt the required measures. The
absence of any response to the letter sent to the Iranian
authorities should not serve as a pretext for inaction. It
is a question of credibility.

The same reasoning applies to the interception on
23 January of the Jihan, a vessel that was transporting
arms to Yemen. The absence of a reply to the letter
sent in May to the Iranian authorities does not exempt
the Committee from continuing to work to adopt
appropriate measures in response to that effort to avoid
the sanctions regime, especially since such a delivery of
arms could further destabilize a region that is already
in a precarious situation.

Such potential regional instability also leads us
to be concerned by Iranian leaders' public statements
about the delivery of arms to Gaza. On that issue,
we have enough information, gathered by the Panel
of Experts, to request clarifications from the Iranian
authorities.

Today's briefing by the Chair of the 1737
Committee referred to the very useful briefing of the
Special Representative of Interpol on 25 July to the
Committee. In that context, we would welcome an
agreement between the 1737 Committee and Interpol
with respect to the distribution of special notices. Those
notices have been successful in providing information
and in raising awareness among States Members of
their commitments under the sanctions regime. We
believe that there is no serious justification for the 1737
Committee's failure to use them when almost all other
sanctions committees do so.

While it is true that sanctions do not represent an
end in themselves, we should also remember that they
are not the result of happenstance. Such measures
are the outcome of ongoing concern over the nature
of the Iranian nuclear programme. They represent
the international community's response to Iran's
refusal to respect international commitments and to
fully cooperate with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA).

In that regard, too little progress has been
achieved, judging by the most recent report of the
IAEA (GOV/20l3/40) published on 28 August. The
report clearly shows that there has been a slowdown
in the growth of the stockpile of uranium enriched to
20 per cent, but it also confirms enrichment activities
and the development of capacities to produce enriched
uranium, thanks to the establishment of hundreds of
new IR-2m centrifuges. Moreover, the construction of
a heavy-water reactor in Arak is advancing, and Iran
continues to refuse to allow access to the Parchin site
to IAEA inspectors. All those developments cast doubt
on Iran's real attentions.

We note with interest the scheduled relaunching
of discussions on 27 September between Iran and the
IAEA to define a so-called structured approach in order
to resolve outstanding issues with regard to the possible
military dimensions of the Iranian nuclear programme.
We sincerely hope that, unlike previous talks, these
will allow us to move forward. On 17 August, the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Catherine Ashton,
informed the new Minister of Foreign Affairs of Iran,
Mr. Mohammad Javad Zarif, of the determination of
the E3+3 to find a diplomatic solution to the Iranian
nuclear issue. She reasserted the importance of holding
substantive talks that would rapidly lead to tangible
results. We endorse that appeal, and we encourage the
new leadership in Iran to commit as soon as possible to
constructive negotiations with the E3+3 and to take the
measures necessary to demonstrate to the international
community that its nuclear programme has strictly
peaceful ends.
