I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing. I would also like to thank Ms. Noura Ghazi for lending her voice to the families of the thousands of Syrians that have gone missing over years of conflict. Whether their loves ones are detained or dead, families have the right to know their whereabouts. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic can be both a challenge of potentially unprecedented scale for the Syrian people and an opportunity to enhance our solidarity with the most vulnerable. A year ago, the Security Council was united in adopting resolution 2474 (2019), on missing persons in armed conflict. With it, the Council underscored that the steps set out therein could "contribute to the process of confidence building between parties to armed conflict". In the Syrian context, with more than 90,000 people reportedly having gone missing since the start of the conflict, achieving more progress on the humanitarian release of detainees could be the first step in a national trust-building effort that could eventually constitute the cornerstone of a broader process whereby Syrians achieve reconciliation. We must advocate tirelessly for the promotion of truth, justice and accountability and the fight against impunity, so that those responsible pay the price of their acts. The Security Council therefore has the responsibility to continue to demand greater meaningful action on the release of detainees and the provision of information about the missing to their families. The deteriorating living conditions of Syrians are a source of great concern for the Dominican Republic. The convergence of a humanitarian crisis, an economic crisis and a potential public-health crisis is undermining the capacity of the people to cope and seriously impacting their resilience. Adding to the list of concerns is the worrying signs of resurgence and regrouping in the region of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. They are again attacking civilians and security forces and terrorizing farmers by destroying their livelihoods and infrastructure. All these conditions reiterate the pressing need to continue to push for a definitive and sustainable political solution to the conflict. I say it again: a political solution - one that helps Syrians rebuild and relaunch their country based on the rule of law and on peace and security for all its citizens, in fairness and equality. To conclude, the Dominican Republic reiterates the following several points. A lasting national ceasefire is necessary - all parties, and those who support them, must commit to this, and allow the suffering population, particularly in the north- west, some sense of security. It is important to facilitate safe and unimpeded access to serve all those in need, particularly in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic and the persistence of pressing needs all across the country. There is no military solution to this conflict, only one based on a negotiated settlement led and owned by the Syrians and facilitated by the United Nations, as outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). The Constitutional Committee can indeed be a door opener for a broader political process. Therefore, parties need to continue their consultations as soon as the conditions are in place to do so. Finally, the Government of Syria needs to show credible and renewed commitment to the broad political process with words and with actions, and, building on that commitment, create the conditions for free and fair elections next year. The opportunity is now in the Government's hands to move forward and meet the aspirations of the people of Syria, including those living as refugees. A sustainable solution to this conflict will only emerge from the determined commitment of all parties to the peace and prosperity of the Syrian people as their main objective.
