Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): As this is the first open
meeting of the Security Council under your leadership,
Sir, I wholeheartedly wish the Chinese presidency
every success in its endeavours this month, as it holds
this important international position, and assure you of
our full support.

We would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
her important briefing. We take note of the Prosecutor's
sixteenth report and update on the activities regarding
the situation in Libya, which, unfortunately, are not
very encouraging.

Ongoing political instability, a fragile security
situation and a breakdown in the rule of law continue
to create a breeding ground for growing impunity
on the part of armed militias and terrorist groups. In
that regard, we would like to appeal to all States to
recognize that terrorism poses a threat to the peace
and security of that country and other countries and
also has a negative impact on sustainable development
and the humanitarian sphere. Nonetheless, widespread
violations of human rights continue to be committed
against civilians and vulnerable populations. Thousands
of migrants and refugees in Libya are suffering abuses
and detention under inhuman conditions.

Kazakhstan reiterates its position that an effective
and credible Government is crucial to reinforcing
Libya's commitment to restoring and promoting
the rule of law, as well as its capacity in that regard,
addressing impunity, protecting basic human rights and
providing justice for past violations. To that end, the
international community's support to Libya remains
vital to restoring stability and security throughout
the country. Such stability and security require the
unification and rebuilding of all national institutions,
including political authorities and the security and
defence forces. The United Nations has a key role to play
in that process, and we reiterate our support to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salame'.

