Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Ms. Sandra Honore, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
has provided the Council with a very important and
informative briefing on the situation in Haiti. My
comments will focus on political developments,
the security situation, humanitarian issues, and the
drawdown and reconfiguration of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

On political developments, we are pleased to note
that the tensions of the early part of the reporting period
in Haiti were reduced by the promulgation of a new
electoral law and the launch of a national dialogue. We
commend the civil society groups and religious leaders
involved in facilitating the dialogue. We also commend
His Excellency Mr. Michel Martelly, President of Haiti,
for accommodating various shades of opinion in the
spirit of fostering genuine democracy in his country.
That has contributed significantly to lessening political
tensions. We urge the executive branch and Parliament
to strengthen their cooperation in the interest of good
governance and the supremacy of the law.

We note with appreciation the engagement of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Honore with political actors in Haiti and her advocacy
for democracy, nationa1 dialogue and progress towards
the holding of elections. We also note the support
provided by MINUSTAH to the Government of Haiti
in the registration of new voters, the distribution of
national identity cards, and the training of police and
electoral officers.

On security, we are pleased to note that the situation
was relatively stable during the reporting period. In
particular we note the downward trend in major crimes,
such as homicide and kidnapping. We also welcome the
expansion and improved performance of the Haitian
National Police during the reporting period.

On the humanitarian front, we are pleased with the
progress that Haiti has made so far. We take particular
note of the fact that 90 per cent of those displaced
by the earthquake of 2010 have left the camps. We
commend the Government of Haiti, the United Nations
and non-governmental partners for that significant
achievement. We are also pleased to note the reduction
of cholera infections by half since 2010 and of the
number of people affected by severe food insecurity
from 1.5 million in early 2013 to 600,000 by the end of
the year. We sincerely hope that efforts will be made to
reduce that number further - to zero, if possible.

Concerning MINUSTAH's consolidation and
reconfiguration beyond 2016, we note the five options
presented by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2014/162) as they pertain to the Mission's political
and peacekeeping functions. We look forward to the
full-scale United Nations-wide strategic assessment
that will be carried out with a view to studying
conditions on the ground as they relate to the five
options. MINUSTAH has done a splendid job in Haiti.
We commend the officers and men and women of the
Mission for their courage, commitment and sense of
duty and for enabling Haiti to be where it is today after
its terrible misfortune.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, especially for her astute leadership
of MINUSTAH. She has upheld the values and
integrity of the United Nations in difficult and trying
circumstances. In doing so, she has confirmed to us
the soundness of the Secretary-General's judgement in
appointing women to important positions in the United
Nations system. Only last week, Ms. Karin Lundgren
addressed the Council on the situation in Liberia (see S/PV.7145). Previously, Ms. Helen Clark addressed us
on the United Nations Development Programme (see S/PV.7143), and before that Ms. Mary Robinson on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region of Africa (see S/PV.7137). All of them
demonstrate the importance of the appointment of
women to key positions.

Finally, we would like to suggest that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General compare notes
with the Peacebuilding Commission on best practices
and lessons learned in various fields of operation in
Africa, particularly in such areas as disaster reduction
and resilience strategies and building quick-response
strategies in order to mitigate disaster situations such
as those faced in Haiti, and in developing quick-impact
projects, such as with respect to women's empowerment,
grass-roots participation in national dialogue and
political processes, and civil society involvement in
national development efforts.

