Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
should like first of all to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH). We listened with interest to the
briefing given my Mr. Hedi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, and we thank him
for the useful information that he has just given us. We

 

pay tribute to the personnel of UNMIBH for their devotion
and for the tireless efforts that they are constantly making
for the cause of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
throughout the region.

The Secretary-General's report and Mr. Annabi's
statement have given an account of new progress made by
UNMIBH. These developments are especially encouraging
as they are taking place in sensitive and vital areas: the
restructuring and changing of the mono-ethnic nature of the
police force, the creation of a reliable and impartial judicial
system and the consolidation of a State based on the rule of
law.

All the initiatives undertaken by UNMIBH have been
necessary, especially since, in accordance with the approach
envisioned and taken by UNMIBH, they were intended to
contribute to strengthening national identity and to
mobilizing both the people and the authorities around a
common plan: the complete elimination of ethnic rifts,
which we believe to be the major obstacle to the
reconciliation for which we all hope.

It is true that, as the report states, some initiatives
intended to create a dynamic for peace and requiring the
ongoing commitment of the international community as a
whole have come up against obstructive actions. The firm
and steadfast support of the Security Council for UNMIBH
will help overcome resistance and put pressure on the
forces that are opposed to change.

We note that, despite the encouraging progress made,
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains precarious.
Insecurity and instability, the return of refugees and the
difficult economic and social problems are still sources of
concern requiring stronger commitment on the part of the
international community and closer coordination between all
the actors.

It is in this context that the activities of United
Nations bodies are taking place in various areas. Such
activities, especially those undertaken by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Children's Fund and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) are all part of a comprehensive and
multidisciplinary Vision, which plays an essential role in
establishing a unified approach contributing to the
attainment of a common goal.

In this context, it is important to stress the
educational role to be played by UNESCO in promoting
a culture of tolerance and peace so as to produce a new
generation in Bosnia and Herzegovina that will have
overcome the psychological torment of a conflict that has
marked both the Bosnian conscience and that of the
international community.

Furthermore, we are convinced that the future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot be contemplated without
an overarching vision that applies to the entire region of
the Balkans, which is facing many similar challenges.

