Mr. Yaakob (Malaysia): I would like at the outset
to thank the Kingdom of the Netherlands for convening
today's timely and important debate. I also wish to
join the other speakers who took the floor before me
in thanking the Secretary-General, Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat and Ms. Fatimata Toure for their briefings.

Malaysia aligns itself with the statements made
earlier by the Foreign Minister of Indonesia, on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. I
wish to add a few points in my national capacity.

Malaysia continues to believe thatthe UnitedNations
plays a pivotal role in the maintenance of international
peace and security through, inter alia, peacekeeping
operations. That is why Malaysia believes in the reform
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations to make
them fit for purpose and cost-efficient.

Malaysia first participated in a peacekeeping
operation in 1960, and since then we have contributed
thousands of peacekeepers to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. At the moment, Malaysia is
participating in 6 out of 16 United Nations peacekeeping
operations, contributing nearly 1,000 peacekeepers. I
would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
sacrifices of all peacekeepers - to the devoted men and
women serving with unwavering dedication and great
distinction in our common endeavour to keep peace.
Some have paid the ultimate price, with their lives.

Malaysia believes that the reform of United
Nations peacekeeping operations should focus on
the continuous strengthening and enhancing of the
capabilities of its peacekeeping missions so that they
may fulfil their mandates. This is to ensure that they
remain relevant and, more importantly, effective. In
addition, efforts also must be geared towards enhancing
the overall performance of peacekeepers through the
proper training.

We acknowledge that military, police and civilian
personnel deployed in volatile and perilous locations
must be equipped with the right aptitudes, strong
survival skills and unquestionable competencies. This
is due to more comprehensive peacekeeping mandates
that encompass the necessity to protect civilians,
address sexual violence and overcome human rights
challenges. We believe that providing a common
training module prior to their deployment is vital to
the safety and security of our peacekeepers. In that
context, I would like to mention that in 1966 Malaysia
established a peacekeeping training centre that has
trained thousands of peacekeepers, not only from
Malaysia but also from other countries.

Each peacekeeping mission is unique and distinct.
Therefore, we need to take into account various
challenges on the ground, such as the mission's
components, the environment, suitable equipment
and coordination among various stakeholders, in our
collective efforts to enhance the overall effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations. In that regard, Malaysia
believes that it is important to strengthen cooperation
not just between the United Nations, Secretariat and
troop- and police-contributing countries, but also with
regional and subregional organizations, as well as the
active participation of the host country.

In the context of the peacekeeping missions in
Africa, Malaysia welcomes the African Union's resolve
in taking up a more prominent leadership role in
increasing and enhancing peacekeeping capabilities
among its members. We believe that the African Union
would have a better understanding of the continent's
own security challenges.

To conclude, Malaysia reaffirms its support for
enhancing and strengthening the United Nations
peacekeeping missions. We reiterate our full
cooperation with all stakeholders because we sincerely
believe that only by working together can we ensure that
all peacekeeping missions will fulfil their mandates, fit
for purpose and in a cost-efficient manner.

