The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Italy and Serbia and
Montenegro, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahovic'
(Serbia and Montenegro) took a seat at the
Council table. Mr. Nesho (Albania) and Mr.
Spatafora (Italy) took the seats reserved for them
at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: In order to optimize the use of
our time, I will not individually invite speakers to take
seats at the Council table. When a speaker is taking the
floor, the Conference Officer will seat the next speaker
on the list at the table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. He'di Annabi,
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I would like to appeal to all those who intend to
speak - and it is a very formidable list -for as much
brevity as possible, please. And if colleagues have
already made points, it would be hugely appreciated,
not just by the Chair but by other colleagues, if we
could show agreement with what has been said and
forego the urge to repeat it. I say that because it is the
intention of the presidency, in response to a formal
request that we have received, to convene this
afternoon at 3 pm. at the ambassadorial level in formal
consultations on the situation in the Middle East. Given
the agenda we have today - this is no disrespect
whatever to this item - I think a measure of brevity
would help us all.

I now invite Mr. Annabi, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, to brief the
Council on the current situation with respect to the
item on the agenda.


