The United Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolutions 2524 (2020) and 2525 (2020). The establishment of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) marks the opening of a new chapter in the Sudan's relationship with the United Nations, the Security Council and the broader international community. Through the adoption of resolution 2524 (2020), the Security Council has responded directly to the Government of the Sudan's request for support. UNITAMS will support the Sudan in a broad range of priorities for the transitional period, from the implementation of the Constitutional Document to the peace process, peacebuilding and the promotion and protection of human rights. In seeking this support from the United Nations, the Government of the Sudan has demonstrated its commitment to realizing the aspirations of the Sudanese people for a more stable, peaceful, democratic and prosperous future. The African Union's role will continue to be critical. We welcome our partnership with it and the strong commitment it has made to providing continued support to the political transition in the Sudan. The United Kingdom calls upon the Government of the Sudan and all Sudanese stakeholders to seize the opportunity created by this new chapter to make the aspirations of the Sudanese people a reality. Success will ultimately be achieved through unwavering commitments from the Government and all Sudanese stakeholders. The Security Council has made the responsible decision to extend the presence of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until 31 December 2020 through the adoption of resolution 2525 (2020). The extension of UNAMID was necessary in the light of the challenges faced by the Sudan and the wider international community that were brought about by the coronavirus-disease pandemic. We commend the Government of the Sudan's commitment to assuming full responsibility for the protection of civilians. The ongoing peace process offers the best chance in the history of the Darfur conflict for sustainable peace. However, at present, challenges remain in Darfur, and civilians remain particularly vulnerable. Accordingly, while the Government builds its own capacity to protect civilians and the peace process remains ongoing, UNAMID will continue to be mandated to protect civilians in Darfur. The United Kingdom thanks Germany, our fellow penholder on these two resolutions, for its tireless work and professionalism. The United Kingdom would also like to express its sincere thanks to the other members of the Security Council for their constructive engagement throughout the negotiations. Last year, the people of the Sudan made their stand for freedom and for a better future. The United Kingdom stood with them then, and we stand with them now in partnership, as we adopt these historic resolutions and look to the opening of a new chapter in the Sudan's relationship with the United Nations and the international community.
