Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening the
present meeting and to express our appreciation to
Mr. Hedi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for the valuable information
he has just given us.

The periodic consideration of the situation in
Kosovo reflects the concern and steadfast
determination of our Council in following through on
the actions taken in the framework of implementing
resolution 1244 (1999).

At preceding meetings, my delegation welcomed
the progress achieved on the ground and expressed its
concern at the obstacles to be overcome. It remains a
fact that institutional, security and economic issues, as
well as those of returns and property, are still a source
of concern for the international community in general
and the Council in particular. We welcome the progress
achieved in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) with a View to finding a suitable solution for the
various issues.

However, my delegation notes with regret that the
security situation remains a concern. In that context, it
regrets the death of members of the Stolic family in
Obilic. That situation can only fuel tensions, which
undermine the efforts being made, particularly efforts
to assist refugees and displaced persons, who require a
certain level of security and confidence to return to
their homes. We are hopeful that the measures taken by
Mr. Steiner will quickly lead to the arrest and bringing
to justice ofthe perpetrators ofthose heinous crimes.

Economic issues such as investment are also a
source of great concern. My delegation believes that
the success of the entire programme in Kosovo hinges
upon taking into account the interests of all Kosovans
and on regional equilibrium. We note with satisfaction
the holding of last month's Ohrid conference, where
members of the Governments of Balkan region
countries assembled to strengthen regional cooperation.

The leaders of the Provisional Institutions and
local leaders, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the Belgrade authorities
must further strengthen their cooperation in order to
overcome the challenges for the future of a multi-
ethnic Kosovo in a viable socio-economic, political and
cultural environment.

Furthermore, my delegation notes with
satisfaction the return last month of 800 bodies
exhumed in Serbia, thought to be those of Kosovars of
Albanian origin who had disappeared. It appreciates
the work done by the UNMIK Office on Missing
Persons and Forensics, as well as the activities of the
Contact Group on Missing Persons of the United
Nations Civilian Police and the Serb Government. That
work must continue for the definitive settlement of this
question.

Finally, my delegation is convinced that the
establishment of lasting peace in Kosovo depends on
the continued commitment of the leadership, of civil
society and of the entire population to put their
differences and futile disputes aside and to focus on
promoting shared interests that can help everyone
flourish. The contribution of the international
community will always be indispensable to those
efforts.

