Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this important
meeting to mark the twentieth anniversary of the
genocide in Rwanda. I would like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his presence and his thoughtful
intervention today. And I thank Colin Keating for
his powerful and telling testimony, speaking from
a position of real authority, as the President of the
Security Council in April 1994. We must heed his
important recommendations.
It has been 20 years since the international
community said "never again". This debate is an
opportunity to assess the progress made against that
pledge and to consider what more should be done.
Terrible events took place in Rwanda in 1994. Today
we remember the victims, the survivors and those who
risk their lives to stop the horror. We remember both
the personal tragedies and the horrendous scale of
the killing. We commend the Rwandan people on the
outstanding progress they have made in transforming
their country from an impoverished war-torn State into
a stable, confident country. The United Kingdom has
been and will continue to be a long-standing friend,
but it is not enough to simply remember. The events
in Rwanda in 1994 and other genocides and mass
atrocities, like Srebrenica in 1995, underline the vital
shared interest in devising and re-evaluating measures
to protect populations at risk.

The primary responsibility for protecting citizens
rests, of course, with the States themselves. But
1994 showed us that where a State is failing to act to
protect its own population or, even worse, is active in
persecuting and killing its own citizens, the international
community has an equal and shared responsibility to do
all it can to protect populations at risk. States must act
in full conformity with the United Nations Charter and
work with and through the United Nations to confront
threats. We urge countries that have not already done so
to sign and ratify treaties such as the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. Those treaties work because they provide
effective penalties for persons guilty of genocide.

To deter atrocities and achieve justice for victims,
perpetrators of genocide must be held accountable for
their actions. Since the genocide in Rwanda, global work
to fight impunity has been considerably strengthened
through the investigation and prosecution of crimes
in the international criminal justice system. The
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has made
a substantial contribution. And in the International
Criminal Court (ICC) we now have a permanent court
with jurisdiction over genocide war crimes and crimes
against humanity. It is vital that States cooperate with
the ICC so that it can deliver accountability where
national authorities are unable or unwilling to act.

There must be no safe harbour for those who
commit atrocities, no matter what office they hold. It
is a matter of great regret that some ICC States parties
have failed to comply with their obligation to implement
an arrest warrant for an indictment which covers three
counts of genocide. It is high time for States to live up
to those obligations and for the Council to follow up on
its referral of the situation in Darfur.

The Rwandan genocide is one of several instances
in which the Security Council has failed to act, but
since 1994 the United Nations has brought about real
improvements in our collective ability to take action
in situations that could result in mass atrocities. We
have responded to the horrors of the past with a number
of important decisions. In 2006, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1674 (2006) on protecting civilians
and reaffirmed its commitment in resolution 1894
(2009) in 2009.

The protection of civilians is now a cornerstone
of modern peacekeeping and is incorporated into
most peacekeeping mandates. The United Nations has
developed better early warning mechanisms to equip
the international community with the means to preempt
mass atrocities. The United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the special procedures ofthe Human
Rights Council, the Human Rights Council and the
Secretary-General's Special Adviser on the Prevention
of Genocide all make important contributions.

But as Ambassador Keating spelled out, early
warning by itself is not enough. We must get better
at translating early warning into effective preventive
action and that requires political will. Political will is
a responsibility of every single member of the Security
Council and especially every permanent member of
the Security Council. The responsibility to protect
initiative of 2005 is another positive development and is
increasingly incorporated into national Governments'
deliberations. We must support States that are building
their capacity on the preventative aspects of the
responsibility to protect and help them to respond to
tensions before they escalate.

When the international community is united,
we can achieve progress that would otherwise be
impossible. A united Security Council effectively
prevented mass atrocities in cote d'lvoire and in Libya
and has made positive progress in Mali and Somalia.
Today Widespread insecurity in the Central African
Republic is creating intensifying ethnic and religious
divides, but the African Union, the United Nations and
the European Union are working together to bring hope
to that appalling situation. But immense challenges
remain. South Sudan, the world's newest nation, faces
descent into civil war if peace talks falter. In Syria, the
regime still denies the life-saving access the population
desperately needs and continues to persecute and kill
its own citizens indiscriminately.
With 20 years having passed since the terrible
atrocities in Rwanda, there are no more excuses. We
now have the tools not just to say "Never again", but
to stay true to our word and to act together to prevent
future genocides.

