Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): Armed
conflicts that in the past involved only military
personnel are now involving civilians on a routine
basis. In today's debate - which you were kind
enough to convene, Mr. President, and we wish to
thank you for that - conflicts we are discussing
involve men and women of all ages, and the only thing
they did wrong was to be in the wrong place at the
wrong time, as innocent victims of the cruel game of
those who control weapons.

So let us not talk about the category of civilians
engaged in militias - whose objectives are
debatable - who, having decided to engage in policy
through means more violent than peaceful, seal their
own fate. The only reason for that is ideology. These
are the people who practice terrorism and the bulk of
those they recruit, primarily from among extremists.
Some of them are young or even only children.

It is for the young people and children that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes are increasingly being established, which
are now part of the whole range of measures geared
towards getting more young people back to civil
society - which they never should have left behind -
and which allow them to trade a rifle or combat
fatigues for a more useful tool.

The third term of the DDR trilogy - the "R" of
reintegration - is the measure whereby we assess the
degree of reliability of a programme. It is the final
point of a process whose objective is to build peace
and to secure a commitment guaranteeing a non-return
to the life of a fighter. That is where the Peacebuilding
Commission should act, which now more than ever
should be supported.

Serious attention should be paid to DDR
programmes now underway in Burundi, Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Cote d'Ivoire so that not only young people
but the "reconverted" will be freed from
unemployment in the long term and will cease being a
source of constant misfortune for the citizens of their
countries as agents looting, stealing, rape, maiming and
other forms of insecurity.

Two days ago the entire world commemorated the
International Day of Refugees, of which there now
about 14 million, along with 20 million internally
displaced persons spread through 23 countries. Among
the victims of crimes of genocide and atrocities of all
kinds - which are the source of famine, malnutrition,
illness or simply of exclusion and anything else that
can breed death or desolation - we count all of those
who are denied all human dignity and the right to the
first among human rights, which is the right to life. It is
women, children and other categories of vulnerable
people of whom we are thinking and for whom today
the strict application of those rights should be
demanded.

Now more than ever, the action that the Security
Council is called upon to take should be taken in the
most coherent manner possible with governmental and
nongovernmental organizations committed to the noble
task of protection of and assistance for civilians, direct
or indirect causalities of armed conflicts. From that
point of view, the recently concluded agreement among
the United Nations, the African Union and the Sudan
for a hybrid operation in Darfur is of particular
importance for hundreds of thousands of individuals
who are victims of attacks and secret killings. We hope
this will become a well-merited act of deliverance,
which is long overdue.

The principle of responsibility and the duty to
protect were highlighted during the 2005 Summit,
when the international community took on the
obligation to protect people from the crimes of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.

The international tribunals for Rwanda, the
former Yugoslavia and Sierra Leone, concerning which
the Council was briefed a few days ago, are today the
expression of the professed will of the international
community not only to recognize the sacred character
of human life but also to convert that affirmation into a
tangible reality and to punish those responsible for
those attacks. Unfortunately, too many States still hide
behind crassly political strategic interests, so as not to
lend all the assistance needed by the Tribunals, even
if - for example, in the case of the Lord's Resistance
Army in Uganda or in Darfur or Somalia - some
warlords, who have neither faith nor law, could have
been severely punished.

The protection of journalists and humanitarian
personnel is being given more attention, since now we
see a situation of great concern, with tragedies sparing
no continent. We see them in Southern Europe,
Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, Iraq, the Middle East, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Haiti.

Massive displacements of populations taken
hostage, persecutions for cultural reasons, torture for
political reasons or simply horrid crimes, the
Janjaweed in Darfur of sinister reputation, Palestine,
Somalia - all these have given us many lessons,
enough for us to stress what Mr. Holmes said in his
message at the start of the briefing.

More than ever, it is up to the international
community to stand up to the increasing numbers of
barbaric acts with the power of the law, of which the
thirtieth anniversary of the Additional Protocols to the
Geneva Conventions, relating to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, commemorated on 8 June,
served as a timely reminder. In order for the 1977
Protocols to the 1949 Conventions to be effective
alongside the relevant Security Council decisions -
such as resolution 1674 (2006) of 28 April 2006 and
resolution 1738 (2006) of 23 December 2006, adopted
following the two most recent open debates on this
item - it is now more necessary than ever to combine
political will with an active consensus against the spirit
and practice of terrorism, which continues to motivate
too many parties to the human tragedies of our times.

In the international community's imperative fight
in that area, conflict prevention and the promotion of
political and socio-economic solutions form the
essential basis for firmly establishing the rule of law,
with all its implications in terms of human rights. This
cannot fail to strengthen true peace and security.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to thank the
Belgian delegation for having taken the excellent
initiative to convene this debate. We are prepared to
support any future decision the Council might take in
response to public opinion on the question of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

