Ms. Del Ponte (spoke in French): I will be very
brief. I also want to express thanks for the comments
that have been addressed to me. I must say that I agree
completely with some of them. As for others, I have
some doubts, but this is not the right time to discuss
them.

I would like to say a few words on the situation
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. One
hundred and thirty-six investigations means 136
suspects under investigation. Some doubt has been
expressed as to whether these are major perpetrators. I
will give you the information that we have from the
Government of Rwanda; it has placed on its official list
of first-class category perpetrators of genocide 2,899
persons: planners, organizers and supervisors. This
means that, according to the Government of Rwanda
itself, there are over 2,800 in the category of persons
highly responsible, whereas on our own list there are
136. Of course some of them have died; in the case of
others, we will be unable to get the necessary evidence;
and still others have disappeared. Thus we will have
even fewer indictments - perhaps some 100.

As far as the transfer of cases to a national
Tribunal is concerned, there is a problem with Rwanda,
as I said. Rwanda still has the death penalty, so it is
impossible to transfer these cases there, even without
considering that Rwanda has 2,899 persons accused of
genocide who need to be brought to trial and cannot go
through the gachacha system. Of course, even if the
information on proceedings could be transferred to
Rwanda, most of the persons accused are not in
Rwanda - they are abroad. Thus the problem of
extradition to Rwanda arises.

With regard to a transfer of the Tribunal to Kigali,
this measure is being pressed, but a motion has not yet
been presented. However, could begin by at least
holding hearings there to facilitate access to testimony,
so that witnesses who cannot travel to Arusha could be
heard in Kigali. There were problems in arranging for a
hall, which have been resolved. But that is certainly the
right direction. It would be very positive if the Tribunal
could be transferred to Kigali for the last years of its
activities.
As for the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia and the division of labour between
the Tribunal and local jurisdictions, of course this
presupposes a certain number of preconditions, which
unfortunately have not yet been met - for instance,
the protection of witnesses; the independence of these
Tribunals 4 whether Trial Chambers or Appeals
Courts; and, in general, the process of reform in the
local judiciary apparatus. I think it is up to the
international community to encourage the development
of an independent justice system in the former
Yugoslavia. As I see it, this is a prospect for the future,
but it is a future that, with your support, may be the
near future.

I would like to recall that our investigations do
not concern those who merely carried out orders. I
have provided a list of 108 suspects. We have estimated
that, on average, over 8,000 - I repeat, 8,000 persons
- committed crimes that fall under our jurisdiction in
the former Yugoslavia. Out of 8,000 suspects, we are
confining our activity to 108. Truly, I believe that
follows the mandate given to us by the resolution. The
suspects under investigation have been essential links
in the committing of these crimes of war, genocide and
crimes against humanity.

