Mr. Zbogar (Slovenia): Allow me at the outset to
thank Under- Secretary-General Prendergast for the
thought-provoking briefing he gave us this morning, as
always. We would also like to express our appreciation
and full support to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Brahimi, for his tireless efforts to return the
light of hope and peace to the people of Afghanistan. We
join others in expressing our good wishes for his speedy
recovery.

The delegation of Slovenia expresses its appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
the situation in Afghanistan. The problems to be
addressed today are very grave and indeed alarming, and
deserve the most serious consideration by the Security
Council. These problems are also not new. They have
characterized the sad state of affairs in Afghanistan for
far too long. It looks as if the international community
and the Security Council were genuinely unable to find
the right responses for many years. At the same time, it
is clear that the situation in Afghanistan cannot be
described as an essentially internal affair of a State. Quite
to the contrary, that situation arose about two decades ago
as an essentially international problem and has remained
so to date.

 

The international character of and the apparent lack of
solution for the situation in Afghanistan call for a
reinforced effort of the United Nations, and especially of
the Security Council, which has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security. It
is therefore most appropriate that today's discussion takes
place as an orientation debate, open to all United Nations
Member States. We hope that the results of today's debate
will give full meaning to the concept of open orientation
debate, which the Security Council should convene as often
as necessary.

The current general situation in Afghanistan is
appalling. The military conflict continues and is gaining
new dimensions, leaving the people of Afghanistan in a dire
humanitarian situation. The appeals of the
Secretary-General, the Security Council and others to the
effect that there will be no military solutions and that
peaceful means must be used remain unheeded. Continuing
the deplorable tradition of the annual vicious cycle of
resumed fighting, the Taliban again ignored efforts by the
international community to bring peace to Afghanistan and
launched the summer military offensive. Adding to the
destabilizing effects of the situation are disturbing reports
about thousands of non-Afghan nationals taking part in the
fighting. We are furthermore concerned at recent reports of
the involvement in the conflict of students, some as young
as 14, recruited in expectation of a new offensive.

In the first week alone, the offensive has caused the
displacement of between 100,000 and 140,000 people. In
addition, 40,000 people were forcibly displaced to Kabul
and J alalabad, using the unacceptable practice of separating
women and children from men. We are deeply concerned
by continuing reports of widespread violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. The present stage
of the military conflict is an extension of the situation of
last year which led to extremely grave humanitarian
consequences. The massacre in Mazar-e-Sharif, following
the seizure of that town by Taliban in August 1998,
resulted in the death of more than 5,000 people. It is
extremely disturbing that the pattern of ethnic cleansing
established last year appears to continue. The conditions for
investigation of massacres, which took place last year, were
not met and the preventive effect of such an investigation
was thwarted. The investigation of the killing of Iranian
diplomats in Mazar-e-Sharif, which was strongly
condemned by the Security Council and the international
community at large, also has yet to make substantial
progress.

The situation in Afghanistan is further aggravated by
organized production of drugs and drug trafficking and by
the harbouring of international terrorism. Numerous and
credible reports have established the Taliban's
responsibility for these social, humanitarian and political
ills that have dangerous implications well beyond the
Afghanistan borders.

In the effort to contribute to the solution of the
situation in Afghanistan, the Security Council has
established the relevant political principles, including,
most importantly, the principle that there is no military
solution to the situation. Furthermore, the Council has
rendered its support to the group of "six plus two" States
as the essential diplomatic mechanism devised to develop
the necessary political agreement among all the parties
concerned. It is regrettable that the principle of peaceful
solution remains unheeded and that the "six plus two"
mechanism remains unsuccessful. Moreover, the
credibility of that mechanism was seriously affected last
July after the high-level Tashkent meeting of the "six plus
two" group, where both the United Front and the Taliban
also participated. It appears that, simultaneously,
preparations for subsequent military action in Afghanistan
were pursued.

What kind of orientation for the future search of
peace can be achieved today? There are, in our opinion,
four main lessons learned from the past, which should
guide policy-making for the future.

First, the growing disunity and the flaws in the
practice of the "six plus two" group have not discredited
the principles which that mechanism is supposed to
pursue. Quite to the contrary, the notion that there is no
military solution in Afghanistan and the principle that
peace must be established by peaceful means are as valid
today as they were yesterday.

Secondly, the key to ending the Afghan tragedy lies
in resolving its external aspects. The conflict in
Afghanistan is perpetuated by continuous foreign
interference in the form of active political and particularly
military support provided to the Afghan parties through
supplies of arms, ammunition and other warring materiel,
as well as military personnel. We call upon all concerned
to desist from such practices in the future.

Thirdly, military advances by the Taliban do not in
themselves constitute the legitimate basis of the
Government. Without the minimum legitimacy of power
in all parts of Afghanistan, there can be no assurance of

 

the long-term effectiveness of the Government in the
country. The necessary legitimacy ought to include respect
for basic norms of international law, including humanitarian
and human rights law. Any new Government aspiring to
international recognition must be aware of that.

Fourthly, the destabilizing effects of the situation in
Afghanistan and its immediate and wider environment must
be addressed precisely and with responsibility. The
immediate political effects of the continuing war on
Afghanistan's neighbours are serious enough. Additionally,
however, serious consideration must be given to the
cancerous effects of drug-trafficking and terrorism, which
destabilize the wider region and beyond.

The situation in Afghanistan remains tragic, while its
wider repercussions are becoming ever more dangerous.
The essential political and conceptual conditions for a
peaceful solution are already known. Our delegation
believes that today' 5 meeting of the Security Council should
demonstrate the resolve of the international community to
insist on those conditions in the effort to help in finding a
solution for the situation in Afghanistan.

