The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

At the outset, it gives me pleasure to express
sincere thanks to Japan, New Zealand, Spain and
Uruguay, which were Egypt's partners in introducing
the important resolution 2286 (2016), on medical care
in armed conflict. In that context, I would like to draw
attention to the unique manner in which the initiative
was developed. It is perhaps the first time that five
elected Member States of the Council participated in a
collective effort to draft a resolution while leading and
coordinating consultations in an open, transparent and
all-inclusive manner, with all Council members taking
part in order to achieve its unanimous adoption. The
adoption was reflected in the widespread support for
the resolution among the States Members of the United
Nations, as well as in the fact that many Member States
co-sponsored the resolution.

Humanitarian efforts today face a serious
development in the form of the increasing frequency
of attacks against medical facilities and medical staff.
Parties to the various conflicts have put obstacles in
the way to medical services for those in need. This
represents an unprecedented challenge to the basic
pillars of international humanitarian law and to
enforcement of the principle of protecting civilians in
armed conflict.

Egypt believes that such attacks foment hatred
and tension among parties to a conflict and the
various components of society, which undermines
the possibility of achieving peaceful settlements to
conflicts. As a case in point with respect to the urgency
of this situation, I would cite the atrocities committed
against health-care providers in many conflicts around
the world, but especially in Syria over the last five
years, due to the conflict that has been raging there.

International humanitarian law, including the
1949 Geneva Convention and its Additional Protocols,
provides for the protection of international health-
care personnel, facilities and equipment and their
transport. It also sets forth strict rules to protect access
to health care by the sick and injured in times of armed
conflict. I would therefore stress that the violation of
these conventions has been and continues to be totally
unacceptable. Perpetrators must be held accountable no
matter which side of the conflict they are on. Individual
States and the international community as a whole have
a duty to guarantee that perpetrators are held to account.

These rules are binding on all parties to a conflict,
be they Governments or non-State actors. These rules
also prohibit forcing health-care workers to commit
acts that prevent them from fulfilling their health-
care duties or that violate their professional ethics.
International law also prohibits deliberate attacks
against medical facilities, designating such attacks as
war crimes. Through such a designation, it guarantees
the accountability of the perpetrators and deny
them impunity.

The initiative behind resolution 2286 (2016),
sponsored by five States, seeks to urge the Security
Council to uphold the legal framework that requires
parties to a conflict to protect the sick and the injured
and those working to bring them medical care. The
Council needs to send a strong political message that
attacks on the sick, the injured and health-care workers
are no longer acceptable or admissible, that they can
no longer be perpetrated with impunity or without
accountability to States. Concerted international efforts
must therefore be made to prevent the occurrence of
such gross violations of international humanitarian
law. Accordingly, resolution 2286 (2016) condemns
violations of international humanitarian law, urges
Member States to adopt practical measures to prevent
their occurrence, and calls on States to ensure peaceful
and unimpeded access to medical care.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that Egypt's
sponsorship of resolution 2286 (2016) is rooted in its
deep and focused commitment to the noble principles
of international humanitarian law, in particular those
related to the protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
Indeed, Egypt supports access to medical care during
conflict-withoutpoliticizationordiscrimination-for
the injured, the sick, the vulnerable and those who are
most likely to be subject to attack, including women
and children. We seek to increase awareness in the
Security Council of the violations of international
humanitarian law in this area so that we can provide a
safer environment for the sick and the injured and for
health-care workers.

I would be remiss ifI failed to express our gratitude
for the sacrifices of and the noble role played by
such international organizations as the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Medecins Sans
Frontieres and others, which are providing health-care
services to innocent civilians who find themselves
caught in zones of violence or the victims of terrorist
attacks through no fault of their own.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 12.35 pm.
