At the outset, we would like to thank Ms. Stephanie Williams for her helpful briefing and her valued and vigorous efforts to advance a political settlement in Libya. We also thank the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya for capably steering the work of the Committee, and we look forward to his briefing to the Council at the earliest opportunity. We should also acknowledge the support of the Secretary-General and the Secretariat in launching the three tracks established at the Berlin Conference, as well as the support of all international and regional actors for the recent positive developments in Libya. Tunisia closely followed the negotiations that it hosted between 9 and 15 November as part of the first round of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum held under the auspices of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). Tunisia lauds the positive and constructive atmosphere of the Forum and the clear commitment of all participants to a logic of dialogue, consensus and patriotic spirit, all of which attested to their firm belief that it is essential to act quickly to end the suffering of the Libyan people and bring about a comprehensive political settlement. Tunisia enthusiastically welcomes the outcomes of the Forum and acknowledges the important consensus that was reached and the steps that were taken towards developing a road map for resolving the crisis, including the agreement on holding elections on 24 December 2021, as well as defining and consolidating the powers of the executive branch. Tunisia also applauds the extent to which Libyan women participated in this dialogue and hopes that they will be encouraged to participate in all ongoing tracks. Tunisia hopes that the process will build on the outcomes of the Forum in order to resolve the crisis. We call on all the Libyan parties to retain the same positive spirit as they work to achieve the desired goals as soon as possible, thereby fulfilling the Libyan people's desire to restore security and stability and to devote themselves to the work of building and developing their country in an atmosphere of respect for Libyan unity and sovereignty. Tunisia also reiterates that it is firmly committed to continuing to assist the efforts of UNSMIL to promote a peaceful, lasting political settlement of the crisis, and that it stands ready to increase its assistance in order to ensure that the upcoming rounds of dialogue are fruitful. Tunisia notes with satisfaction the commitment of the Libyan parties to the ceasefire that was signed on 23 October in the context of the work of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission, which is a symbol of the unification of Libyan institutions. Tunisia also welcomes the rounds that followed the signing of the ceasefire agreement in line with Security Council resolution 2542 (2020) and looks forward to the report of the Secretary-General on potential mechanisms to monitor the ceasefire. Tunisia urges all stakeholders to work to implement all the provisions of the agreement, including the stipulation that all mercenaries and foreign fighters shall depart from the Libyan territories in accordance with the agreed time frame because of the threat that they pose to the security and stability of Libya and the entire region. We underscore the responsibility of the Security Council in this regard. We also reiterate our call to all parties to commit fully to complying with the arms embargo on Libya and to refrain from interfering in the country's internal affairs. We would like to emphasize that all the tracks emanating from the Berlin Conference should be coherent, so as to ensure that the new phase is grounded in the path to a comprehensive political settlement and avoid a reversal of the gains already made. We also stress that all Libyan parties must take responsibility, commit to a political solution, uphold the best interests of the country, restore the political and social milieu and promote an inclusive discourse. Tunisia emphasizes the need to comply with international humanitarian law and international human rights law in Libya. In particular, we call for the situation of migrants and refugees to be addressed and for enhanced accountability, in order to eliminate impunity for grave violations and crimes committed in Libya, including the mass graves discovered in Tarhunah and summary executions and assassinations. In closing, my delegation joins the preceding speakers in emphasizing the need to swiftly appoint a United Nations envoy for Libya and a coordinator for UNSMIL, which will be an important pillar of United Nations and international efforts to advance the political process and help the Libyan parties move forward along the tracks of military, political and economic dialogue and strengthen confidence- building measures.
