Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
would like to welcome High Representative Lajeak
back to the Council today. We thank him for his
comprehensive report and applaud his work as High
Representative. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the Council of Ministers
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to the Council today.

The United States welcomes the progress that
Bosnia and Herzegovina has made in recent years,

particularly the signing of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union (EU).
My country has devoted considerable attention and
resources to helping stabilize Bosnia and Herzegovina
since the conflict of the 1990s, and we are committed
to helping the Bosnian people achieve a peaceful and
prosperous future.

We welcome the positive developments that the
High Representative has identified since his last report,
particularly with regard to the objectives set by the
Peace Implementation Council last February. In
particular, we commend the work of the High
Representative and his staff to facilitate progress in
meeting the five objectives and two conditions to
enable closure of the Office of the High
Representative.

We share, however, the serious concerns that the
High Representative has raised with regard to political
developments that have impeded further progress on
those objectives. We have seen a sharp rise in divisive
nationalist rhetoric; we have seen State-level
institutions, which are required for the country to make
further progress towards the EU and NATO, attacked
and undermined; and we have witnessed disturbing
attempts to roll back previously successful reforms of
the past 13 years - the very reforms that have led the
EU and NATO to open their doors to Bosnia's eventual
membership.

The Republika Srpska Government's recent effort
to seek criminal charges against local and international
officials who are performing their professional
obligations is unacceptable and outrageous and raises
troubling questions about Republika Srpska's
commitment to the rule of law. Those officials will
continue to have our full support as they carry out their
important work to implement the Dayton Agreement
and to advance Bosnia and Herzegovina's Euro-
Atlantic agenda.

We join the High Representative in rejecting
rhetoric or actions that undermine the Dayton
Agreement, call into question the territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina or promote unilateral changes
to the constituent structure of the country. To reiterate
the statement of support for the High Representative
that my delegation made when the Council made last
May, the role of the High Representative is critical in
implementing the Dayton Agreement and ensuring that
Bosnia and Herzegovina completes its transition to a
secure and stable multi-ethnic State.

The United States firmly supports the Peace
Implementation Council's decision to continue the
High Representative's mandate until the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully meet the five objectives
and two conditions specified in February. We believe
that the 8 November agreement among several major
political parties is a welcome development that offers
an opportunity to break this destructive cycle and to
make progress towards meeting the outstanding
objectives. That initiative represents the kind of
constructive approach and spirit of compromise that
are required for Bosnia to continue to move forward. In
order to achieve true progress, Bosnian political
leaders will need to translate the agreement into
concrete actions, including finding a legally viable
solution for protecting Brcko district's status under the
terms of the final award.

Finally, the United States remains fully
committed to supporting the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, who continue to strive to stabilize their
country, implement reform, implement the terms of the
Dayton Agreement and help their country claim its
rightful place within the Euro-Atlantic community.

