Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by expressing our
indignation over and strong condemnation of the
terrible attacks yesterday in Kabul and Badakhshan.
Most of the victims were defenceless civilians going
about their daily lives; many of them were children.
No goal, political, religious or otherwise, can justify
actions of this nature.

This morning, the Security Council issued a press
release vigorously condemning these acts, which
reiterates in no uncertain terms that any form of
terrorism is a criminal act that is absolutely inexcusable,
whatever the motivation invoked by its perpetrators.
The release further notes that those responsible for
these acts will sooner or later be held accountable.
There is no doubt that the international community and
the Security Council steadfastly support the process
towards peace, democracy and stability that the
Afghan people themselves have decided to embrace and
spearhead. I would ask Ambassador Saikal to convey to
the Government of Afghanistan our condolences and
heartfelt solidarity with the Afghan people.

I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom.
His presence among us will be the last in his current
capacity. We therefore take this opportunity to express
our gratitude for his years of steadfast commitment and
tireless dedication to Afghanistan and to the Council
as Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for four years, if we count his
two years as Deputy Special Representative. It is been
a true pleasure for my delegation to work closely with
him and his team as penholder of the Security Council
for Afghanistan. We have always had the highest regard
for his commitment to progress and reconciliation
in Afghanistan, and we wish him every success in
his future endeavours. Henceforth, his successor,
Ambassador Yamamoto, can count on the support and
collaboration of Spain.

It is abundantly clear after reading the Secretary-
General's report (S/2016/532) and hearing Mr. Haysom's
briefing that Afghanistan's challenges persist and that it
is at a turning point in its recent history. It behooves us
to recognize the progress made, in particular since the
National Unity Government has taken up functions. It
has rolled out a robust reform agenda for the country's
socioeconomic development.

We hail the Afghan National Peace and Development
Framework, which seeks to establish a road map for
reaching the self-reliance goals set forth in London in
2014, and will be presented in the upcoming ministerial
conference to be held in October in Brussels. The
decisive push in the fight against corruption under the
direct leadership of President Ghani is also evident. We
welcome the measures contemplating judicial reform,
the regulation of procurement of public goods and
services, and the establishment of a high council on
governance, the rule of law and anti-corruption in an
effort to institutionalize anticorruption policies. We
commend the Government's decision to give priority
attention to these matters.

In the context of human rights, the second annual
dialogue on this topic between the European Union and
Afghanistan, held just days ago in Kabul, brought to
light the measures that have been adopted in this area,
in compliance with Afghanistan's commitments, such
as legal reform in the field of children's rights, criminal
aspects of the law for the elimination of violence
against women, and new commitments undertaken
by Afghanistan with regard to various human rights
instruments. We must now be equally diligent in
ensuring the implementation of all of these important
measures throughout the nation.

The events of the past few months make it clear
that the challenges facing Afghanistan have not abated.
We are alarmed by the deterioration of security, the
increase of armed conflicts and the violence of insurgent
and terrorist groups in the recently launched spring
campaign, and the persistently high number of civilian
casualties from this conflict. Yesterday's events were
yet another manifestation of this reality.

We are also concerned over the deterioration of
Afghan economic prospects, which may continue to
decline if national security collapses further. The
perceived lack ofprospects among civilians is evidenced
in the massive outflow of Afghan civilians towards
other countries in search of opportunities which is a
worrying consequence of these factors. We are also
concerned about the lack of progress towards a process
of peace and reconciliation, despite the undeniable
efforts over the past few months of the members of
the Quadrilateral Coordination Group, whom I thank
once again.

The lack of progress in electoral reform, despite
the steps taken towards that goal, hampers compliance
with the electoral timetable and could have an adverse
impact on the stability and functions of the State,
which at this time is the principle goal of all the
institutions and political actors of Afghanistan. We are
also concerned about the ongoing rise in the number
of internally displaced persons and the conditions in
which they find themselves.

To summarize, it is essential to ensure that the
progress that has been achieved over the past 15 years
is not lost. Today perhaps more than ever in the past,
it is therefore particularly important to maintain the
unanimous support of the international community for
the current and future efforts of the Afghan Government
to promote political stability, economic growth, and the
well-being and rights of all Afghan men and women, as
well as their fight against terrorism and insurgency and
in favour of national reconciliation.

The NATO Summit that will take place in Warsaw
a few days from now and the ministerial conference
scheduled for October in Brussels, to which I referred
earlier, will be particularly important opportunities
to demonstrate our support for Afghanistan. In the
context of the international community's support and
help for Afghanistan, a particularly important role
must be played by regional stakeholders. Afghanistan
therefore must continue to coordinate and cooperate
constructively with its neighbours.

Before concluding, I would like to refer to two
particular issues that are of key priority for Spain.
First, I welcome the recently adopted measures
pertaining to Afghanistan's national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) . I am
pleased to inform the Council that Spain, together with
the United Kingdom, which is the penholder for that
resolution, has proposed the inclusion of Afghanistan
and UNAMA in the work of the informal experts group
on women, peace and security created by resolution
2242 (2015). We have done so because we are convinced
that a better understanding of all that Afghanistan and
UNAMA have done in that field will be very useful
to the increasingly important work of the Security
Council in that area.

Secondly, while I recognize the progress made
and political resolve demonstrated by the Afghan
authorities in a significant number of human rights-
related areas, I add the voice of Spain to those who have
appealed to the Government of Afghanistan to establish
a moratorium on the application of the death penalty
and to advance towards the necessary legal reforms
necessary to commute such sentences.

