Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan) (interpretation from Russian): Sir, since this is the first time I have spoken in
the Security Council under your presidency, allow me to
congratulate you on your assumption of your important post
and to express confidence that under your experienced

 

leadership the Council will successfully and effectively
resolve the complex problems on its agenda this month.

I should also like to take this opportunity to pay a
tribute to your predecessor, the Permanent Representative
of Guinea-Bissau, Ambassador Cabral, for his skilled
guidance of the Council's work last month.

I am grateful for this opportunity to participate in
today's discussion of the situation in Afghanistan.
Unfortunately, we note that the question of Afghanistan
is appearing with increasing frequency on the Council's
agenda owing to the continuing exacerbation of the
situation in that country. The conflict in Afghanistan is
intensifying, and the country's population is continuing to
suffer.

We would like to hope that today's meeting of the
Security Council will make a positive contribution to the
establishment of an atmosphere in which the entire
international community in involved in promoting a
solution to the problem of Afghanistan, searching for a
peaceful solution to the conflict and ensuring the basic
humanitarian needs of the Afghan population.

It is logical that the Government of Uzbekistan
should be carefully following the progress of the situation
in neighbouring Afghanistan and the expansion of the
scale and intensity of the conflict there. The peoples of
our countries have an age-old history of good-neighbourly
relations, and the events in Afghanistan cannot fail to be
a source of alarm for us. In assessing the situation, we
must note that the continuing civil war in Afghanistan
seriously threatens to destabilize the Central Asian region.
As was noted in the joint declaration of the leaders of
Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan
and Uzbekistan of 4 October 1996, this course of events
poses a threat to the national interests and security of
those States. The conflict in Afghanistan must not be
allowed to threaten the stability and national security of
neighbouring countries. We are alarmed by the fact that
in the midst of an ongoing war, the territory of
Afghanistan remains a place for the massive, uncontrolled
production of drugs and a base for their illegal export.
The transit roads for this trade pass through States
neighbouring Afghanistan.

The Government of Uzbekistan holds to a position
of principle: that the conflict in Afghanistan can be
resolved only by the Afghan parties themselves. The non-
involvement of other States in the inter-Afghan
confrontation, non-interference from outside in the

 

internal affairs of sovereign Afghanistan, and the cessation
of hostilities by the Afghan parties to the conflict are
prerequisites for peaceful dialogue to seek ways to achieve
national accord. Recently, the United Nations, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, other authoritative
international organizations and the international community
at large have begun to pay significantly more attention to
the progress of the situation in Afghanistan.

In this context, I should like to take this opportunity
to express the Government of Uzbekistan's satisfaction with
and support for the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 50/88 of 19 December 1995, the letter dated 22
August 1996 from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/l996/683), and the
statement of the President of the Security Council of 28
September 1996 (S/PRST/ 1996/40). In the view of
Uzbekistan, a leading role must be played by the United
Nations in promoting a settlement to the Afghan conflict.
We have a very high opinion of the efforts undertaken by
the United Nations Special Mission for Afghanistan, headed
by Mr. Holl. We continue to support and to consider most
sensible the idea of convening an international conference
on Afghanistan under United Nations auspices.

We believe that an important element in establishing
conditions for the cessation of hostilities and the
achievement of peace in Afghanistan is the imposition of an
embargo on the delivery of all forms of weapons to
Afghanistan. On numerous occasions, the Government of
the Republic of Uzbekistan has raised the need for
imposing such an embargo. This proposal was made in a
letter dated 23 July 1996 from the President of Uzbekistan,
Mr. Islam Karimov, addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/1996/607, annex). We believe that the
implementation of such measures should be aimed not
against any of the Afghan parties but first and foremost
against outside suppliers of weapons. We believe that all
possible means should be used to cut off the delivery of the
weapons that are being used to fuel the Afghan conflict.

Allow me to express the hope that consistent
implementation of the international community's efforts to
promote inter-Afghan dialogue will lead to the restoration
of peace and national accord in Afghanistan. We would like
to hope that today's Security Council discussion of the
Afghan problem will make a substantive contribution to
focusing the efforts of the international community on the
search for practical measures for the settlement of the
situation in Afghanistan and for strengthening political
stability throughout the Central Asian region.

 

