I add my voice to the acknowledgements given to our briefers of the day. I would like to thank Mariam in particular, and through her the youth of Mali and all those who work daily on the ground to improve the situation of children. Fifteen years ago, the age of Mariam, my predecessor Ambassador De la Sabliere and his counterpart from Benin submitted an ambitious and innovative draft resolution to the Council. Resolution 1612 (2005) structures our collective action to put an end to the infamy that brings us together today. Since 2005, our efforts have resulted in the release of more than 150,000 children, thanks to the commitment of the Security Council, successive Special Representatives of the Secretary-General, UNICEF and civil society. Our discussions have highlighted this collective success, which illustrates what the multilateral system can do best when the Security Council is vigilant, united and equipped with effective tools. However, grave violations against children continue at alarming levels, fuelled by the escalation of conflict. That is why we must make the best use of the tools that the Security Council has put in place. Its Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict must continue to meet regularly, develop contacts with those involved in child protection, and carry out field visits. In this respect, I pay tribute to Belgium for its dynamic chairmanship of the Working Group. Since 2001, the Council has also asked the Secretary-General to release an annual infamous list. It is a heavy responsibility that is to be exercised on the basis of rigorous and objective criteria. For its part, France will continue to play an active role and promote the universal endorsement of the Paris Principles and Commitments. In the field, France supports projects for children in emergency situations. In particular, through UNICEF and the Education Cannot Wait Fund, we support projects in Lebanon and the Sahel. Protecting children from recruitment and indoctrination by terrorist groups is imperative. Empowerment, through education and training, is one of the best ramparts against these forms of exploitation. This is why France has made education a priority of its external action. It has significantly increased its bilateral aid in this area and actively supports UNESCO, in particular in strengthening the resilience of young people in the face of violent extremism in the Sahel. France has also strengthened its support to the Global Partnership for Education with a historic contribution of €200 million. Since girls are particularly vulnerable, France supports the establishment of a protective environment for girls in schools. This is one of the objectives of the "Priority for Equality" initiative, which operates in the Sahel countries. Finally, in the face of the unacceptable increase of mutilation and sexual violence, our action includes a section devoted to care. This is why we support, for instance, several projects in Iraq as well as the Mukwege-Murad fund for survivors of sexual violence.
