Mr. Gueye (Senegal) (spoke in French): I should like
at the outset, Sir, to say what an honour and a pleasure
it is for the Senegalese delegation to see you personally
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council,
which you decided to devote to the important issue
of transboundary waters and preventive diplomacy.
That decision has made it possible for the Council to
consider, for the third time in 14 months, the issue of
water and its relationship with peace, in the wake of the
Arria Formula meeting held on 22 April 2016, under
the effective presidency of Mr. Macky Sall, President
of the Republic of Senegal, and the open debate held
on 22 November 2016 (see S/PV.7818), presided over by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Senegal abroad,
Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye.

The fact that this body has met three times, with
growing interest on the part of Member States and
in such a short time, on this issue is an affirmation,
if such were needed, that this is a relevant topic. We
would highlight also the well-considered decision
made by our respective countries, Senegal last year
and Bolivia today, to consider this issue from the
perspective of prevention, which the Secretary-
General, Mr. Antonio Guterres - whom I thank for
his important statement - decided to place on the
list of absolute priorities within the framework of the
maintenance of international peace and security.

It can never be said often enough: the continued
scarcity of water resources, together with their
unequal distribution throughout the world, leaves us
no room for inaction. In fact, given rapid demographic
growth, runaway urbanization, the worrying issue of
global warming and the increasing need to invest in
hydraulics, the question of access to water is today
more burning than ever in a world where 60 per cent of
water resources are located in nine countries.

This frightening state of affairs requires a paradigm
shift on the issue of water in order to set in motion
a preventive approach that is based on two major
pillars: cooperation, in order to ensure access to water
resources and mediation, in order to resolve differences
among States.

We believe, therefore, that the goal is no longer
simply to make clear how water is related to peace
and security, or the fact that we need to prevent water-
related conflicts, but, rather, how to share experiences
of successful cooperation. That is why it is my pleasure
to talk to the Council about the Senegal River Basin
Development Organization (OMVS), which represents
a success story in the area of the joint management
of transboundary waters. Given the serious
consequences of the severe droughts of the 1970s, three
countries - Senegal, Mali and Mauritania - guided
by the ideals of solidarity, sharing, fairness and peace,
decided in March 1972 to adopt a forward-looking vision
that resulted in the creation of the OMVS, successor to
the Senegal River Riparian States Organization.

Those three founding countries, joined in 2006
by the Republic of Guinea, defined what has become
known as the Water Charter, which is based on the
idea that since water is a rare commodity and therefore
potentially an object of conflict, it must be shared on
the basis of its uses, not among member States, so as
to ensure joint management of the basin in a spirit
of solidarity.

This resource-sharing among uses is based on
the following principles: the obligation to ensure a
balanced management of water resources; the fair and
reasonable use of river water; the obligation to preserve
the environment; the obligation to negotiate in case
of conflict; and the obligation for each riparian State
to inform other riparian States before undertaking
any action or project that could have an impact on
the availability of water, or about the possibility of
implementing a future project.

This vision was very forward-looking because the
Charter, well before its time, established the principle
of "polluter pays" and grants representatives of users,
territorial communes, non-governmental organizations
and decentralized management committees observer
status within the Standing Commission on Water. In
doing so, OMVS member States ensured access to water
for riparian communities and enabled them to invest
in energy, agriculture and transport while promoting
good-neighbourly relations in the region.

It is in that same spirit that Senegal will be
undertaking its presidency of OMVS after the election
on 17 May of President Macky Sall to preside over the
Conference of Heads of State and Government for the
upcoming two years.

President Sall intends to modernize the organization
at an accelerated rate and implement new projects in the
area of energy and the navigability of the river, and to
promote inclusive cooperation in a spirit of solidarity
so as to ensure that the Senegal river unites and does
not divide riparian countries.

Historically, as we know, rivers have been the cradle
of great civilizations, and we should never lose sight of
this historic role if we wish water and transboundary
waters in particular to continue playing a uniting role.
But knowing the geostrategic challenges surrounding
this resource, we cannot exclude the threat of future
conflicts concerning water. In this light, the Council
has no other option but to turn to prevention.
It is therefore important to promote cooperation
in the management of transboundary water resources,
which would make it possible to guarantee peace
and provide for the interests of all. But for this, the
international community must muster the political will
to strengthen its mediation capacity, in particular by
helping the existing cooperation framework or, where
there is a need for it, in helping to establish new ones.

It is all the more necessary to recall, as underscored
by Mr. Danilo Tiirk, President of the Global High-level
Panel on Water and Peace, in the Council last November,
in saying that of the 263 international watercourses,
only 84 have joint management institutions, and many
are inefficient.

It is our common responsibility, therefore,
to promote a mediation that is complementary to
cooperation, particularly within the framework of the
United Nations, three quarters of whose Members share
watercourses with their neighbours.

We wish also to welcome the outstanding work
done by the Secretariat, in particular the Department of
Political Affairs, and to thank them for their valuable
support for their mediation efforts throughout the
world. Given all of these efforts, we wish to seize this
opportunity to invite the Security Council, the guarantor
of international security, to take a careful look at the
issue of transboundary waters in order to strengthen
its conflict-prevention efforts. Make no mistake, the
future of preventive diplomacy lies in cooperation.
Given the multiplicity and interrelatedness of existing
security challenges, our motto should remain that of
preventive multilateralism.

That message is exactly what the Senegalese
initiative on water, peace and security is trying to
promote. It seeks to show that, with the support of
the international community, countries can be helped
to replace competition for access to water - a source
of conflict - with cooperation around this strategic
resource, and, in that way, prevent conflicts and
strengthen relations between States.

Finally, it remains for me to reiterate the unwavering
commitment of Senegal to continue its efforts to prevent
water-related conflict, and for the the idea of creating
a Group of Friends on Water, Peace and Security has
emerged and will no doubt soon become a reality.

