Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for having convened this open meeting
to debate the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I would also like to thank Mr. Guehenno
and Mr. Solana for their comprehensive statements this
morning.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
Brazil's firm support for the efforts undertaken by the
Secretary-General with regard to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are confident that his new
Special Representative, Ambassador William Swing,
will continue to show the leadership that is crucial for
the success of the peace process, as did his predecessor,
Amos Namanga Ngongi.

Brazil cherishes its ties with Africa, forged
through centuries of intertwined history. In this regard,
Brazil is ready to offer its share of contributions to help
the African people tackle their difficulties, some of
which are very familiar to our own country. Appalled
by the humanitarian situation in Bunia, the Brazilian
Congress has authorized the deployment of two Air
Force cargo planes, with their crews, to be used in the
transportation of troops and humanitarian assistance
from Entebbe to Bunia, under the coordination of the
Multinational Force established by resolution 1484
(2003).

Current efforts made by the international
community to bring immediate relief to the Congolese
people and to re-establish control over the clashes
taking place in Ituri will have to be followed up. We
therefore commend the Council on its efforts to provide
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) with a
more robust mandate before the mandate of the
Multinational Force is due to end. A vacuum of
authority in the region could harm the significant
achievements made by the Ituri Interim Administration
and threaten the activities of the recently established
Transitional Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

Brazil congratulates all the parties involved in the
establishment of the Transitional Government and the
recently promulgated Transitional Constitution. Those
developments would not have happened without
MONUC's support, which will remain crucial
throughout the process leading to the holding of
elections and the creation of a truly democratic
Government in the near future. Democracy is the basis
for sustainable peace. Brazil looks forward to the
successful work of the Independent Electoral
Commission and is ready to cooperate with it, drawing
on our experience in organizing elections in areas of
difficult access.

The agreements reached through the inter-
Congolese dialogue are highly commendable. Brazil
believes that the Secretary-General should be provided
with all the resources required to maintain the current
trend of positive results. We favour a temporary arms
embargo for the region and the establishment of a
mechanism for monitoring and inspection.

The cruelty of the crimes committed in Ituri and
the Kivus shocks the human conscience. The
observance of international humanitarian law is a
condition for peace in the region. In that connection,
MONUC should also be capable of providing a
reasonably safe environment in which humanitarian
agencies can operate.

For sustainable peace to be established, renewed
efforts should be made to ensure that impunity for
those responsible for atrocities and crimes against
humanity does not prevail. It is our view that the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights should be
provided with all necessary support and security so that
it can offer assistance and gather information on the
ground. The recommendations put forward by Mr.
Bertrand Ramcharan some 10 days ago before the
Council deserve our full support. In particular, United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
should be involved in providing psychological help to
victims and witnesses of atrocities. It should not be
overlooked that even some perpetrators of violence
deserve assistance, as is the case with child soldiers.
We also urge the international community to support
the work of the national Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and the National Observatory for Human
Rights, which are to be established under the All-
Inclusive Agreement signed in December 2002.

To conclude, we would like to commend the
Governments of the neighbouring countries for their
support for the activities of the United Nations on the
ground. Neighbouring countries should seize the
opportunity offered by the success achieved in the
inter-Congolese dialogue to consider negotiating
international agreements to deal with the remaining
concerns about security in the region.

