Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, Sir, allow me to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I should also like to commend
Ambassador Churkin of the Russian Federation for his
presidency in the month of May. We would also like to
say how honoured we are to have among us here today
in the Council the Foreign Minister of Turkey and the
Prime Minister of Croatia.

My delegation is grateful to the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals for
Rwanda and the Former Yugoslavia for their
introduction of their biannual progress reports (see S/2009/247 and S/2009/252) on the status of progress
on their completion strategies. Both reports describe
the concrete measures that the Tribunals have taken to
complete their work within a reasonable time frame.
Mexico would like to acknowledge the efforts made by
both Tribunals to expedite their judicial functions in a
responsible and efficient way while also ensuring the
crucial goal of meting out justice and preventing
impunity for criminal acts over which they have
jurisdiction.

Despite such efforts, I should point out that both
reports detail for the Security Council the reasons why
it is extremely difficult to imagine that the Tribunals
will finish their work by the end of this year, as called
for by resolutions 1534 (2004) and 1824 (2008). In
these circumstances, Mexico believes that the Security
Council will have to maintain a pragmatic and flexible
approach with regard to the Tribunals' completion
strategies. In both cases, they face the challenge of
striking a balance between attaining the objective for
which they were set up, that is, to judge and to prevent
impunity, to ensure efficiency in financial and
budgetary matters and to discharge their obligation to
uphold the fundamental rights of the alleged offenders,
the witnesses and the victims of the crimes under their
jurisdiction.

In this regard and as a result of the work carried
out by the informal Working Group on international
tribunals - our colleague from Austria has given us a
very precise and detailed outline of that work -
Mexico believes that the completion strategies must
continue to adhere to the following interconnected
principles.

The first is the gradual completion of the
Tribunals' mandate. As mentioned in the reports before
us at this meeting, the task of guaranteeing a smooth
transition between the closing of the Tribunals and the
establishment of the residual mechanism requires great
care. In this regard, the deadlines for the conclusion of
work, which have been extended, must be realistic and
reasonable and must take into account the caseload and
the resources at the disposal of both bodies.

In the light of this, Mexico is of the opinion that
these deadlines should be viewed as desirable
indicative dates, subject to the realities facing the
Tribunals in the light of how their respective cases
evolve. Of course, this must not be construed as
meaning that we believe that the mandate of the
Tribunals must be extended indefinitely. We believe
that the Security Council must monitor the work of the
Tribunals very closely and adapt its decisions
accordingly, so that it can support the gradual winding-
down of their work in the most efficient, swift and
economical manner possible. We also believe that the
most appropriate course of action would be for the
Tribunals to conclude their work in the very near
future, but not on the basis of arbitrary dates.

The second principle is the referral of new cases
to local jurisdictions. One of the key actions for
dealing with the caseload of the Tribunals and
contributing to the development of capacities for the
administration of justice in the States concerned is the
referral of new cases to national jurisdictions.

However, to achieve this, it is essential for a
number of conditions to be met. One of these is that the
characteristics of new proceedings, such as the identity
and high rank of the alleged offenders and the gravity
of the crimes attributed to them, and the security
conditions for participating witnesses and victims
actually make that possible. In other words, we support
referrals to national jurisdictions except in those cases
when the implications are such that it may be necessary
to deal with these cases in the appropriate International
Tribunal.

Another condition is that there should be
certainty with respect to the will and capacity of the
local jurisdiction to carry out the trials. Regarding this
condition, it is important to underline the fact that the
report on the ICTR points out that there are still major
challenges before certain basic conditions can be
guaranteed in terms of national jurisdictions applying
international standards.

The third principle is to continue devising
mechanisms that make it possible to reduce the number
of judges and the staffing levels in other areas of the
Tribunals. In trying to ensure that the gradual winding-
down of the work of the Tribunals responds to financial
and budgetary concerns, it is important to continue to
support the devising of mechanisms, such as those
already proposed, to reduce the number of judges on
the basis of the procedural stages in which most of the
trials currently stand. In this respect, Mexico
acknowledges the merit of the proposals put forth by
both Tribunals with respect to redeploying judges to
bolster the Appeals Chamber, which will be charged
with carrying out most of the judicial work in the near
future.

Lastly, on the establishment of the residual
mechanism or mechanisms that will take on the
functions of the Tribunals, Mexico believes that
beyond the decision of the Security Council with
respect to establishing one mechanism for each
Tribunal or a common one - the latter being the
option we certainly support - we must continue to
consider very carefully and in detail the various aspects
of the establishment of such a mechanism, such as its
mandate, functioning, composition and budget.

Nonetheless, we wish to emphasize that, even
when it is in the midst of such painstaking
considerations, the Council should not fail to keep its
focus on the main objective, which is to guarantee that
justice is done vis-a-vis the perpetration of the crimes
and atrocities committed during the conflicts in the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda and to combat
impunity for the most heinous crimes against humanity.

With these considerations, Mexico will continue
to work over the coming months to contribute to the
successful implementation of the completion strategies
of both Tribunals.

