Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania):
My delegation wishes to associate itself with the
commendations expressed by previous speakers about
your presidency and that of your predecessor, the
Ambassador of the Gambia. We also associate ourselves
with the statements made by Ambassador Machivenyika
Mapuranga of Zimbabwe on behalf of the Organization of
African Unity and Ambassador Mahfoudh Ould Deddach
of Mauritania on behalf of the African Group for the
month of April, as well as that made by Ambassador
Khiphusizi Jele of South Africa on behalf of the countries
of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC). It is a happy coincidence that the Security
Council is presided over by Japan, which has been taking
important initiatives on African development. We are
therefore very optimistic that the results of this debate
will be positive.

We would also like to pay tribute to the Security
Council for the initiative it took in September 1997 in
having a ministerial debate on Africa, the result of which
is the report of the Secretary-General, entitled "The
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa". We applaud the
Secretary-General for an insightful and constructive
report. We welcome the report as a banner headline of the
challenges facing Africa and, indeed, the international
community as a whole.

A week ago, on 16 April 1998, while introducing the
report, the Secretary-General cautioned and underscored
a matter we wish to emphasize, if only to highlight a
sense of the problem and the magnitude of the challenge
we face. He pointed out:

"Let us never forget that it is the persistence of
poverty that is impeding the full promise of peace

 

for all of Africa's peoples. The alleviation of poverty
must be the first aim of our efforts. Only then - only
when prosperity and opportunity become real - will
every citizen, young or old, man or woman, have a
genuine and lasting stake in a peaceful future for
Africa - politically, economically and socially."
[S/PV.387], p. 4]

Indeed, we could add that only then will Africa take its
rightful place in the global economy.

Africa is a continent composed of 53 States. Of the 48
least developed countries in the world, 33 or more are in
Africa alone. They are also in many ways highly indebted,
a factor which further exacerbates poverty in the region. If
poverty breeds tension and instability, there could therefore
not be a better breeding ground. Not surprisingly, Africa
has dominated and continues to dominate the Council's
agenda. This is a matter to be regretted. It is also a matter
of shame to Africa and to the common humanity we all
share. It is a matter calling for urgent reversal. It is equally
a matter for which Africa bears primary responsibility. It is
nevertheless a matter which, admittedly, Africa alone does
not have the answers. Pious hopes or even eloquent rhetoric
cannot be a substitute for concrete action. Sadly, Africa, our
dear continent, has been the object of many initiatives over
the last 10 years, to no avail. Perhaps it is about time to
find out why there has been so little progress on the
ground.

The Secretary-General's report calls for concerted
effort to assist Africa. It also notes the positive changes
taking place in the continent in the context of further
democratization, governance and economic reforms. These
efforts need to be nurtured and promoted. Any concrete
contribution that can be made in terms of required
resources is an investment in Africa's prosperity, the
rewards of which, in the end, will not only be seen in the
peace dividends, but also in establishing a firm partnership
for truly global cooperation.

The Secretary-General has further made certain
recommendations, some of which bear on Africans
themselves and some on Africa's cooperating partners, as
well as the United Nations. We look forward with
anticipation to measures which would transform those
recommendations into a workable strategy for real changes
in Africa. Perhaps we need to agree how best to proceed
from this debate. It is crucially important that there be an
appropriate forum where concrete measures and resources
will be worked out.

As Africans, we welcome the challenges we have to
shoulder. We do, nevertheless, request of our cooperating
partners to consider seriously the proposal by the
Secretary-General to examine further additional action on
the debt facing Africa, particularly that of the least
developed countries.

I wish to record our appreciation to the countries
that have taken measures to alleviate the debt problem.

Admittedly, the results of well-meant programmes
such as the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt
Initiative of the Bretton Woods institutions have been
disappointing. And yet, Africa continues to face crippling
debt at a time when even the frailest economies, including
that of my country, have just recently been ravaged by
the vagaries of the El Nifio phenomenon. While Africa
does not desire to dishonour its debt obligations, a
cancellation of such a debt burden would release and
make available to Africa critical resources it needs to
build appropriate infrastructure for its prosperity and
peace.

In conclusion, we plead to the Council to follow the
positive developments of recent weeks from the continent
and come up with a message that will reassure Africans
that all hope is not lost. And in that message, it will be
reassuring to get an affirmation that the United Nations
will work, not only with African countries, but also with
the Organization of African Unity, in addressing the twin
goals of peace and security on the one hand, and
development on the other.

