Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Allow me to begin
by thanking the French presidency for convening this
important meeting under the agenda item "The situation
in the Middle East", to discuss the humanitarian
consequences of the Syrian crisis. We are also grateful
to the Deputy Secretary-General and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees for their briefings.
I would also like to welcome the participation of the
various Ministers at the Council's meeting today.

Azerbaijan remains deeply concerned about
the escalation of violence and the worsening socio-
economic and humanitarian situation in Syria. Over the
period from the beginning of the crisis to now, sporadic
incidents have evolved into more brutal clashes with
increased organizational and military capabilities,
including the use of excessive force and indiscriminate
attacks on civilians. As a result, thousands have lost
their lives in the spiral of violence, and the number
of civilians killed grows daily. It is important that
all human rights violations and abuses be thoroughly
investigated and that perpetrators be held accountable
for their crimes. We once again reiterate our appeal to all
parties to cease all acts of violence immediately and to
implement fully their commitments under international
law and relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

As the number of displaced people within Syria
and of refugees fleeing to neighbouring countries
grows, and as the security and humanitarian situation
rapidly deteriorates, the threat of the destabilization
of the whole region is particularly alarming. We
commend the Governments of Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon
and Turkey - the countries affected by repercussions
of the crisis - for the relief and protection that they are
providing to Syrian refugees.

The concerns of, and appeals by, neighbouring
countries about the impact of the continuation and
further escalation of the crisis should be taken
seriously. Those countries must be given appropriate
assistance and support to address the political, security
and humanitarian challenges that they are facing. In
that context, it is of paramount importance that all
appropriate practical measures be taken to ensure
that the crisis in Syria not be used as a pretext for
organizing, instigating, facilitating or encouraging
terrorist and separatist activity against other States, in
particular those surrounding Syria. At the same time,
careful consideration should be given to reports on the
spillover effects of the Syrian crisis on other regions.

About 2.5 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance as a result of the conflict in
Syria. We appreciate the efforts undertaken so far by
international humanitarian organizations and relief
agencies on the ground to assist people affected by the
conflict. The scale of the humanitarian crisis requires
opening greater humanitarian access and widening the
scope of organizations with which the United Nations
and others can interact to deliver relief to those in
need, in accordance with humanitarian principles and
international law. A more prompt and sizable response
to the United Nations humanitarian appeal for Syria
is critical. It is an absolute necessity to support those
requiring assistance inside Syria and in neighbouring
countries.

Together with the Geneva communique of the Action
Group, the relevant resolutions constitute a solid basis
guiding efforts towards a political settlement, involving
an inclusive and Syrian-led political process whose aim
is to address the legitimate aspirations and concerns
of the Syrian people. It is important that obligations
with respect to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Syria and all other States in
the region be fully observed and respected.

The important work that Joint Special Envoy Kofi
Annan undertook must continue. We welcome newly
appointed Joint Special Envoy Lakhdar Brahimi and we
wish him every success in fulfilling the very important
and crucial task of facilitating a peaceful solution. The
full cooperation of all sides in Syria with the Special
Representative and the international community's
support for him are necessary to achieve a long-awaited
breakthrough in ending the violence and bringing
peace and stability to Syria and the entire region. It is
clear that all national stakeholders should demonstrate
determination to solve the crisis by peaceful means
rather than militarily.

Against that background, it is essential that the
Security Council speak with one voice, to ensure
that the parties comply with their commitments and
cooperate with the Joint Special Envoy responsibly and
in good faith. Maintaining the United Nations presence
on the ground is another prerequisite for supporting
the Secretary-General's good offices, as well as for
sustaining international oversight and securing the flow
of independent and impartial on-site information. We
hope that collective efforts will finally yield results in
bringing about a peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis
and in putting an end to the human suffering.

Lastly, I should like to take the opportunity afforded
by the discussion on this agenda item to express our
profound concern about the Middle East peace process,
which has been at a standstill with no substantive
progress towards resuming direct talks between the
parties. It is obvious that a solution to that problem
is essential to achieving durable peace, stability and
security in the entire region, and that respect for
international law should be an absolute priority to that
end. In assuming its responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security Council
must react adequately in order to put an end to illegal
practices and policies and ensure that international law,
human rights and fundamental freedoms are observed
and respected.

