Mr. ngowe (Botswana): The position of my
delegation on the current situation in Lebanon was stated
during the open debate held on Monday, 15 April 1996.
We believe that the grave situation that now obtains in
Lebanon could have been averted had the Security
Council adopted a formal decision at the end of the
orientation debate. This is an extremely serious matter, to
which the Council should have reacted with the utmost
urgency. Lebanese people have been massacred in the
most brutal manner. The Israeli military actions have
definitely gone beyond the limits of Israel's legitimate
right to self-defence.

The present Israeli military activities in Lebanon
constitute an outright invasion of that country. Bombs,
rockets and other missiles are being directly targeted at
the civilian population, resulting in death, suffering and
extensive destruction of property. Even the headquarters
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
has not been spared. UNIFIL buildings have been
damaged and some UNIFIL troops have sustained
injuries. The actions of the Israeli armed forces clearly
put the lives of the United Nations forces in serious
danger. We call upon Israel to respect United Nations
personnel at all times.

The Security Council cannot afford to watch
impassively the war tragedy that is unfolding in Lebanon.
The Council should always be ready to respond in a
timeously to situations that constitute a grave threat to
international peace and security. The parties should cease
hostilities immediately. In this regard, we welcome the
content of the operative paragraphs of resolution 1052
(1996), which we have just adopted. They list the priority
areas: immediate cease-fire, support for diplomatic efforts;

 

respect for the territorial integrity and national sovereignty
of Lebanon; the safety and security of UNIFIL personnel,
and the need for humanitarian assistance.

It is our hope that the parties will comply with this
resolution. It no longer serves any useful purpose to argue
about who started the hostilities. The most important thing
at this stage is to end the fighting and give peace a chance.

