Mr. Thoms (Germany): Threats to maritime safety
have become an issue of increased international concern.
The Gulf of Guinea in particular is greatly affected by
piracy and armed robbery at sea, inflicting billions of
dollars of economic losses and threatening maritime
safety. Acts of piracy are often committed with extreme
violence. The countries of the region have recognized
this threat. The Yaounde' process, established by Heads
of State and Government in 2013, underscores the need
for joint action. Allow me to stress the following three
points.

First, without strong local and regional ownership
we will not be able to tackle this issue successfully.
Focused and relevant regional support is therefore
needed at the political and financial levels, as well
as through the human resources of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
its Yaounde process. Germany has contributed more
than €1 million in an effort to strengthen regional
cooperation under the Yaounde process, most notably
through communication equipment designed to improve
surveillance operations in the Gulf. Germany stands
ready to increase its support in the context of its long-
standing partnership with ECOWASand the Yaounde
pI'OCGSS.

Secondly, the scope of the existing partnerships
has to be widened. We therefore welcome efforts
made by the private sector to ensure greater security
in the Gulf of Guinea. We also appreciate the private
sector's repeated calls for transparent and pragmatic
cooperation between all stakeholders of the Yaounde
process.

Thirdly, maritime security is more than ever a
global challenge. Under the auspices of the German
presidency of the Group of Seven (G-7) last year, foreign
ministers collectively agreed in the Liibeck declaration
to make maritime security and effective maritime
governance a priority. The Liibeck declaration calls for
a cooperative, rules-based, cross-sector approach to
maritime security and stresses the importance of the
relevant legal frameworks, such as the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea.

Let me add that we fully support the commitment
of Japan's G-7 2016 presidency to maritime security,
and we welcome the efforts made by the Portuguese
presidency of the G-7 Group of Friends of the Gulf of
Guinea.

