At the outset, I wish to thank Mark Lowcock, David Beasley and Qu Dongyu for their comprehensive briefings. The figures they presented are alarming - the risk of famine continues to increase. There are multiples causes. Conflicts, climate change and, now, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its attendant economic crisis are daily compounding the number of food insecure and malnourished people. The number of countries affected by the risk of famine is extremely worrisome. They include the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Yemen, north-east Nigeria and South Sudan. The situation is also very alarming in the Sahel, particularly in Burkina Faso. Urgent action is therefore required. First and foremost, only coordinated and integrated collective action will make it possible to avert a humanitarian disaster. States, United Nations agencies, regional and subregional organizations, non-governmental organizations, as well as the private sector and international financial institutions, must all be mobilized if we are to reduce the risk of famine. Cooperation among humanitarian and development actors is more essential than ever. It is not just a matter of providing important food aid, but also of strengthening national and local production systems and promoting social safety nets that will help the most vulnerable avoid the risk of famine and, above all, meet their food needs in dignity. This food crisis calls for bolstering the resilience of food systems and accelerating the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. We must also enhance prevention and early-warning mechanisms to better anticipate, prevent and mitigate the effects of food crises. That requires collecting reliable data in real time. France will continue to work towards that goal through bilateral and multilateral support. Our funding for food aid has risen from around €40 million in 2019 to more than €50 million in 2020. It will continue to grow next year. In addition, France is currently mobilizing its European partners to strengthen the Team Europe response to food security and nutrition, with a focus on Africa, a region of particular concern to us. That must be done in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, whose budgetary and other consequences have been highlighted by all. Secondly, we must do all we can to ensure absolute respect for international humanitarian law. As many pointed out, the use of famine as a strategy of war is a war crime under international criminal law and must not go unpunished. Furthermore - we cannot repeat it enough - all parties must guarantee the protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel, as well as civilian infrastructure. We will not compromise on that issue. Finally, preventing famine means ensuring safe and unhindered humanitarian access to all those inneed. In that regard, it is essential to accelerate the implementation of resolution 2532 (2020) through ceasefires and a humanitarian pauses. We have a collective responsibility and a moral obligation to avoid a new humanitarian tragedy in the case of a famine. While conflicts remain the primary drivers of food crises, we must intensify efforts to find lasting political solutions to conflicts. The Council can count on France's unflagging and ongoing support.
