Mr. Apakan (Turkey): First of all, I wish to
welcome you, Sir, and to commend Japan's presidency
for organizing this meeting. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and the Managing Director of
World Bank for their substantive briefings, which
included valuable assessments and recommendations
on how to develop post-conflict peacebuilding
processes. We are particularly honoured by the
presence of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well that
of the Ministers of Sierra-Leone and Timor-Leste.

The concept note provided by Japan (S/2010/167)
includes pertinent questions that encompass a wide
range of issues on the peacebuilding agenda. It also
provides food for thought for future discussion. In that
respect, I shall today limit my intervention to four
points that we deem to be of particular importance.
Moreover, the draft presidential statement that is before
us includes a number of measures relevant to post-
conflict peacebuilding. We fully support it.

The challenges we are addressing today are not
new. For over a decade, we have grappled with how to
bring peacebuilding upstream and how to mount a
more rapid and effective response in the immediate
aftermath of a conflict. Although the challenges
aggravated by global resource constraints remain
formidable, the renewed enthusiasm on the part of
Member States and the international community, as
well as the impetus gained so far through the reform of
United Nations peace operations, have brought about
added optimism for a new peacebuilding agenda.

In our view, the new peacebuilding agenda
requires, first and foremost, recognition in practice, not
just in rhetoric, of the substantive and inherent linkages
between peace, security, stability, development, human
rights and the rule of law. That, in turn, compels us to
take complementary, integrated and properly
sequenced actions in all those areas, so as to achieve a
catalytic impact on the outcome of our peacebuilding
endeavours.

Indeed, peacebuilding requires well-calibrated
action, not only in various policy areas but also with
regard to short-term, medium-term and long-term
goals. That was also one of the messages of the
Secretary General's report last year (S/2009/304). We
agree with the Secretary-General's conclusion that
decisions taken in the short term should not prejudice
medium- and long-term peacebuilding, but that they
should be mutually reinforcing.

Recognizing the nexus between peace, security
and development leads me to the second important
element, which is the necessity of deciding upon a
comprehensive strategy and a political-strategic
compass that is designed to support viable peace
processes and political, economic and social stability.
In other words, that strategy should be an integrated
one that merges the tools of peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It should also be
coherent, adapted to the needs of a situation and well-
coordinated Vis-a-Vis the various actors involved in
peacebuilding.

The lessons learned from various peacebuilding
challenges reveal that, where such an integrated
strategy is missing, the international peacebuilding
agenda is bound to be ad hoc, piecemeal or even
contradictory, if not outright counterproductive. In the
Balkans, for example, the shared peacebuilding
framework involving military, diplomatic, economic,
legal and social instruments of the European Union,
NATO, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the United Nations made collective and
concerted action possible; whereas in some regional
conflicts in Africa, the absence of such a framework at
times hinders the success of the peacebuilding project,
despite continuous international assistance and high
volumes of aid.
This brings us to the third important element,
which is ownership of the process. Undoubtedly,
peacebuilding is ultimately a home-grown project and
the realization of its goals requires the active
engagement of local stakeholders. This would not only
avoid the criticism that it has been imposed on the
national Government and population, but also would
increase the chances of its success.

Therefore, any mechanism for building durable
peace and justice must be applied with the active
participation of all local stakeholders, including civil
society, marginalized groups, ex-combatants,
professional associations and women's organizations.
This is particularly significant in terms of social
reconciliation efforts, where grass-roots structures play
a catalytic role.

At the regional level, neighbouring countries and
regional factors should also be brought into the picture.
Given that many conflicts have cross-border
dimensions beyond the domestic political
circumstances, the scope of conflict analysis and
response has to be broadened, not only conceptually
but also geographically. Of course, the concept of
ownership will remain abstract, unless it is
accompanied from the very beginning by capacity-
building support on the part of the international
community.

While the components of any peacebuilding
strategy should be tailored to specific situations, the
basic pillars on which the international community can
lend its support remain more or less the same. Four
important elements come to fore for the realization of
sustainable peace in a post-conflict situation:
restoration of a functioning State, i.e. ensuring basic
safety, security and services; rebuilding the legitimacy
of the State by ensuring the democratic accountability
of political leaders to their citizens and strengthening
the rule of law; promoting social reconciliation to heal
the wounds of conflict; and revitalizing of the
economy.

This leads me to my fourth point, namely, that the
United Nations has a unique role to play here, one that
could merge the State-centred and human-centred
approaches in all these areas and coordinate the work
of various stakeholders to deliver as one on the ground.
The Peacebuilding Commission, with its unique
position allowing it to explicitly address the nexus
between security and development, could play a
critical role in this respect. Furthermore, the United
Nations can also serve as a clearing house for financial,
in-kind and technical support at the bilateral and
multilateral levels, where all the stakeholders could
interact with each other on their individual projects and
programmes. The Security Council also has an
important role to play in signalling strong international
attention and support for the peace process and for the
initiation of peacebuilding.

I would like to conclude my remarks by
emphasizing that the new peacebuilding agenda
highlights the need to operate at many levels, from the
micro community to the macro political level, from the
national and regional levels to the global level. This is
why we should go beyond State-centric concepts of
security and move to multi-faceted and multi-level
strategies that can help address the multiple causes of
conflict from a long-term developmental perspective.

