Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, forhaving convenedthis important debate. As we begin this year's first quarterly discussion on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question, we hope that the new decade will bring about a new start, not only for Palestine but for the region as a whole. Despite the growing number and complexity of the issues facing our region, principally the Palestinian question, the United Arab Emirates believes that there is an opportunity to reverse the path of negative trends and de-escalate the current situation in order to resolve the crises in the region and achieve regional and international stability. In order to do so, my country underscores the need to take several steps. First, there must be a commitment to implementing international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the Security Council's resolutions. In that regard, my country is concerned by Israel's continuation of its illegal practices against the brotherly Palestinian people, including further settlement-building activities that undermine the two-State solution and are in contravention of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, as well as the relevant General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). Similarly, the demolition of Palestinian property, the confiscation of land, attempts to desecrate holy sites in the city of Jerusalem and the ongoing unjust blockade on Gaza are all illegal practices that hinder peace efforts and exacerbate the suffering of the Palestinian people. On a broader scale, we believe that our region now needs to see the strengthening of international law, which is the basis for confidence-building between the parties and for preventing the spread of chaos and war, so as to achieve regional stability and security. In that regard, we stress the need for States to respect the principles of sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs of other States. Secondly, it is critical that we work towards de-escalation and calm by promoting political action as a fundamental choice to address any tensions that might arise in the context of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, or in the entire region. The primary endeavour of the international community must be to create an environment conducive to peace efforts in any State that suffers crisis in order to address any measures that could have numerous grave security, military and economic repercussions for the States concerned and the region as a whole. The Berlin conference on Libya held earlier this week is an example of how international efforts can be mobilized to address any negative trends that could exacerbate crises. We commend Germany's efforts as the host of the conference, in which my country actively participated. We hope that it will lead to a political process under the auspices of the United Nations that enjoys the full commitment of all stakeholders. Thirdly, we must strengthen multilateral action to break the current stalemate in the Middle East peace process, as such action constitutes the best means to urge the parties to reach lasting political solutions, whether in Palestine or in other countries of the region, such as Syria, Yemen and Libya. That must conform to the agreed terms of reference for achieving peace in a manner that meets the legitimate aspirations of the peoples concerned. In that regard, we highlight the important role of the United Nations and the envoys of the Secretary-General in strengthening mediation and preventive diplomacy efforts to resolve the conflicts in the region by peaceful means. In line with those efforts, regional organizations, including the League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, should be encouraged to participate in consultations related to regional issues, especially as such organizations are qualified to develop effective political solutions to crises. In that context, we call on the international community to redouble its efforts to implement the two-State solution and declare an independent Palestinian State along the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with the relevant international resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. Fourthly, and finally, we must bolster humanitarian assistance to people affected by conflict, while continuing to support development and reconstruction efforts. We must help those nations and peoples in need to achieve prosperity and implement the SustainableDevelopment Goals. It is also imperative that we focus on addressing the deteriorating humanitarian and economic conditions in the Palestinian territories and support the vital sectors there, especially in the Gaza Strip, where the humanitarian conditions are appalling. For our part, my country will continue to extend humanitarian and development aid to Palestine. We are among the largest donors to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, having contributed more than $630 million to finance various sectors in Palestine over the past five years. In conclusion, we underscore that the Palestinian question will remain the central issue of the Arab and Islamic nations. Restoring stability to the region will not be possible without a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question. The United Arab Emirates, which will celebrate the year 2020 under the theme "Towards the Next 50", is launching a major national development strategy for the next 50 years across all vital sectors. We will spare no effort to achieve stability in the region and keep the wheel of economic and technological progress turning in pursuit of a better future for our country and for the countries of the region.
