Mr. Skoog: I wish to thank you, Madam, for
organizing this debate and inviting me to brief the
Security Council on behalf of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

This debate on security, development and the root
causes of conflict is both important and timely. The
Peacebuilding Commission, which I represent here
today, was set up 10 years ago to address challenges
around bridging the gap between security and
development. This debate offers an opportunity to
reflect on our common successes and shortcomings so
far. Of course, it is only by addressing the root causes
of conflict that we can contribute to building lasting
peace.

In 2015, the international community has confirmed
that sustainable development cannot be realized without
peace and security, and that peace and security will
be at risk without sustainable development. Less than
two months ago, Heads of State confirmed, inter alia,
the intention to promote peaceful, just and inclusive
societies that are free from fear and violence.

Two weeks ago, the Secretary-General and the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross issued an unprecedented joint warning about the
impact oftoday's conflicts on civilians and appealed for
urgent and concrete action to address human suffering
and insecurity. They referred to the fact that the world
is at a turning point and called upon States to redouble
their efforts to find sustainable solutions to conflicts
and take concrete steps to that effect. I want to pay
a tribute to the mission statement that the Secretary-
General put forward this morning to that respect. I
think it is up to all the rest of us to heed that call, too.
The issue, of course, is how we go about it.

The United Nations and the international
community at large must become better at supporting
efforts to build and sustain peace. As part of this, we
must do more to avoid relapse into conflict and step up
efforts to prevent conflict from occurring in the first
place. There needs to be a renewed determination that
includes seizing the opportunity of the three reviews
related to peace operations currently under way. The
challenge is to turn normative developments and

political momentum into concrete reforms for better
operational response.

I should like to highlight three shifts that I believe
will be necessary in order to better support efforts to
sustain peace: more emphasis on prevention, increased
inclusivity and strengthened coherence. I will describe
what each of these shifts entails, and also touch upon
where and how the Peacebuilding Commission can add
value.

First of all, preventing lapse and relapse into
conflict should move to the fore of United Nations
engagement and build on the realization that building
peace is a primarily political process that requires
sustained and long-term engagement. One of the most
effective ways to sustain peace and prevent conflicts is
by building national capacity, strengthening domestic
institutions and supporting good governance.

Furthermore, countries that are prone to conflict
need support from international partners that are
willing and able to stay for the long haul. We need
to consider adjusting our horizons from the standard
three-to-five-year programme cycles to frameworks
that rather span 15 to 30 years. As the report (see S/2015/490) on the peacebuilding review points out,
creating legitimate institutions that can help prevent
relapse takes a generation. The PBC provides a forum
for countries that are not in situations of immediate
conflict but where sustained attention is needed and
where root causes of conflict need to be addressed.

Successful peacebuilding and preventive work also
requires sound political analysis as the foundation of
international support, both in conflict and post-conflict
settings. For that, increased conflict-assessment
capacity is needed. United Nations efforts should be
systematically underpinned by an analysis of conflict
and fragility. In addition, the United Nations should
better utilize all the tools at its disposal for preventing
conflicts, including the peacebuilding architecture.

I would like to recognize the important work done
by the Peacebuilding Fund in supporting integrated,
time-sensitive and risk-taking work across the United
Nations system. As recommended by the reports of
the reviews, it is crucial that sufficient and predictable
resources be provided to that important tool.

To better respond to the needs of conflict-prone
countries, we should do much more to strengthen
the capacity of regional actors, who are often first
responders.

Peace can emerge only from within societies, and
build on inclusive national ownership. Transparent and
accessible institutions that are accountable for, and
responsive to, the needs of the entirety of its population
are crucial for building trust and strengthening the
relationship between States and citizens.

Inclusivity is at the core of the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission. As part of its convening
role, the PBC is uniquely placed to listen and consult
with a broad range of stakeholders at the local, national
and regional levels. Furthermore, it is set up to support
national and local ownership. The countries with which
the PBC engages are always in the lead. Our role is to
support their processes.

We cannot address inclusivity without mentioning
the importance of including women as actors in all
aspects of our work. The Peacebuilding Commission
is currently developing a gender strategy to ensure
more systematic and strategic engagement on the topic.
Furthermore, in a few weeks' time, we will discuss the
issue of youth and peacebuilding, an agenda that has
not yet received as much attention as it should. It is
important that youth not be seen as primarily victims
of violence in conflict. And our focus not be on youth
as a potential risk group or perpetrators, but as actors.

The last shift I would like to call for concerns
the way we collaborate with one another. Responding
to challenges of conflict and post-conflict countries
demands of all of us that we do more and better within
our respective mandates. International actors need to
start acting more coherently. That applies across the
United Nations system, the international financial
institutions and regional and national actors. By
overcoming short-sighted turf wars, we would not only
increase the efficacy of the Organization but, even
more important, provide more effective support for the
societies that it was set up to help.

I believe the Peacebuilding Commission can help
break down some of the silos and address fragmentation
and duplication of effort. Through its convening role
of a wide array of critical regional and international
actors, we can help bring a peacebuilding perspective
to deliberations of the principal organs of the United
Nations. Furthermore, the Commission can provide
strategic assessments of United Nations efforts on the
ground and actionable recommendations in specific
country contexts, as well as contribute to donor
coherence.

The importance of increased coherence across the
United Nations spectrum is perhaps never more evident
than during transitions. Getting transitions right
requires genuine integration of peace and development.
It also requires an understanding of inherently complex
interrelationships and a shift away from a linear
understanding of conflicts.

We can learn from successful examples such as the
transition in Sierra Leone. In the years ahead, we will
have a chance to demonstrate in Liberia that we are able
to work through joined-up approaches across areas of
security, development and human rights.

As Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission this
year, I have worked very closely with the six country
configurations. I know we all strive to diversify our
working methods and adopt more flexible tools of
engagement. That work that has already begun, but
I think we can do more, and better, to assist more
countries in need of peacebuilding efforts.

In conclusion, I look forward to forging a closer
relationship with the Council to bring to bear the
complementary advice that the PBC can offer. There is
scope for enhanced collaboration, drawing upon both
bodies' respective mandates.

