Mr. Jeremic' (Serbia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting of the Security Council.

Once again, we are gathered to discuss the
situation in the Serbian province of Kosovo. I would
like right at the outset to express my country's deep
gratitude to the substantial majority of United Nations
Member States that respect Serbia's sovereignty and
territorial integrity. The expressions of solidarity we
have received from all over the globe encourage us to
persevere in our efforts to resolve the future status of
Kosovo peacefully and in a way that is acceptable to
all responsible stakeholders.

Our principled position on our province's future
status remains the same. Serbia will never recognize
the unilateral declaration of independence by the ethnic
Albanian authorities in Pristina on 17 February, 2008.
This remains our political, moral and legal obligation.
It is also our democratic duty, for our nation is united
as one on this fundamental point. The Kosovo case is a
significant test for the world community, for there is a
choice to be made here between unilateralism and
consensus. The unilateral declaration of independence
is a challenge that we must work together to overcome,
for the sake of peace and stability and in the name of
international law.

The General Assembly tasked the International
Court of Justice to determine whether the unilateral
declaration of independence conforms to international
law. The crucial stage in the legal process is just about
09-55956
to begin. This is the first time in history that the Court
will rule on the legality of an attempt at secession by
an ethnic group from a United Nations Member State
in peacetime. It is also the first time that all five
permanent members of this Council will participate in
a proceeding before the Court. The total number of
actors that will present their views in The Hague is a
record for the Court, exceeding even the figure in the
cases involving the legality of the use of nuclear
weapons. There is therefore little doubt that the Court's
conclusions will have overarching consequences for
the international legal order.

It is in this context that Serbia appeals to all
United Nations Member States to respect the fact that
the International Court of Justice is actively
considering the issue of the unilateral declaration of
independence. It is our shared duty to ensure that the
Court's deliberations are not prejudged. The Court's
proceedings should be allowed to run their course,
unhindered by political pressures, such as further
recognitions of Kosovo's unilateral declaration of
independence.

I would like to welcome the presence of Special
Representative Lamberto Zannier, and wish to
underline the Secretary-General's assertion in
paragraph 2 of the report before the Council
(S/2009/497) that the United Nations Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) "has successfully concluded its
reconfiguration as at 1 July". It has now reached the
end-state of its draw-down.

The United Nations remains an indispensable
actor in Kosovo. It is therefore critical that this Council
continue to support UNMIK's presence as a crucial
pillar of peace and stability. The exercise of UNMIK's
external representation function remains especially
important. Its role is critical if regional groups, such as
the Central European Free Trade Agreement and the
Regional Cooperation Council, are to function in
accordance with established procedures.

Moreover, the United Nations ability to work
effectively with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) must remain
unconstrained. That is why it is important for the
amendments adopted by the General Assembly to the
UNMIK budget for the next fiscal year be fully applied
and for all vacant positions to be filled as soon as
possible.
09-55956
Serbia strongly believes that disagreements on
status must not impede the determination to act
together on improving the lives of all the residents in
the province. We have proactively worked with all
legitimate actors on the ground in Kosovo, while
ensuring our constitutional red lines are not crossed.

I am pleased that the report commends Belgrade's
policy of constructive engagement by acknowledging
our "pragmatic approach" to the resolution of practical
issues.

Commitments made in this Chamber should be
honoured. What is agreed to and welcomed by the
Security Council must be implemented in full from
resolution 1244 (1999) to the Secretary-General's six-
point plan, to which I will now turn. I begin with the
police, where I wish to highlight two important
developments that took place during the reporting
period in applying this crucial segment of the
Secretary-General's plan.

 

First, virtually all Kosovo Serb police officers
returned to their posts as a direct consequence of our
engagement. This has contributed to an improvement
in the security situation throughout the province -
especially in the Serbian enclaves in the south.

The second important development concerns the
signing of the Protocol on Police Cooperation between
the Serbian Ministry of the Interior and EULEX. The
Protocol is based on the best practices of our
longstanding cooperation with UNMIK police forces
on these matters. It is entirely status-neutral and fully
conforms to resolution 1244 (1999). Its implementation
will greatly contribute to the fight against organized
crime and terrorism in Kosovo - an area that
continues to be the hub of a sinister international
network of arms, drugs, and human traffickers.

Regarding the judiciary, despite some
constructive preliminary discussions with UNMIK and
EULEX, we have regretfully not been able to move
forward on issues such as determining the territorial
jurisdiction of the District Court in Mitrovica, the
appointments of judges and prosecutors designed to
reflect the ethnic communities they would serve, and
the applicability of UNMIK law. It is our hope that our
talks will intensify in the time ahead, for consensual
solutions must be found, in accordance with the
provisions of the November 2008 report.
5
On a number of other fronts, cooperation has
deepened. For example, special EULEX prosecutors
and Serbia's war crimes prosecutors have intensified
collaboration on serious cases. These include organ
harvesting committed by the Kosovo Liberation Army
on ethnic Serb civilians in the well-publicized "yellow
house", and the infamous KLA-run jails and
liquidation centres in places like Klecka in the Lipljan
municipality.

With respect to the delicate matter of customs, we
have also achieved some results. Technical cooperation
between Belgrade and EULEX has proceeded
smoothly, as information is exchanged regularly on
topics of mutual concern, such as smuggling. However,
progress on the important issue of revenue collection
and how it will benefit the relevant communities has
been more limited. We hope that, in the months ahead,
we can come to workable arrangements with our
UNMIK and EULEX partners, within the framework
endorsed by this Council in November 2008.

Concerning administrative lines and security, I
would like to acknowledge the useful role played by
the International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR).
Serbia will continue to act as its reliable partner, in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Kumanova Military-Technical Agreement.

KFOR's status-neutral presence in the province is
still required in order to protect Kosovo Serb enclaves
and our holy sites from threats, incursions and attacks.
According to Annex 1 of the report before us this
afternoon, a handover of responsibility from KFOR to
the Kosovo Police is being envisaged at the
Gazimestan Monument in honour of our martyred
heroes. Serbia strongly opposes such plans.
Gazimestan is hallowed ground for the Serbian nation.
KFOR has done an exemplary job in protecting it. It is
critically important that they continue to guard it,
together with other holy sites.

Concerning transportation and infrastructure, the
Serbian Government has worked hard to resolve
pressing electrical energy issues. As a result of our
active engagement with UNMIK and the OSCE, the
disconnection policies that discriminated against the
Kosovo Serb community, as highlighted in the report,
have been rectified. Consequently, a vast majority of
Serbian enclaves and monastic communities in the
south have had their power restored.

Yet the critically important issue of facilitating
the entry and transport of Serbian officials into the
province remains unresolved. It is difficult to imagine
how we can positively contribute to developments on
the ground, if our ability to work closely with the
Kosovo Serb community throughout the province is
hindered. We must find a way to overcome this
obstacle in a status-neutral manner, consistent with
resolution 1244 (1999).

Regarding Serbian patrimony - the last of the
six points - we salute UNMIK's efforts to "achieve
durable solutions for the protection of Serbian cultural
heritage in Kosovo," (S/2009/497, para. 9), as well as
its good-faith attempts to work with other legitimate
stakeholders in this sensitive field.

The Serbian Government and the Serbian
Orthodox Church have fully supported the renewal and
restoration of our holy sites, conducted under the
auspices of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and the
Reconstruction Implementation Commission chaired
by the Council of Europe.

Unfortunately, the precarious state of Serbian
patrimony remains a deeply troubling part of the reality
on the ground in Kosovo. For instance, local officials in
the town of Decani continue to defy the international
community. They have repeatedly refused to restore the
cadastral record of land belonging to the monastery of
Visoki Decani - a UNESCO World Heritage Site that
has been placed on its List of World Heritage in Danger.

Judges have been intimidated in connection with
this case, while a public disinformation campaign
orchestrated by KLA War Veterans Association claimed
that the monastery represents centuries-old Albanian
cultural heritage that was taken over by the Serbs in the
19th century. It is deeply regrettable that no one from
Pristina has chosen to condemn such dangerous
distortions, and set the record straight once and for all.

In August of this year, the whole-scale pillaging
of the largest medieval hermitage complex in the
mountains above our ancient capital of Prizren took
place. This unique and now abandoned monastic centre
was built by the Serbian ascetic Saint Peter of Korisha,
and dates back to the early decades of the 13th century.
Frescos were damaged and altars were vandalized. In
one of the pictures taken at the scene, we see carved
into a wall the acronym "UCK" - meaning the
Kosovo Liberation Army.
The extent of the material damage is still being
documented. What is beyond dispute is that the
perpetrators have succeeded in debasing our faith and
destroying yet another part of our patrimony.
Unfortunately, the authorities claim they have no leads,
and no arrests have been made.

Ethnic Albanian authorities are still refusing to
reconsider the outrageous decision to pave over with
concrete the remains of the twice-destroyed Serbian
church in the centre of Dakovica - thus compounding
physical destruction with the attempt to erase every
trace of its existence.

This is the third time I raise the issue in this
Chamber. Is it possible that the international
community is powerless to get this awful deed
reversed? Do we have the will to undo this act of
cultural cleansing? Once again, we ask for your help.

It is our assessment that our UNMIK and EULEX
partners share our determination to constructively
engage in overcoming these challenges. Let me
underline the great importance of our common status-
neutral approach for moving forward on a whole host
of concrete matters. We invested great efforts in
building up this solid basis for our cooperation.

Regretfully, Kosovo's ethnic Albanian authorities
have not demonstrated enthusiasm to embrace the
status-neutral framework for dealing with unresolved
practical issues. We believe this reticence does no one
any good. All parties have their constraints. But these
must not harm those who matter the most, the residents
of the province.

Last time we met, I called on everyone to
concentrate on improving the lives of citizens, instead
of making them the victims of our disagreements. I
proposed that we focus on the central humanitarian
issue of internally displaced persons (IDPs). The report
before us speaks of the upsetting consequences of a
failure to engage on this issue in good faith. A total of
only 31 of the more than 200,000 Kosovo Serb IDPs
were able to return to the province during the reporting
period, out of the thousands that expressed a concrete
interest in doing so in the weeks following our most
recent meeting in this Council. Serb IDPs have been
informed in writing by various local authorities that
they cannot come back home. This must not be allowed
to stand.

The denial of the right of return to Kosovo Serb
IDPs took place against the backdrop of tensions in the
northern village of Brdjani. The ethnic Albanian
authorities insisted on going ahead with the
construction of new, unauthorized settlements.
Breaking their agreement with EULEX, they
dispatched a special operations police unit, called the
Regional Operational Support Unit, to support the
illegal construction of Kosovo Albanian dwellings in
Brdjani, only to pull it back at the last minute under
intense pressure from the international community. In
short, while Pristina insists that ethnic Albanians settle
in new areas, their local authorities actively prevent
Kosovo Serb IDPs from going back to their homes in
the south.

As the report indicates, Pristina called for some
local elections to be held on 15 November.
Unfortunately, the legitimacy of the entire electoral
process has been compromised by the failure to hold
them within the status-neutral framework of resolution
1244 (1999). According to the report before us
(S/2009/497), the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General did not call them, the OSCE will not
monitor them and the United Nations cannot certify
them. Under such circumstances, it is simply
impossible for us to support them.

The situation is deeply regrettable. An
opportunity was missed to de-politicize this vitally
important issue. Had a choice been made to work in
concert instead of at cross-purposes, perhaps we could
have paved the way for a properly incentivized Kosovo
Serb community to actively participate in this process.

It is now imperative that we focus our energies on
finding a way forward. As has always been the case,
we remain in favour of establishing a system of
functional decentralization acceptable to the
non-Albanian communities directly concerned. We
stand ready to engage through a status-neutral
organization - the OSCE, for example - to create a
legitimate decentralization package designed to
succeed.

In a few days, the Republic of Serbia will
celebrate the sixty-fifth anniversary of the liberation of
our capital from the fascists. That liberation marked the
end of a brutal occupation that had forcefully
partitioned our country among the Axis countries and
their collaborators and brought profound misery to our
people. A great number of valiant men and women lost

their lives in that triumph over evil. Their heroism will
always be remembered. Thanks to their sacrifice, our
nation stood up proudly again.

They set in motion what has come to pass now,
decades later: the embrace of interdependence and the
conviction that only by working together, in good faith,
can we overcome the traumatic consequences of the
past. My responsibility is to act in the interest of my
people and my country, and in the twenty-first century,
national success cannot come about in isolation. That is
why Serbia will continue to engage in the best possible
faith with the international community in addressing all
outstanding challenges in the Western Balkans.
Furthermore, we remain fundamentally as committed
to defending our territorial integrity in a peaceful
manner, as we are to fulfilling our European destiny.
Serbia's central strategic priority remains full European
Union membership.

During the recent general debate, a great world
leader said that we are called upon by our times to
unite as one and work together for mutual benefit and
progress of a win-win nature, like passengers in the
same boat.

It is a call that we wholeheartedly support. Serbia
is dedicated to resolving all differences at the
negotiating table, not the battlefield. Enough bullets
have been fired in the Western Balkans. Never again
should we descend into the maelstrom of war.

Today we have an obligation to foster
engagement grounded in mutual respect. This will not
be easy, for the wounds have not yet healed. But if we
take up the challenge of reconciliation and find the
courage to act together, then it will be said of this
generation that when the need was great and when the
odds seemed against us, we did the right thing and
brought lasting peace to our lands, so that our children
could live out their dreams.

I thank you, Sir, for allowing me to address the
Council today.

