Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, Uruguay would like to express its
solidarity with the Governments of Colombia, Mali and

the United Kingdom in the light of the attacks that have
taken place in those countries recently. We extend our
deepest condolences to the relatives of the victims.

I thank the Chair ofthe Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Cho Tae-yul, and the former Vice-Chair
and former Chair of the Commission, Ambassador
Macharia Kamau, for their informative briefings and the
work they do in leading the Peacebuilding Commission.

Since the Security Council and the General
Assembly adopted substantially identical resolutions on
peacebuilding - resolution 2282 (2016) and resolution
70/262, respectively - the Peacebuilding Commission
has been revitalized and has made progress in
implementing its goals and considering many situations
that go beyond those within the purview of the country-
specific configurations.

In January, the Security Council acknowledged
the cooperation between the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel and the Peacebuilding
Commission and underscored the importance of the
work of the Commission in consolidating peace in
West Africa and in encouraging deeper commitment
and strengthening partnership among the countries of
the Sahel and other partners in order to promote the
implementation and adaptation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.

The conflicts that have been witnessed in the Sahel
countries and in the Lake Chad basin are exacerbated
by a number of contributing factors, such as the spread
of the terrorist threat, the scarcity of State authority, the
humanitarian and food crises, and the effects of change
climate, among others. Against that backdrop, we pay
tribute to national, regional and international efforts
aimed at relieving the situation and providing financing
to the Sahel region and the Lake Chad basin. Both the
Multinational Joint Task Force in the Lake Chad basin
and the initiative to establish the Group of Five for the
Sahel are clear examples of coordinated regional efforts
that have played key roles in responding to situations
of this nature, which have transboundary elements and
affect entire regions.

We believe that the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission lends a holistic and comprehensive
vision to the challenges presented by both regions.
The Peacebuilding Commission, as a coordinator of
all efforts under way, will undoubtedly strengthen the
cooperation of all parties, including that among the
bodies and agencies of the United Nations; regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States;
as well as cooperation among international financial
institutions and donor countries. Such coordination
is vital if we are to approach these situations in a
comprehensive and inclusive way that addresses
peacekeeping and security concerns, humanitarian
assistance and development cooperation. In that
connection, Uruguay believes that closer contact and
interaction between the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Security Council is a priority. To that end,
we underscore the usefulness of interactive meetings,
such as the one scheduled today, and the need for more
frequent contact between both bodies.

In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the
Peacebuilding Commission for including a gender
perspective in its work, as it is clear that women are key
actors in both preventing and resolving conflicts and
they have a key role to play in the recovery of societies
and in the processes of building sustainable peace.

The meeting rose at10.30 a.m.
