Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): My delegation would
like to pay tribute to the Secretary-General, the Friends of
the Secretary-General for Haiti and the United Nations
Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH) troop-contributing
countries for their untiring efforts to restore peace and
consolidate democracy in Haiti. We are particularly grateful
to the Governments of Canada and the United States for
their voluntary support for UNSMIH.

Since the establishment of UNSMIH last June, there
have been many positive developments. During the last few
months, in particular, we have witnessed slow but steady
improvement in the security situation in Haiti and in the
capacity of the Haitian National Police (HNP) to confront
the existing challenges.

Even so, the progress made has not been sufficient to
warrant termination of UNSMIH's mandate at this stage. It
is clear from the Secretary-General's report and its recent
addendum that the security situation in Haiti is still fragile
and requires the continued support of the international
community. Although the swell of Violence of last summer
has abated significantly, the report of the Secretary-General
clearly indicates the enormous potential for instability.

 

Against that backdrop, the delay in the institutional
development of the Haitian National Police is a source of
serious concern. Despite some positive developments in
recent months, the HNP must still deal with many
shortcomings in critical areas. The young police force not
only lacks the necessary equipment, but is also largely
inexperienced and in need of leadership to cope with the
daunting challenges of maintaining law and order on its
own.

In the light of the less than satisfactory situation
described here, my delegation concurs with the Secretary-
General's observation that the presence of UNSMIH with
its civilian and military components continues to be
required. It is necessary not only for the successful
completion of the professionalization of the HNP, but also
to consummate the investment made by the international
community in the restoration of democracy and a secure
environment in Haiti.

Needless to say, the United Nations cannot maintain
its presence in Haiti indefinitely. In this regard, we are
pleased that the draft resolution recognizes that the people
of Haiti themselves bear the ultimate responsibility for
shaping their future, and that it also states clearly that this
is to be the final extension of the mandate of UNSMIH.
It is therefore the earnest hope of my delegation that the
Government and the people of Haiti, together with the
international community, will make optimum use of the
coming six to eight months for the smooth transition from
the peacekeeping to the peace-building phase.

I should like to reiterate in this regard the view we
have consistently held that, from the long-term
perspective, the genuine security of that nation cannot be
ensured unless the basic living conditions of its people are
improved through social and economic development. We
note with satisfaction that operative paragraph 4 of the
draft resolution recognizes that economic rehabilitation
and reconstruction constitute the major tasks facing the
Haitian Government and people. My delegation therefore
hopes that the subsequent presence of the international
community, envisaged in operative paragraph 7 of the
draft resolution, could be geared towards these tasks.

With these remarks, the Republic of Korea is
pleased to join the consensus of the Council and vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us.

