Indonesia would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing. We took note of the Prosecutor's twentieth report to the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), on Libya. Allow me to focus on the following points. First, Indonesia welcomes the progress made through dialogue in Libya. We also welcome the long-awaited ceasefire agreement reached in October. We call for all relevant parties to respect and adhere to the ceasefire agreement and to commit to supporting its implementation. A military solution has never been the answer, and never will be. We also welcome the launch of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum and its in-person meeting in Tunisia. We commend the Government of Tunisia for hosting the meeting, as well as the Governments of Morocco and Egypt for hosting previous intra-Libyan dialogues. We reaffirm the importance of Libyan-owned and-led dialogue, as set out in resolution 2510 (2020). Secondly, we call on all parties to fully respect international humanitarian law and take all the necessary measures to protect civilians. Attacks against health facilities, migrants, displaced persons and the personnel of United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) must stop. It is concerning that fuel shortages and electricity outages in Libya continue to disrupt people's lives and impact hospitals and schools across the country. Coronavirus disease cases have doubled, with more than 20,000 confirmed cases and 320 deaths reported in September alone. In that regard, support for humanitarian efforts in Libya must also increase. Thirdly, the security and political progress we see in Libya should also be complemented with progress on justice. Indonesia is committed to pursuing justice in Libya as a part of wider efforts to achieve long-lasting and sustainable peace in the country. Peace cannot be complete without justice, and justice cannot prosper in the absence of peace. I fully share the view that it is Libya's obligation to ensure accountability for crimes committed on its territory. We need to empower the Libyan judicial authorities to enable them to fully exercise their sovereignty. That is why the referral of the situation in Libya to the International Criminal Court should not deter the competent Libyan authorities from invoking their jurisdiction to investigate violations of human rights and bring the perpetrators to justice. Since Indonesia joined the Council in January 2019, we have heard four briefings from the ICC. In all four briefings, the role of UNSMIL was clearly highlighted. For Indonesia, the priority has always been clear - to save human lives. All actions by the international community should be carefully deliberated to avoid provoking violence that might lead to loss of life and jeopardize the quest for peace.
