Allow me to express my thanks to France as the penholder on the important resolution 2556 (2020). The United States strongly supports the Security Council's efforts to enhance the Intervention Brigade and strengthen the performance of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), consistent with the request of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for a better equipped, better trained and more mobile peacekeeping force. The resolution also highlights key issues such as the efforts of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to advance disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and security sector reform in order to achieve lasting peace in the eastern part of the country, recognizing MONUSCO's role in supporting the Government. We further appreciate the Council's efforts to support MONUSCO's gradual and responsible transition, and we note the importance of ensuring that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations country team and other actors are prepared to take over the Mission's important tasks, such as early-warning alert networks. However, we must clarify the United States position on the language in this resolution regarding humanitarian access. The United States strongly supports the need for humanitarian access in conflict areas, having backed language in numerous Security Council resolutions that demands parties to a conflict provide safe, rapid and unhindered access for humanitarian aid. Our words are supported by our actions, as the United States has provided more funding for humanitarian aid than any other country in the world - more than $10.5 billion last year. Our concern with this resolution is related to changes made this year regarding how international law is referred to in the humanitarian context. While the United States recognizes that in certain circumstances States may have obligations related to humanitarian aid, there is no universal and unlimited international legal obligation for States to allow and facilitate safe, rapid and unhindered humanitarian access. Therefore, the United States disagrees with the insertion of the phrase "in accordance with international law" in paragraph 35 of this resolution, where its placement suggests that safe, rapid and unhindered humanitarian access is required by international law, without exception. Nonetheless, the United States remains a strong advocate, in the Security Council and more generally, for States and parties to a conflict to allow and facilitate safe, rapid and unhindered humanitarian access. We invite other members of the Council to consult with us regarding how we can maintain strong humanitarian access clauses in Security Council resolutions, while accurately capturing the law.
