Mrs. Pino Rivero (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Cuba endorses the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

The situation in the Middle East resulting from
the Israeli military occupation of the Palestinian
territory and other Arab territories, which has
continued since 1967, remains a matter of great
concern not only to the region, but also to the entire
international community.

Cuba regrets the lack of progress, despite the
increasing international efforts and the resumption of
the peace process in late November 2007, in addressing
the main issues and in pursuing the key positions on
the Palestinian question. We would also like to express
our great concern at the serious deterioration in the
situation and in the critical political, economic, social,
humanitarian and security conditions in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, owing
to the ongoing illegal policies and practices by Israel,
the occupying Power.

Israel must immediately cease military aggression
against the Palestinian people. Our delegation
underscores the importance of achieving a permanent
ceasefire starting in the Gaza Strip and extending to the
West Bank, and expresses its support for Egypt's
efforts in that regard.

We reiterate our condemnation of Israel's
inhumane and illegal closure and blockade of the Gaza
Strip, which has resulted in the imprisonment of the
entire Palestinian civilian population by obstructing its
freedom of movement, including that of the sick,
students and humanitarian personnel; by hampering
access to humanitarian aid and basic necessities, such
as food, medicines, fuel, electricity and building
materials; and by blocking all trade.

It is time for Israel to cease such illegal practices
against the Palestinian people and permanently put an
end to its illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip, allowing
the immediate and permanent opening of all border
crossings in the Gaza Strip, and permitting movement
to and from the territory of the persons and goods
needed to alleviate the humanitarian crisis and to effect
the immediate reconstruction and economic recovery
of the Palestinian people.

The situation in the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territory continues to be a source of great
concern. In that regard, we condemn Israel's ongoing
intensive campaign to establish settlements, including
the confiscation of vast tracts of land; the construction
and expansion of illegal settlements and their outposts
and infrastructure; the transfer of additional Israeli
settlers; the building of the wall; the demolition of
homes; the excavations; and the imposition of arbitrary
and racist restrictions on residency and movement
through a system of permits and checkpoints
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory,
especially in and around occupied East Jerusalem.
Such policies and measures by Israel are grave
violations of international law and a flagrant challenge
to the United Nations resolutions and the 9 July 2004
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.

We emphasize the incompatibility of peace
process negotiations with such illegal settlement
activities, which are clearly aimed at illegally
acquiring and, de facto, annexing more Palestinian
territory and forcibly imposing a unilateral solution.
We harbour the hope that the ongoing efforts to achieve
reconciliation and unity in Palestine will soon reach
their objectives, for the benefit of the Palestinian
people.

We reiterate our call for the prompt solution of
the issue of the Sheba'a farms in full respect for
Lebanese territorial integrity, as stipulated by
resolution 1701 (2006). We urge all parties to
cooperate in protecting the sovereign rights of Lebanon
in that area, and we note the efforts of the Secretary-
General in that regard.

Similarly, we reaffirm that any measure or action
taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the occupying Power,
aimed at changing the legal, physical or demographic
condition or the institutional infrastructure of the
occupied Syrian Golan, and any measures by Israel to
impose its jurisdiction and administration in that
territory, have no legal effect. It is now time for Israel
to comply with resolution 497 (1981) and to withdraw
completely from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of4 June 1967.
09-42592
Cuba will continue to support and to contribute
actively in every possible sphere to achieving a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
based on all relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid terms of reference, the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road Map.

