Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): We welcome the
report by the Secretary-General (S/2013/689) on the
protection of civilians, especially the emphasis placed
on the five core challenges. Let me use the opportunity
today to focus on two of them, namely, enhancing
humanitarian access and accountability.

The protection of civilians must be addressed by
a broad range of stakeholders, including those present
here today. While the parties to conflict bear the
obligation to comply with international humanitarian
law, and are thus primarily responsible for the protection
of civilians, the Security Council also has an important
role to play.

As the guardian of international peace and security,
the Council must respond decisively when massive
violations of international humanitarian law escalate
a conflict, as we have been witnessing in Syria for
such a prolonged period now. The arbitrary denial of
humanitarian access should be among the Council's
core concerns and triggers for action. As stated by the
Secretary-General in his report, parties to conflict must
allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage
of humanitarian relief. The presidential statement from
October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/15) represented a rare and
welcome moment of unity in the Council, but it did not
lead to any changes on the ground.

It is now high time for the Council to step up
the pressure and adopt a resolution urging all parties
to conflict to make sure that civilians in need can
be reached and that humanitarian and medical
personnel are adequately protected. Given the lack
of implementation of the presidential statement, the
resolution should at the very least make it clear that
the Council will, in cases of non-compliance, follow
up with measures under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. We call upon Council members to
adopt such a resolution without further delay, thereby
fulfilling their responsibility under the Charter. It
would be inexcusable to use or threaten the use of the
veto against such a draft resolution, aimed at preventing
or ending violations of international humanitarian law,
many of which may amount to war crimes.

We congratulate France on its commitment to
develop a code of conduct with a view to restricting the
use of the veto. We, along with other States and civil
society actors, continue to support that initiative. The
veto is both a privilege and a responsibility. It must not
be used to prolong and legitimize human suffering.

One important incentive for conflict parties to
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarin law is the prospect of accountability.
Those responsible for war crimes must be brought
to justice. The Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) sends a clear message and states
specifically that willfully impeding relief supplies may
constitute a war crime. Ratification of the Rome Statute
remains the ultimate expression of commitment to
respecting international humanitarian law and ensuring
accountability. It does not mean that the ICC should or
can deal with all serious crimes in any given situation,
but it is a manifestation of the State's commitment
to hold perpetrators to account or, should that not be
possible, to transfer them to an international judicial
institution.

Until such time as the Rome Statute system has
reached universality, the Security Council has a crucial
role to play in triggering the Court's jurisdiction, and
thereby realizing its full deterrent effect. More than a
year ago, 58 States requested the Council to refer the
situation in Syria to the ICC - a call that still remains
unanswered today. The repeated expression of interest
of the Syrian opposition to submit to the jurisdiction of
the ICC gives some hope that accountability will not
fall off the table.
As we know by now, from many years of experience,
accountability needs to be pursued through a range
of measures that go far beyond criminal proceedings
against particular individuals. Efforts must be made
to preserve the rights and dignity of endless numbers
of victims, to fight impunity on a larger scale, to help
establish a common historical narrative and to lay the
building blocks for long-term reconciliation.

As stated by the Secretary-General, accountability
encompasses the political, legal and moral responsibility
of individuals and institutions for past violations. Such
responsibility can be upheld only where the activities
of conflict parties are monitored, thereby propelling
decision-makers to act. Conflict parties engaging in
casualty tracking can also help to foster accountability.
Furthermore, the United Nations "Rights up front"
approach is an important new development in that
regard, as is the undertaking of civilian casualty
recording.

My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General
that peacekeeping remains an important tool in
protecting civilians and that sustained efforts to provide
missions with sufficient resources and capabilities are
essential to achieving that goal. We must also ensure
that all individual protection components of mission
mandates are fully implemented.

Through resolution 2100 (2013), on the situation in
Mali, the Security Council requested the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali to support the efforts of national authorities and
the ICC to bring to justice those responsible for war
crimes and crimes against humanity. We encourage
the creation of an inter-agency task force to deal with
that and other matters related to international criminal
justice.

