Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I would like to start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and also for
convening today's important debate on United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Peacekeeping operations are at the heart of the
United Nations, which is as much about peacemaking
and peace enforcement, as it is about peacekeeping.
There is no better cause than preventing violent
conflicts. It is about saving lives and livelihoods. It
is about bringing hopes to the vanquished. It is about
creating conditions to empower communities to enable
their children to realize their dreams and let them
dream new dreams.

The Maldives wishes to submit to the Security
Council in today's open debate that it is of profound
importance to construct an analytical framework
in which the Council is able to consider the
changes needed in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Such a framework could be
created by establishing, at the inception level, a greater
coordination and operational coherence between
peacekeeping operations and the United Nations
country team on the ground.

The designing stage of any peacekeeping operation
should take full account of the unique historical,
political and economic circumstances of the situation,
using the most relevant analytical tools available. Any
such analysis should produce the correct diagnosis of
the underlying causes of the conflict. The visible signs
we see and hear about a conflict, might, at times, be
the symptoms of an underlying set of issues. As such,
identifying the underlying causes that led to the conflict
in the first place should be the goal of even the earliest
diagnosis of the conflict situation.

Situations can give rise to conflicts that become
intractable over time, quite often because of
systemic failures. Such failures might be the result
of the decaying of a social fabric that had held the
communities together for centuries, or it might be the
gradual weakening of the State's capacity to govern and
maintain order. Any peacekeeping operation, in any
inter-State conflict or intra-State conflict, should aim
to build the capacity of the State, first of all, to govern,
and then to foster a governing order that is rooted in
the principles of democracy, good governance and
inclusive development.

Building the capacity of the State is also important
in developing an institutional architecture that would
help to create a shared vision for the country and to
mobilize and sustain support for such a vision. If there
is one thing that peacekeeping operations can do to help
countries create and sustain peace, it is to build a set
of institutions that can inspire national unity, deliver
a peace dividend to every corner of the country, and
cultivate and foster a culture of peace, respect and
tolerance in the country concerned.

The Maldives believes that the Security Council,
in close collaboration with other agencies in the United
Nations system, can inspire and lead in bringing
the necessary reforms to peacekeeping missions, in
designing such operations and in implementing the set
of strategies that will sustain peace. Women and men in
every corner of the world look to the Security Council
for leadership; we in the Maldives have full faith that
the Council will not fail in providing that leadership.

