Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I should like, first of all, to express
condolences to the people and the Government of
Guatemala in the light of the report, which we received
this morning, about the deaths of Guatemalan
peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That tragic event reaffirms that we need to help
countries to resolve conflict in that region and
elsewhere. We must pay constant attention to the safety
and security of all United Nations peacekeepers.

The Russian delegation welcomes the
participation in this Council meeting of the President
and of the Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste. We were
pleased to hear the statement made by President
Xanana Gusmao. We would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Hasegawa, for introducing the progress report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL). We thank him for his
informative briefing on developments in the country.

Russia welcomes the steady progress made in
building Timor-Leste's statehood. We are pleased at the
successful holding of local elections, the strengthening
of the country's legislative framework and the
enhancement of the professional skills of members of
the law enforcement services. We welcome the
attention that Timor-Leste is devoting to resolving the
problems that still exist in that area. However, we
realize that the capacity of the State's organs is not yet
strong enough and that the country remains somewhat
dependent in that regard. Timor-Leste still requires
effective international assistance to provide security,
stability and sustainable development; indeed, that
point was made today by Mr. Gusmao.

We View as positive the development of
cooperation between Timor-Leste and Indonesia and
Australia, and we welcome the progress made in
resolving the issue of delineating the border between
Timor-Leste and Indonesia. We take note of the great
importance of the bilateral Commission for Truth and
Friendship. We hope that the Commission will
successfully carry out its duties and that it will help to
further strengthen the relationship between Indonesia
and Timor-Leste, including in the area of resolving
issues related to human rights violations in Timor-
Leste.

We believe that the activities of UNOTIL are
important, and we commend its staff for their efforts.
We are sure that the Office's mandate will be fully
carried out by May 2006. However, given the need to
ensure the successful organization of presidential and
parliamentary elections in 2007, the Russian delegation
is prepared to engage in a constructive Security
Council discussion of possible ways to provide the
Timorese with appropriate United Nations support
following the completion of UNOTIL's mandate, on 20
May this year.

We have taken careful note of the wishes
expressed here by the President of Timor-Leste.

