Mr. Sharma (Nepal): I wish to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. Let me also thank you for selecting as a topic
for open debate the theme of peace-building, a topical
issue of fundamental significance for peace and
security in the world. The paper you have circulated
(S/2001/82, annex) is useful for organizing our
thoughts.

Armies may sometimes win a battle, but
humanity always loses the war. Humanity bleeds in
victory and in defeat. Countless lives are lost and
colossal wealth that could do tremendous good by
making a difference in people's lives is destroyed.
Children lose their fathers, wives their husbands and
parents their sons. Ironically, conflict bedevils those
who can least afford it. Each bullet that is fired burns
up several children's hopes of buying textbooks. Every
bomb that is blasted engulfs resources sufficient to
build several schools and hospitals and to construct
several miles of road.

Conflicts are inherently evil, for they bring
unspeakable misery and pain, mostly to innocent
women and children. But they, sadly, happen with
remarkable frequency, now more within States than
between States. We are all members ofthe same human
family. Globalization has brought us closer together.
Every war is now our war, not theirs.

Through the Charter, the community of nations
entrusted the task of maintaining world peace to the
United Nations, and particularly to the Security
Council. It is the solemn treaty obligation - besides
being a moral imperative - of members of the
Security Council, as the collective guarantors of peace,
to shoulder that responsibility. It is also the bounden
duty of other States to collaborate with the Council.

We must do everything in our power, as nations
and as people, to prevent war through the peaceful
settlement of disputes and to save humanity from its
scourge. But the Security Council has seldom been able
to stave off the hostility that burns the bridges between
people, making settlement more difficult, if not
impossible. Failing that, the Security Council is left
with only one costly, second-rate alternative: to
manage conflict once it begins to exact its price. The
complexity of this option is compounded when the
Council has to grapple in tandem with peacekeeping,
peace-building and peacemaking, each one quite
involved in itself.

"An Agenda for Peace" (S/24111) and the report
(S/2000/809) of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations chaired by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi both
recognized peace-building as a powerful tool to sustain
peace once it has been restored. But it is exceptionally
complex to devise and to implement. The Brahimi
report is indicative of the tangle involved. It contends
that effective peace-building requires active
engagement with the local parties, and that such
engagement should be multidimensional in nature.

Building peace is a long and complicated process,
not an isolated event; it has to be part of a larger
nation-building process. It is all the more formidable
because it has to be achieved when central authority
may have broken down, when law and order are non-
existent and when local institutions are dysfunctional.
It means, in a way, beginning to convert the seemingly
impossible into the possible in as short a span as
possible, amidst the heightened animosity of conflict,
by bringing clashing stakeholders together, by
reasoning with them and convincing them to put their
bitter past behind, and by moving them on towards a
common high goal.

Since it touches all aspects of national life, peace-
building must be comprehensive in content,
participatory and inclusive in approach, and
conciliatory in nature. But primarily, it is a complicated
political process where jockeying for advantage,
bargaining and hard compromises become fundamental
rules of the game. Understanding has to be built where
there is none. The entire society has to be brought on
board by building confidence, so that no one feels left
out or deceived, which would be a sure recipe for
future tension.
Peace-building, therefore, is a fairly long
commitment on the part of the United Nations and the
international community, and it taxes their patience and
resources considerably. To make it work, the Council
must set a clear and achievable objective that can be
realized in a span of three to five years and must chalk
out a comprehensive plan accordingly.

Identifying a problem, it is said, is half the
solution. Conflicts have been both causes and
consequences of a number of social ailments. Poverty,
for instance, is a time bomb ready to explode at the
slightest provocation - and there are provocateurs
aplenty: terrorists, drug barons, smugglers and thugs
selling dreams to the poor and cajoling them into
catastrophe. Ethnic, religious and cultural fault lines
have long been understood as underpinning various
upheavals. Colonial legacies and unscrupulous political
elements have undermined peace in numerous
situations.

One might wish that there were prototype
solutions to intricate peace and security problems. But
there are none. A peace-building plan needs to be
evolved, keeping in perspective the configuration of
the actors and factors prevailing in each unique
situation and dovetailing it with a larger framework of
nation-building. Focus should be on reviving and
strengthening endogenous institutions and processes
rather than on supplanting them with exogenous ones.
It is important quickly to build local capacity that can
uphold and sustain peace against heavy odds and to
enable external involvement to be gradually phased
out.

Partnership, cooperation and coordination
become essential to produce synergy and to optimize
the impact of collective efforts. It is as critical among
the key stakeholders in the State in conflict as it is
between such a State and external actors or among
external players. The easiest option is not necessarily
the best. The Council must do what is right, not what is
easy. This is a hard choice, but it is the defining virtue
and ideal that the founding fathers contemplated for the
United Nations.

The Council must overcome the natural
temptation to choose the line of least resistance.
Reconciliation, not divorce, ought to be our goal.
Cambodia and Mozambique present an earnest, if still
fragile, effort at conciliation. But most other peace-
building missions, including those in East Timor and in
the Balkans, have left a sour taste in one mouth or
another. We must strive to heal the wound, not to
amputate the limb at the first sign of trouble.

As the sovereign equality of States is the
foundation of the United Nations, it becomes
incumbent on each of us not to trivialize this
fundamental premise. If there is a gulf between the
segments of the population, we need to narrow it; if
there are disagreements, we should seek to promote
rapprochement. Unless people in a State themselves so
decide, the United Nations must not engage in severing
a part from the whole and undermining the sanctity and
integrity of a State.

The reason for this is simple. Differences are
bound to occur even in a State of ethnic or religious
homogeneity, but they do not validate separation;
rather, they offer the first lesson in tolerance and
challenge us to foster unity in diversity.

A pattern of selective involvement in conflict
situations has at times prompted many to question the
objectivity and fairness of the Security Council in its
operations. The Council must try to engage on the
merit of each case, not on the basis of the political
priorities of its members. It will have to begin with the
Council's establishing general guidelines for the
Secretariat to follow when recommending to the
Council a specific course of action in a particular
conflict situation. Only this standard-setting will enable
the Secretariat to tell the Council what it needs to
know, rather than what it wants to hear. This measure
will tremendously enhance the international
community's confidence in the Council and facilitate
the work ofthe Secretariat.

Nepal has always maintained that, whenever the
Security Council engages in activities that touch on the
scope of other competent bodies and agencies, it must
involve all relevant international agencies and regional
mechanisms in the process. This will be in the interest
of the Council itself in the long run, as it can liberally
draw on the competence of other relevant bodies as
well as carefully save itself from stretching itself too
thin and rendering itself ineffective.

Conflict manifests a complex set of political,
economic, social and cultural problems inherent in our
societies. Therefore, there are no easy solutions to it.
Peace-building ought to be an effort in the utmost
sincerity as the first step to nation-building, not just to
bring temporary relief that is unlikely to last. That will
be a more effective, credible and less expensive way to
promote peace in the service of all humanity. Time is
of the essence in this context. As is said, a stitch in
time saves nine. The Council will do well to change its
habit of doing too little too late at an unconscionable
cost.

Nepal appreciates the Council's good work in
many situations and encourages the Council to stave
off an advancing storm, rather than wait to clean up the
mess after the fury has hit the ground. We have worked
with the Council closely in the past and remain
committed to doing so in a spirit of cooperation and
common good.

