Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
This meeting of the Security Council gives me the
opportunity to give an overview of developments in
C6te d'Ivoire since our meeting on 28 January.

During the period under review, the situation in
C6te d'Ivoire has been marked by a serious crisis
caused by the matter of fraud on the electoral list in
favour of the opposition. The Chairman of the
Independent Electoral Commission, a member of one
of the opposition parties, had fraudulently registered
more than 429,000 people on the electoral list. This
figure represents nearly 8 per cent of the electorate.
10-27475
After the discovery of the fraud, the Chairman of the
Commission refused to resign, thus paralysing the
institution and blocking the peace process.

The President of the Republic therefore decided
to dissolve the Commission in order to replace
Mr. Mambe', the perpetrator of the fraud. At the same
time, the Government was dissolved, as some
ministers, obeying the orders of their political parties,
openly supported Mr. Mambe' while the Prime Minister
was asking for his resignation. A new Chairman of the
Commission has been elected and a new Government
formed.

Priority must now be given to compiling a
reliable electoral list in order to organize clean and
credible elections. To that end, two essential actions
must be undertaken. First, the 429,030 people whom
the former Chairman of the Commission wished to
fraudulently register on the electoral list must be
removed from the file. Secondly, a full audit of the
provisional list must be conducted in order to remove
those who have no right to be on it and to validate, at
the same time, the inclusion of all those who do have
that right. These operations will take one to two
months, after which the final electoral list will be
established for the elections.

Besides the issue of the electoral list, there
remains a further significant challenge to credible
elections - the challenge of disarmament and
reunification. Recent events have demonstrated the
need to move quickly on disarmament and
reunification in order for free elections to take place in
accordance with the criteria defined by the United
Nations.

The current security apparatus in the central,
northern and western areas controlled by the rebels has
shown its weaknesses. It failed to prevent attacks
against symbols of the State and buildings belonging to
members of the party of President of the Republic, in
particular. The headquarters of the Ivorian Popular
Front, the party of the President of the Republic, was
destroyed. In the same locality, Korhogo, the
residences of the President of the Republic's national
campaign director and other executives of the party
have been ransacked and burned. The residence of the
spokesperson of the President of the Republic was
sacked in the town of Katiola, which is also in the
northern region controlled by the rebels. The offices of
the prefect of Bouake, in the centre of the country, as
well as those of the sub-prefect in Vavoua in the
central-west of the country, were ransacked.
The list of damage caused by the opposition
parties is long, and it would take too much time to
make a full enumeration of it here. The time has come
to disarm and reunify Cote d'Ivoire. This essential
measure, called for in article 3 of the fourth
supplementary agreement to the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement, can no longer be postponed if we wish to
hold free elections in Cote d'Ivoire in accordance with
the criteria defined by the United Nations.

Cote d'Ivoire is one and indivisible, and the unity
of the nation is reflected in the unity of the army of the
Republic, by the unity of the State coffers, through the
deployment of prefects and sub-prefects as the sole
legal representatives of the State in the territorial
constituencies, and by the deployment of defence and
security forces that must perform sovereign State tasks
within those territorial constituencies.

The United Nations, which enshrines within its
Charter the sacrosanct concept of sovereignty, cannot
promote fragmented sovereignty to serve individual
interests. The United Nations cannot validate an
alleged national poll in a bisected territory where
supporters of one of the candidates are denied access to
a part of the same territory, or where a private
television channel in the area controlled by rebels
campaigns for only one of 14 candidates.

The United Nations must make every effort to
support the facilitator in the Ivorian crisis, who is
working tirelessly to find a solution to the issue of
reunification. The electoral process should not be
turned into dogma that is to be blindly applied to end
all types of crises.

Cote d'Ivoire will proceed with elections as soon
as possible if, at the same time, important progress is
made in the implementation of articles 3 and 8 of the
fourth supplementary agreement to the Ouagadougou
Political Agreement related to the restoration of State
authority throughout the territory, which is the real
solution to the Ivorian crisis.

