Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Let me join with my
colleagues who spoke earlier in thanking Ambassador
Fowler for his comprehensive and, indeed, very
informative report on his recent visit to Europe and
Algiers.

The question of Angola has reached a critical stage
and is leaning towards total catastrophe. It is at this
critical moment that the international community must
stand firm and support the Angolan people. My delegation
was particularly gratified by the declaration on Angola
made by the presidency of the European Union during the
visit of Ambassador Fowler, in which the Union
committed itself to assisting all States in Africa to fully
implement the Security Council sanctions against UNITA.

In this regard, we call upon our European partners
to cooperate very closely with the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) in their efforts to achieve a peaceful
resolution of the Angolan conflict. The declaration made
during the OAU meeting in Algiers fully committed OAU
member countries to resolving conflicts in Africa
peacefully, in order to put Africa on the path towards

 

peace, progress and development. The support of the
international community is required.

My delegation agrees with the Chairman of the
sanctions Committee that his substantive recommendations,
which we very much support, should be considered by the
expert panels before they are considered in detail by the
Security Council. We believe that this will allow more light
to be shed so that Council members can better understand
the issues at hand. We look forward to the assembling of
the expert panels with a view to their beginning work as
soon as possible.

We appreciate the fact that the measures relating to
mercenaries were also discussed with the Member States
concerned. We would like to remind those Member States
that some of their nationals are still assisting UNITA as
pilots and advisers, thus impeding the effectiveness of the
sanctions against UNITA and thereby prolonging the agony
and suffering of innocent Angolan civilians.

As I indicated earlier, my delegation agrees with the
recommendations contained in the report, particularly with
regard to the urgent need for the donor community to
generously provide financial and material assistance to
SADC and to countries neighbouring Angola in their efforts
to enhance and strengthen the regional capacity for the
implementation and monitoring of the Council-imposed
sanctions against UNITA. We also share the concern
expressed by the Chairman at the possibility that weapons
that are not up to the standard of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), and which are sold or otherwise
disposed of by new members of that alliance, might enter
the arms market in central and southern Africa or otherwise
find their way into UNITA's possession. It is our sincere
hope that NATO will look into this matter seriously.

My delegation welcomes the intention of the
International Diamond Manufacturers Association to include
the issue of Angola among the topics to be discussed at the
World Diamond Congress, and invites the Chairman of the
sanctions Committee on Angola to address that Congress,
which is to be held in Antwerp in July next year. We hope
that by that time the expert panels will have completed their
work.

