Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
The inauguration of the Government of Unity and
National Reconciliation in Angola is an historic milestone
that the Government of Chile welcomes, together with the
entire international community.

We must recognize that on those occasions when the
parties did not take the necessary steps called for by the
international community, we often felt that frustration was
dominating over good wishes. But finally expectations
have been met, and we would like to congratulate all
Angolans on this major step. They are the winners. It is
the people of Angola who are triumphant, and this should
now give them the strength needed to embark on a new
phase in their history - that of development, progress
and reconciliation.

 

I would like to take this opportunity to address the
representative of Angola, who is here in the Council
Chamber, and to tell him that we congratulate him on his
new status as representative of the new Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation of Angola. From now on,
through the will of the parties, he and his delegation are
representing at the United Nations all of the people of
Angola. We wish him every success in this new phase.

The Secretary-General has noted that it will take a
long time to do the great deal that remains to be done in
Angola, starting with the completion of pending issues of
the Lusaka Protocol. We should not let the success of the
past few weeks blind us to the difficulties which still exist.

We believe that it is essential that the new
Government of Angola, headed by President Dos Santos,
should strengthen its internal ties. National reconciliation -
and many countries know through experience the
difficulties and complexities of this - is the priority task
and perhaps the most crucial in the long run. This will be
the main source of stability in the future, but it is also the
most difficult. It takes time to bury hatred; it takes time to
forgive others; it takes time to acknowledge one's own
mistakes.

That is why close cooperation between President Dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi seems so indispensable. This is the
time to build everlasting bonds of mutual trust between
them and between their teams. The image of unity, and
actual unity, is the best gift that both can give to their
people. Let peace begin with peace in the hearts of the
leaders. For this to happen Mr. Savimbi would personally
have to join in the political dialogue at the highest level.

The future lies in the hands of the people of Angola.
However, the Angolan people, their Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation and the many friends of Angola
must remain vigilant, and ensure that the international
community does not leave them alone on the new path that
they are treading. The United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III) is concluding one phase, but the
United Nations must continue to support the consolidation
of the peace process.

For all these reasons, my delegation will support the
draft resolution through which the Security Council will
extend the mandate of UNAVEM. III for the last time, and
will express its intention to consider the continuation of the
United Nations presence in Angola following the
withdrawal of UNAVEM. III by sending an observer
mission.

With regard to Angola's present situation, we should
like to note that the delegation of Chile has on numerous
occasions reiterated its concern over what happens after
peacekeeping operations come to an end - precisely the
time at which the great challenges of consolidating peace
and starting on the road to reconstruction, economic and
social development and reconciliation arise.
We believe that this is an excellent opportunity to
try to ensure that the United Nations observer mission in
Angola proposed by the Secretary-General will cooperate
with the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation in these matters, so as to ensure a smooth
and safe transition.

However, if all goes well in the near future, Angola
will cease to be an item on the agenda of the Security
Council, although it will not cease to be in our minds or
lose the support of the United Nations system. However,
there is always a danger: in other cases we have seen
how, once a crisis is over, agreements have been reached
and peace restored, international political interest in the
next phase - that of development and national
reconciliation - quickly falls off. It is as if the Security
Council were saying, "Goodbye and good luck. All the
best". Of course, a general appeal is made to international
community, and, in particular, consolidated humanitarian
appeals are made in support of the country. But there is
no regular follow-up of developments in the country that
was the subject of such great political attention in the
Security Council - in this Chamber. Instead, ad hoc
groups are set up to follow the situation in the country.

I believe that we need to think about this matter.
Perhaps the Economic and Social Council could have the
task of taking on countries emerging from a crisis, once
they are off the Security Council's agenda, accompanying
them as they go through their new phase, coordinating in
an appropriate manner the support of the international
community and, above all, keeping political interest in the
issues alive.

We fully support the idea that the activities of the
future United Nations observer mission in Angola should
focus mainly on pending military issues, political matters,
the police, human rights, humanitarian programmes and
support for the process of national reconciliation.
However, it is also important to include the objectives of
economic and social development, to which the United
Nations could contribute in this delicate process.

 

Finally, allow me to thank all the men and women
who have participated in UNAVEM. for the very valuable
work that they have done in support of peace in Angola.
We should like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Arman; his predecessor, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali; and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye; as well as the Governments of
Portugal, the United States and the Russian Federation for
their mediation efforts; the entire United Nations system;
the humanitarian agencies on the ground; and, in particular,
the long-suffering people of Angola, who are now seeing a
new dawn.

