Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have attentively studied the reports of the
leadership of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (see S/2017/436 and S/2017/434, respectively) on the past six-month
period. We note that as stated in the report of the ICTY,
judicial proceedings are under way on schedule and
will be completed in November 2017. We call on the
Tribunal's leadership to make every effort to reduce
these timetables, as has been repeatedly called for by
the Security Council, particularly in resolutions 2193
(2014), 2256 (2015) and 2329 (2016).

Although the ICTY has entered the final stage of its
operations, everything possible must be done to address
the imbalances that have accrued in the past few years.
They discredit the very idea of international criminal
justice. We have discussed them at length in the past.
This certainly does not have to do only with a failure
to comply with the rules about the duration of trials
and pre-trial detention. In particular, we reject attempts
to put forward assessments that implicitly place blame
for crime on peoples, Governments and others, thereby
creating certain biases. The Tribunal must operate on
the basis of the core principle of criminal law, namely,
that criminal responsibility is individual in nature. The
role of establishing guilt vis-a-vis specific individuals
was assigned by Security Council to the Tribunal, and
we cannot go outside this framework.

Our delegation is deeply disheartened by the refusal
of the ICTY Trial Chamber to grant the request of
Ratko Mladic' for provisional release on humanitarian
grounds so that he could receive medical treatment in
Russia. Information about the significant deterioration
of the health of Ratko Mladie was ignored, as was
the guarnatee of his timely return to The Hague and
compliance with other conditions that might be put
forward by the Trial Chamber. Related safeguards and
the assurances were also rejected. The judges refused
to give the individual the opportunity to receive highly
qualified medical assistance at a stage of the trial that
did not require his individual presence. Previously the
Tribunal had agreed to provisionally release individuals
who were present with less weighty circumstances.
Of course, the ICTY bears full responsibility for this
decision and its potential repercussions.

We have repeatedly voiced concern about the
quality of medical treatment of ICTY indictees. Once
again, we call for an investigation into the operation of
the medical unit of detention facilities of the ICTY by
the Office of Internal Oversight Services. We trust that
this investigation will take place promptly.

On the whole, our assessments of the operations of
the ICTY, including staffing issues, have been voiced
during previous meetings, and we will certainly not
repeat them. However, we would mention that the
contempt case must not influence the trial nor the
Tribunal's closure dates, and consideration of the issue
of inclusion of the Council in this matter is something
that we continue to believe is unsubstantiated, especially
in the light of previous practice in similar cases.

Briefly, on the work of the Residual Mechanism,
we are closely following the trials, particularly in
the light of the negative experience of the ICTY.
The Mechanism, which was established pursuant to
resolution 1966 (2010), has a limited mandate with
regard to both the substance of its functions and the
duration ofits operations. For this reason, it is officially
referred to as a Residual Mechanism.

The mandate of the Mechanism hinges on biannual
Security Council review cycles of its activities. We
believe that the Mechanism must not overstep its
mandates. In particular, it must not analyse mindsets
in a given country or historical views or, for example,
prospects for European integration. We call for avoiding
getting sidetracked by issues and tasks unrelated
to the Mechanism's mandate. They draw attention
from attaining the goals set forth by the Charter and
Council resolutions.

We trust that officials in the Mechanism will
plan the course of criminal trials and other statutory
activities in a qualitative manner. We anticipate sound
forecasts, maximum effectiveness, transparency,
efficiency and strict compliance with standards of
justice, including the duration of proceedings and
schedules. The Mechanism has all procedural and other
capacities to that end at its disposal.

