Ms. Banks (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes this opportunity to address the Security
Council on the important issues of energy, security and
climate. We thank the United Kingdom for its initiative
in hosting the debate, which in our view is a useful
way of drawing further attention to those challenging
lssues.

New Zealand also welcomes the United
Kingdom's concept paper. We urgently need to focus
the attention of the international community on some
of the most serious implications of climate change.
Governments are becoming more aware that the effects
of climate change are much more than threats to the
environment alone. They also threaten some of the
most fundamental needs of our citizens: a safe place to
live, access to water, health care and food, and the
ability to earn a living. When those needs are
threatened, whole societies are at risk of instability. So
it is entirely appropriate that we are discussing the
security dimensions of climate change in this forum.

New Zealand would like to highlight two themes
that are important for us and for our Pacific region.

First, sustainable development, including
responses to climate change, and energy security need
to be considered together. In New Zealand, we are
developing our energy and climate change policies in
tandem, including focusing on ways to maximize New
Zealand's energy derived from renewable sources and
promoting diversity in our energy supply. That will
help us to secure a low-emissions energy supply. We
recognize that the use of low-emissions technologies
and improving energy efficiency are fundamental to
industrialized and developing countries alike in
reducing carbon emissions and maintaining a secure
energy supply for the future. Energy issues are also a
major challenge for the Pacific. In recognition of that,
Pacific energy ministers will be meeting at the end of
April to discuss how the region might address those
challenges, particularly in the renewable energy sector.

Secondly, many of the countries in our part of the
world, the Pacific, are amongst the most vulnerable to
climate change impacts. That is likely to exacerbate
07-30973

issues such as access to fresh water and vulnerability to
cyclones, drought or flooding. The Mauritius
Implementation Strategy speaks of the existential risks
that climate change and sea-level rise pose to small
island developing States. It also notes the ongoing
threats posed to the sustainable development of those
nations and the priority that should be given to
adaptation. Those threats, alongside limitations on the
capacity of small island developing States to respond,
mean that we are already talking about the viability of
some societies.

There is an important role for other nations in
providing assistance to Pacific and other small island
developing States, as well as other vulnerable countries,
in evaluating the impacts of and adapting to climate
change. Assistance provided by the international
community, however, does need to be tailored to
different risk and development circumstances and to
various national contexts. It should also support the
objectives of recipient States themselves in order to
ensure local ownership and practical results. For
example, the Government of Kiribati has made climate
change adaptation a central priority, and New Zealand
is pleased to help support its adaptation programme.

While climate change presents all of us with
daunting challenges, there are solutions. Above all, this
debate is a timely reminder of the need for effective
concerted international action within the United
Nations framework. We need a process that brings the
major emitters of greenhouse gases together in the
United Nations to forge a truly global response to
climate change.

