Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, allow me
to thank you, Mr. President, for your adept leadership
and guidance of the Council during this critical period,
as well as throughout the many consultations prior to
the vote on the draft resolution today. At the same time,
I wish to express our deep appreciation to the
delegation of Qatar for all its efforts, as a member of
both the Council and the Arab Group, in steering our
long and often difficult negotiations on the draft
resolution.

We express our thanks in that regard as well to
Saudi Arabia, in its capacity as Chair of the Arab
Group for the month of July, and convey our
appreciation to all those who have supported our just
efforts throughout this process, aimed at having the
Security Council, in accordance with its authority and
responsibilities, take action to address the crisis
situation that continues to prevail in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem.

We believe that all possible efforts were exerted
to arrive at a balanced and reasonable draft resolution
addressing the major issues facing us at this time. We
thank the members of the Council that voted in favour
of the draft resolution, upholding their responsibilities
as members of the Council and, at the same time,
upholding international law, including international
humanitarian law, which is being grossly violated and
gravely breached by Israel, the occupying Power, as it
carries out its relentless military assaults against the
defenceless Palestinian civilian population under its
occupation, particularly in the Gaza Strip.

The downward spiral of developments and the
dramatic deterioration of the situation on the ground in
recent weeks, including the decline of the already dire
humanitarian situation as result of Israel's lethal
military aggression and continuing escalation of
violence against the Palestinian people and their
leadership, gave urgency to this matter and to our
efforts to have the Council be seriously engaged in
guiding this crisis towards its resolution.

We are highly disappointed and frustrated at the
Council's continued inability to act while innocent
Palestinian civilians continue to be brutally killed by
the Israeli occupying forces. The failure to adopt
today's draft resolution will not help to calm the
situation or contribute to resolving the current crisis,
and it seriously harms the credibility of the Council at
this crucial time, sending the wrong message to the
occupying Power and further fueling the disastrous
culture of impunity that has allowed Israel to continue
breaching international law for all these years, and
through to today, without being held accountable for its
actions.

Indeed, even as we meet in this Chamber, Israel,
the occupying Power, continues deliberately and
wantonly to cause more human carnage and physical
destruction, turning the besieged and impoverished
Gaza Strip into a devastated humanitarian wasteland of
death, rubble and misery. The Israeli occupying forces
continue wantonly to destroy Palestinian homes and
property, agricultural land, vital infrastructure and
institutions, including, just today, the bombing of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Gaza City.

Far worse, innocent Palestinian civilians continue
to be brutally killed daily by the Israeli occupying
forces in a barrage of air strikes and artillery
bombardment launched against the defenceless civilian
population. Yesterday alone, at least 23 Palestinians
were killed by the occupying forces, among them nine
members of the Salmiya family - a mother, a father
and their seven children - cold-bloodedly murdered in
their own home when the Israeli occupying forces
deliberately dropped a quarter-ton bomb on their home.
That is State terrorism against a captive civilian
population, and all of those acts clearly constitute war
crimes. All such acts must be condemned. Action must
be taken to compel the occupying Power to cease such
grave breaches and to abide by its obligations under
international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, and the perpetrators of those crimes must
be held accountable and brought to justice.

There is no doubt that the situation is seriously
worsening with each passing day, compounding the
suffering and hardship being endured by the
Palestinian civilian population, and that tensions and
frictions continue dramatically to rise, resulting in the
further destabilization of the situation, not only in the
area, but beyond in the region. The overall situation
that is now prevailing clearly requires the immediate
attention of and concerted action by the international
community before it deteriorates even further and
plunges the entire region into an uncontrollable cycle
of violence and conflict. This is a matter of
international peace and security, and it calls for serious
measures by the international community, including
foremost this Council.

We continue to believe that the Council should
uphold its duties in the maintenance of peace and
security and in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict with regard to the situation of the Palestinian
people under Israeli occupation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, and
we believe that, in the face of this ongoing tragedy, it
ultimately will. It is that conviction, based on the
principles enshrined in the Charter and on our belief in
the rule of international law, which has brought us back
to the Security Council time and time again, and not
any other reason, despite the claims made by some in
that regard. What other recourse does a people have
when it has been oppressed, subjugated, weakened and
denied its most basic human rights under a belligerent
foreign military occupation for more than 30 years?

The question of Palestine cannot, among the
many conflicts, crises and tragedies being faced by the
international community, be excluded from the
Security Council's mandate and responsibilities. The
repeated failure of the Council to act can only prolong
the conflict, rather than end the vicious cycle of
violence, resulting only in more bloodshed, suffering
and loss for the Palestinian people at the hands of their
occupier and in greater instability throughout the
region, and taking us further from the realization of the
just and lasting peace that we all desperately seek.

In conclusion, it is therefore our strong hope that,
ultimately and very soon, this Council will find the
determination to implement its resolutions, uphold the
rule of law and take the necessary course of action to
address this growing crisis and to pave the way for a
final, peaceful resolution of this long and tragic
conflict, for the sake of both the Palestinian and the
Israeli peoples and for the sake of the region as a
whole. It is not too late to act. Too many human lives,
the future of an entire people and the prospects for
peace and stability in the region are at stake.

