Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General of Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, the Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
Special Envoy for South Sudan, Mr. Ismail Wais,
for their briefings. Those briefings have given us
a comprehensive overview of the latest events in
South Sudan.

Given that the Security Council dealt with this issue
just last week (see S/PV.8115), and without wishing to
repeat ideas, I shall focus my statement on the most
recent events in South Sudan, many of which the
briefers referred to quite Clearly. However, before doing
that, I would like once again to express Uruguay's deep
concern at this protracted crisis.

Just a few weeks from the end of this year - the
fifth year since the conflict broke out - the future
of South Sudan is at a critical juncture. All of the
promises and announcements of commitments have
already been made by all the parties to the conflict.
All that has not been lacking. What there has been
a dearth of, and what the country and its population
urgently need, are concrete actions and tangible results
that lead to a resolution of the crisis. In that regard, the
parties will soon have a unique opportunity, perhaps
a last chance, to demonstrate to their people their
commitment to a peaceful solution to the crisis. We
have great expectations for the convening of the high-
level revitalization forum on the 2015 Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, to be led by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development. We reiterate that, for that initiative to
be conducted normally and successfully, it is essential
that the parties involved once and for all comply with
their commitments to immediately put an end to the
hostilities across the entire country. It should be clear
that the persistence of any armed confrontation is
incompatible with the establishment and conduct of a
genuine dialogue.
With regard to the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS), we regret to note that it
continues to face all kinds of restrictions imposed by
the Government, at the same time that the regional
protection force approved by the Security Council over
a year ago is still far from being 100 per cent operative.
In that regard, we once again urge the Government
of South Sudan to lift restrictions imposed on the
Mission and all humanitarian workers, as well as to
fully cooperate with the United Nations. We have heard
numerous promises on that topic, but it is now time for
those to translate into concrete action. On the other
hand, we note the progress that is under way on the
Secretariat's strategic review of the UNMISS mandate.
We are fully confident that its conclusions will enable
the Security Council to take a responsible decision on
the future of the Mission, which plays a crucial role in
protecting civilians.

In conclusion, by way of summary, given that our
participation in the Security Council is coming to an
end, I must highlight our disappointment about the
situation of South Sudanese civilians. We had hoped for
more diligent action on the part of the Government in
Juba. We all know what goes on and how people live in
the so-called civilian protection sites. Many of us here
in the Council saw it barely over a year ago when, in
September 2016, we visited civilian protection sites in
Juba and Wau - places close to, or under the protection
of, UNMISS, or the Catholic Church in the case of Wau.

Unfortunately, the displaced people living there
are facing the terrible dilemma of remaining cooped up
without being able to work, with little or no prospects for
their future, or of leaving those centres to return to their
homes at the high risk of being robbed, sexually attacked
or killed. This week, the Minister for Humanitarian
Affairs and Disaster Management, Mr. Hussein Mar
Nyuot, presented a so-called resettlement package that
encouraged civilians to leave protection sites to return
to their homes. No one in their right mind would want
to return to their homes, or what is left of them, when
they pose so much danger. We have to set our priorities:
there must first be an immediate cessation of hostilities
and, thereafter, security guarantees have to be provided
for the entire civilian population.
As this is our last statement on South Sudan at
the Security Council, we pay tribute to all South
Sudanese civilians.

