Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the delegations
of the United Kingdom and France for initiating this
emergency meeting, and the Senegalese presidency for
organizing it. Let me also express thanks to our briefers
for their remarkable yet sobering perspectives on the
latest developments in Syria.

Emboldened by the military momentum and the
full-fledged support it receives from its backers, the
Syrian regime shows no mercy and appears to be
ready to sink the whole of Syria into bloodshed of a
magnitude yet unseen, which is something that we have
warned the Security Council about since we joined it
11 months ago.

According to the media and independent sources,
just yesterday the Syrian military committed a horrible
massacre in the neighbourhood of Bab Al-Nairab,
which claimed the lives of 25 civilians, of which most
were women and children. They were hit by air strikes
while trying to escape eastern Aleppo on foot; they
were ordinary civilians, not terrorists. The military
operation in Aleppo is not about countering the terrorist
threat, but about crushing the opposition to the Syrian
regime. It is about gaining ground. The control of
territory and the reanimation of the Syrian regime are
the primary aims of those who invest military, financial
and diplomatic assets and manpower in supporting the
lifeline of the brutal dictatorship. But in fact, the only
result of the ongoing operation to retake Aleppo will be
the strengthening of the terrorist groups inside Syria
and throughout the wider region. Al-Qaida will benefit
immensely by acquiring much stronger capabilities for
recruiting new members in Syria among those wishing
to continue resistance against the Al-Assad regime and
those who are discouraged by the continuing absence
of a political solution. The international campaign to
eradicate Da'esh will also suffer a huge blow.

We are further dismayed by the fact that, instead of
choosing to go along with the Special Envoy's initiative
for Aleppo, the regime forces and its allies are pursuing
the path of military offenses and the annihilation
of their opponents. In our opinion, that proves one
thing - our problem is not a lack of strong and well-
thought-out initiatives and resolutions, but rather a
lack of commitment, monitoring, accountability and
implementation. Aleppo is the bifurcation point of the
Syrian conflict. Damascus and its allies are using the
current escalation to support their long-term strategy
to render the city uninhabitable and to depopulate its
opposition-controlled districts.

Reducing Aleppo to ashes and then calling for
political talks is not an option, or maybe it is according
to the Syrian and Russian military. Al-Assad and
Russia have gotten one step closer to turning Aleppo
into another Grozny. The world should not sit idly by
and let that happen. We call on Russia and the Syrian
regime to respect the agreed obligations, including the
cessation of hostilities, particularly in Aleppo, and to
secure the possibility of providing humanitarian aid to
the besieged areas. The world wonders how many more
meetings of the Council need to be convened to achieve
such a simple and humane goal.

