Ms. Del Ponte: I am most grateful to have once
again the opportunity to address the Council. As
requested in resolution 1503 (2003), I intend to explain
my plans to implement the completion strategy of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). In this context, I will also focus on
some essential conditions that must be implemented for
a successful completion strategy, including the full
cooperation of the States in the former Yugoslavia and
the deferral of cases to domestic jurisdictions.

In resolution 1503 (2003), the Security Council
provides my office with clear guidance regarding the
time frame of my investigations. 1 can report that
necessary measures are continuously being taken to
ensure the completion of all remaining investigations by
2004. This is also reflected in our budget submission,
which proposes significant cuts in the Investigation
Division during 2005. I am confident that the remaining
most senior leaders who are suspected of being most
responsible for crimes falling within the ICTY's
jurisdiction will have been indicted by the end of 2004.

Following the information provided to the
Council by President Meron, I would like to give
members some information regarding the nature of the
cases that remain under investigation. It will be
understood that I cannot give precise details about these
cases, as that would compromise the investigations.

There are now 13 investigations remaining that,
in my judgement, must be completed by my office
before it can be said that the investigative mandate
entrusted to me and my predecessors by the Council
has been completed in a responsible manner. I
constantly review these investigations. As things stand
today, it is possible that not all of them will result in
new indictments. All these cases involve the remaining
individuals who held the highest possible levels of
responsibility, for very serious crimes committed in the
former Yugoslavia, and involving most of the parties to
the conflict spanning the period from 1991 to 2001.

Even if all these investigations resulted in new
indictments, they would lead to nine additional trials,
because some could be joined with other future trials.
They involve approximately 30 individual suspects, all
at the highest levels of responsibility. At this stage,
there is hardly any prospect that these cases could be
assumed locally.

In addition to these 13 top-priority investigations,
my office has conducted 17 additional investigations
that were suspended at the end of last year as a result
of my decision to focus solely on the most senior
perpetrators. They involve 62 suspects who will not be
formally indicted by the ICTY. I expect these cases to
be referred to domestic courts for further investigation
and prosecution according to the following
distribution: 12 cases involving 48 suspects to be
referred to Bosnia and Herzegovina; three cases
involving eight suspects to be referred to Croatia and
two cases involving six suspects to be referred to
Serbia and Montenegro. The great attention we and the
international community have devoted to the referral of
cases to domestic jurisdictions demonstrates a general
concern that no impunity should be tolerated.

There are currently three ongoing trials before the
ICTY, involving four accused. Another 18 cases,
involving 27 accused, are at the pre-trial stage. There
are also currently 17 indicted fugitives remaining at
large, and if all were surrendered to the Tribunal in a
timely fashion, there could potentially be an additional
10 trials, not taking into account that some joinders
with other trials or guilty pleas may also be possible.

The bottom line with all these cases is that there
could be between 40 and 45 trials to be completed by
the Tribunal, including the three ongoing trials, by
2008. It is very likely that some of these trials will
result in guilty pleas, while others could be referred to
the domestic courts in the former Yugoslavia. That is
the scope of the ICTY's potential trial load.

The Council has heard the accurate and realistic
report of President Meron regarding the dates for the
completion strategy. I obviously share his estimates,
which are the result of a very fruitful and transparent
process of coordination, in which all three pillars of the
Tribunal are closely associated. My Office is committed
to continuing this dialogue with the President as
closely as possible, so as to ensure that the Tribunal as
a whole can fulfil the objectives defined in its mandate
and in the various Security Council resolutions, not
least in resolution 1503 (2003) of 28 August.

Now, according to the latest calculations made
jointly with the Registrar and the President, it will not
be possible to prosecute in The Hague before the end
of 2008 all the suspects and accused who will have
been indicted by the ICTY by the end of 2004. I take
this situation very seriously, and, to supplement the
conclusions drawn by the President, I would offer the
following possible approach for the Council's further
consideration.

By the end of next year, we will have a precise
View of what remains to be done. All remaining
indictments will have been issued and will most
probably be public. The Tribunal will know the status
of the current list of fugitives and will also know how
many additional fugitives there will be, arising out of
the new indictments. It will also be much clearer which
cases will result in pleas of guilty. In close cooperation
with the President, and on the basis of the guidance
provided by the Security Council, it will then be
possible to decide which cases should be prosecuted in
The Hague and which cases could properly and
responsibly be referred back to the domestic
jurisdictions, in accordance with the procedure
foreseen in rule 11 bis of the Tribunal's Rules of
Procedure and Evidence. Among the many reasons in
favour of this option, I would highlight the following.

Referring ICTY-indicted cases to the domestic
jurisdictions offers better guarantees that these cases
will actually be tried, rather than referring non-indicted
cases, as would be the case if I stopped all
investigations now. Namely, it would enable the ICTY
to use its primacy and call back cases if serious flaws
were noted. This would not be possible for non-
indicted cases.

As I said before, my remaining investigations
cover the region and concern all the main parties to the
conflict. By completing these investigations, the ICTY
will have proved that it worked impartially towards
achieving justice, peace and reconciliation in the
former Yugoslavia. I kindly invite the Council to
consider the political conclusions that some might draw
if I were forced to cease investigations at this juncture.

This option would ensure that the international
community has succeeded in maintaining the highest
standards of criminal justice in the operations of the
ICTY, in particular those involving the independence of
the Prosecutor, as expressed in Article 16 of the Statute.

For these reasons, I believe that we should
continue on the road indicated by the Security Council
last August, bearing in mind that, by the end of next
year, all remaining indictments will have been issued.
At that stage, at the very beginning of 2005, we will,
with the President, review the situation to determine
which cases should remain in The Hague and which
should be referred to domestic jurisdictions. This
solution conforms with the guidelines provided by the
Council in resolution 1503 (2003) and our firm
commitment to conclude our investigations by 2004
and the subsequent dates of our completion strategy.
We will continue to work diligently towards that end.

In the meantime, in relation to the cases
remaining in The Hague, I will also continue to work
closely with the President and the Registrar to identify
other methods to improve the efficiency of the
Tribunal, to shorten the length of trials, and to
maximize the use of the courtrooms. It is, and it will of
course be, up to the Security Council to provide us
with the necessary framework that will allow us to
implement the completion strategy, while maintaining
the necessity to have independent and impartial justice.
In this connection, allow me to elaborate briefly on two
key issues directly related to the success of the
completion strategy: full cooperation by the States of
the former Yugoslavia and fostering reforms and
support of national courts.

Full cooperation by the States in the former
Yugoslavia is of crucial importance to speeding up the
trial process. Providing access to documents and
witnesses, as well as carrying out arrests and transfer
of fugitives, remains the most basic contribution of
these States to the completion strategy. It is also their
international legal obligation to do so. Following my
address to the Security Council on 29 October 2002, I
regret to have to report that Croatia, Serbia and
Montenegro, Republika Srpska and the Bosnian Croat
party to the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina have
not so far achieved full cooperation with the Tribunal.

In the case of Croatia, 1 can report that most of
my requests to the Croatian Government regarding
access to documents and witnesses are now being treated
seriously and professionally 4 now. The backlog of
important benchmark requests has been cleared just
recently. It is regrettable, though, that on average it
takes more than a year to process a request from my
Office. It is also noteworthy that when it comes to
important international deadlines, when the status of
cooperation is in the limelight, the speed and quality of
compliance with my requests increase considerably. I
hope - and, indeed, I have received assurances from
the Government on this matter - that with the new
requests from my Office there will be no undue delays.

At the same time, the Croatian authorities bear
the responsibility for the failure to arrest and transfer
General Ante Gotovina. The Croatian Government
recently submitted reports to the Registrar, pursuant to
ICTY rule 59, providing additional explanations and
pointing to the conclusion that the accused Gotovina
was outside Croatian territory. Most of the information
provided in these reports was already known and
outdated. In the meeting I had this week with Prime
Minister Racan, I shared information available to me
about the whereabouts of Gotovina, which comes from
various sources, concurring that the accused is in Croatia.
I also gave details about the protection that he is receiving
in Croatia from persons within the institutions.

In front of me, the Croatian authorities - the
President and Prime Minister - did not deny that the
accused could be in Croatia, despite public statements
saying that he would be in a European country. We
agreed to work together in order to locate and arrest
him, and I received firm assurances from the
Government in this respect. Until we see results,
though, Croatia's obligations in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1503 (2003), in particular
its paragraph 2, will remain to be fulfilled.

Our cooperation with Belgrade remains very
difficult and heavily politicized, whether in regard to
arrests and transfer of fugitives or access to documents
and waivers for high-level witnesses. I continue to face
serious problems regarding access to key documents, in
particular those held in various archives. 1 showed
understanding for the Serbian concerns regarding
protective measures for some materials, even providing
the Government with my written commitment in the
Milosevic case. It is understood that protective
measures ought to be reasonable and not contradict the
public interest and the principle of transparency of the
trials. It is regrettable that the requested documents
only started to arrive in my Office in recent months and
only as a result of binding Court orders issued by the
Trial Chamber, not as a result of my requests for
assistance or voluntary contribution.
Also, I proposed a mechanism in February this
year to ensure proper access to key archived documents
by my staff, respecting the Government's
confidentiality concerns. It took more than seven
months to receive a reply, which arrived only last
week. It is actually a counter-proposal that is totally
unacceptable, since it would forbid my staff to have
access to the documents for the whole period from
1991 until the end of 1995, which obviously
corresponds to the wars in Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina - the core of the ICTY's mandate.

In the Milosevic trial and other cases, I sense a
willingness on the part of the authorities to retain
crucial material that could prove the implication of the
then Belgrade authorities - the former regime - in
the crimes committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Belgrade invokes national security concerns in regard
to these materials, but in fact such an approach is
limiting or slowing down the Tribunal's access to
critical evidence. This goes against the interests of
justice and truth, and also does not help in terms of our
completion strategy. As an example, we have been
asking for Ratko Mladic's personal file for about two
years now, and, while a file is not a fugitive, we still
cannot get it.

Moreover, witnesses still have to go through a
lengthy process whereby they have to be granted
waivers by the authorities. That process, which exists
only in Serbia and Montenegro, has proved to be
extremely slow and painful, and it has an obvious
detrimental effect on the trials and on our efforts to
reduce their length. For example, to this day, over 60
such requests for waivers are pending a decision.

I was inclined to speak about some improvement
in Belgrade's cooperation with the ICTY before my
visit to Belgrade last week, but I am not in a position to
do so. There is no true commitment for cooperation or
readiness to take difficult steps, which are badly
needed, and not only from the point of View of the
Tribunal. The authorities are unanimous in stressing
the necessity to cooperate with the Tribunal; however,
when it comes to tough decisions or the need to
provide sensitive documents, we face obstruction and
negative attitudes.

I have reason to believe that, among the 17
fugitives remaining at large, well over half of them,
including Ratko Mladic, reside in Serbia and
Montenegro. The authorities now concur with me that
at least seven accused are in Serbia. On a number of
occasions this year, my Office has transmitted very
precise information to the Serb authorities, in the
expectation that it could lead to the arrest of fugitives.
Unfortunately, we received very limited feedback after
such intelligence was passed on, and it was not
convincing.

In relation to Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
authorities of the Republika Srpska still have not
located or arrested a single indicted fugitive to date.
Karadzic is known to be constantly moving between
the Republika Srpska and Montenegro. Additionally,
we cannot obtain full access to the necessary
documents or individuals, while certain archives and
their contents are, clearly, being hidden from my
investigators. It appears that there are still influential
elements in the police and army structures in the
Republika Srpska that actively protect and support the
fugitives and war crimes suspects.

To conclude my comments on the level of
cooperation on the part of the States and entities of the
former Yugoslavia, I must mention the Bosnian Croat
party to the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. For
several years now, my office has received very little
cooperation from the Bosnian Croat authorities in
respect of cases involving Bosnian Croat perpetrators.
The reality is that there is no cooperation in these
cases, and there have been no steps or efforts to comply
with the Tribunal's requests. Although my Office has
received some assistance in the location of witnesses,
there has been no response to requests for relevant
documentation - in fact, there has been consistent and
deceitful denial of the existence of such material. Much
remains to be done on the part of the Bosnian Croat
party to the Federation.

Finally, I have to share my concern that the 2004
deadline set in the completion strategy, instead of
speeding up cooperation, may well, on the contrary,
encourage States in the region to buy time and to place
additional obstacles in the way of cooperation with the
ICTY.

As is clear, lack of cooperation by the States
concerned can endanger the completion strategy.
Another key development that will influence the
implementation of the completion strategy is the ability
of the countries of the former Yugoslavia to prosecute
lower-level perpetrators themselves, including suspects
or indictees that the ICTY might wish to refer to
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Montenegro, or
Croatia - and they will not be low-level perpetrators;
they will be mid- and high-level perpetrators.

I am relieved to hear that the donors conference
for the War Crimes Chamber in the State Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina will take place soon. My
office is obviously prepared to assist in this process.

When considering which cases to refer back, the
main problems confronting us are the absence of
adequate domestic witness-protection arrangements
and the lack of legislation in any country in the region
to enable evidence gathered by the Tribunal to be
admissible in the domestic courts. We are already
facing this situation in a case which is to be referred to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The witnesses who were
prepared to testify at The Hague are not willing to do
so before the domestic court. None of the States of the
former Yugoslavia have a legal obligation in their
national legislation to recognize and act upon the
indictments issued by the ICTY, in particular those
transferred to the domestic courts for prosecution. The
same can be said about the status of the non-indicted
cases I intend to refer to the domestic courts, together
with the evidence I have gathered during the course of
my investigations.

This, obviously, constitutes a serious impediment
to the transfer of cases from ICTY to domestic
jurisdictions, and it is my hope that the international
community will assist in providing the necessary input for
the relevant changes in domestic legislation to occur.

It would appear that Croatia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Serbia and Montenegro each
understand the need for domestic war crimes
prosecution, and that this involves a long-term
commitment. This is highly commendable and is
essential if true reconciliation and a lasting peace are to
be achieved. However, without cooperation between
them in terms of bilateral legal assistance, provisions
for the protection of witnesses and evidence, and,
finally, mutual agreements on the extradition of
accused persons, any realistic prospects of dealing with
the cases referred by the ICTY to the domestic courts
of the former Yugoslavia will be slim.

Let me assure the Council once again of my
determination to implement the objectives set by the
Security Council. In so doing, I will continue working
closely with the President. Let me also reiterate that I
am grateful to the members of the Council for their
support and trust. That support remains crucial, notably
to encourage States to cooperate fully with the ICTY
and to foster the creation of reliable domestic
judiciaries in the region. Ultimately, we will all benefit
if justice, the rule of law and reconciliation prevail in
the former Yugoslavia.
