Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Mr. Zenenga,
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia,
and Ambassador Madeira, Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), for their briefings.

I would like to begin by bringing up two important
issues. The first is essentially about the thanks we owe
Ambassador Madeira for what he said towards the end
of his statement, when he stressed how critical it is to
ensure a coordinated effort in the support provided to
Somalia's security sector. He talked about the fact that
the deficit in that support has been a major problem.
We hope that, post-London and post-April, we have
established a basis for overcoming that problem.

The second issue is really an appeal for ensuring
that the support provided to Somalia's security forces
and AMISOM. is judged according to objective reality
and the contribution that those forces are making to
regional and international peace and security. Sweden's
advice is pertinent here.

Today's meeting is taking place against abackdrop of
the positive momentum generated over the past couple of
months for Somalia's peace, security and development.
The outcome of the London Conference hosted last
week by the United Kingdom, for which it should be
commended, reflected that positive momentum, and the
new partnership for Somalia endorsed at the Conference
is consistent with the country's need and expectations
for renewed international support based on its ownership
and priorities, as outlined by the Federal Government
in its national development plan. What is equally
important, of course, is the need to honour the pledges
and commitments that have been made previously and
to translate them into concrete support for the country's
recovery and peacebuilding endeavours.

However, we are also mindful of the fact that
we are meeting at a time when Somalia is facing a
serious humanitarian crisis brought on by drought.
Responding urgently and swiftly to the crisis is first
and foremost a matter of saving lives, but it also has
to do with preserving the gains that have been made
in recent years through enormous effort and sacrifice.
In that regard, we appreciate the Federal Government's
initiatives and plans to address this national disaster,
and we welcome the international support that has
been mobilized to deliver much-needed assistance to
those affected by the drought. Ensuring an effective
and coordinated response under the leadership of the
Federal Government is important if a humanitarian
catastrophe is to be averted, in the short term, and the
root causes of the country's vulnerability to disasters
addressed, with a View to building its resilience, over
the long term.

Further complicating the humanitarian crisis
is the situation of Somalian refugees and displaced
persons. The problem of finding a lasting solution to
that issue was discussed at the Special Summit of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development held
in Nairobi two months ago. The Nairobi Declaration
on Durable Solutions for Somali Refugees and
Reintegration of Returnees in Somalia, adopted at
the Summit, represents an important framework for
comprehensively addressing the refugee issue, but its
implementation requires enhanced bilateral, regional
and international support.

This year marks the tenth anniversary ofAMISOM,
which has contributed immensely to peace, security,
reconciliation and peacebuilding in Somalia over the
past decade. There are valuable lessons to be learned
from the Mission's experience that are highly relevant
and significant to current and future peace operations.
AMISOM. is clearly not meant to stay in Somalia
forever, and it is only right that discussions of its future
have already begun. That future should be based on a
clear exit strategy and road map that can eventually give
Somalia's security forces greater responsibility. In that
regard, we welcome the political agreement reached on
16 April on integrating the regional and federal forces
into a coherent national security architecture and on the
establishment ofa national security council and office,
which will enable Somalia to gradually assume greater
responsibility for its security.

However, there is certainly a need to ensure
enhanced coordination and coherence in the
international support to the country on the basis of its
national security architecture. That has not been the
case so far, which is why the progress made in building
Somalia's security forces has been far from adequate.
But that is changing, and the agreement on the national
security architecture is a major breakthrough.

Although AMISOM. will begin a gradual drawdown
in late 2018, its role will still be significant, and the
provision of logistical support to the building of
Somalia's security forces and to AMISOM. therefore
continues to be very critical, and even more so in the
light of the impending offensive operations in the
Juba valley corridor designed to dislodge Al-Shabaab
from the areas that it still controls. Parenthetically, in
connection with the fact that AI-Shabaab continues to
be a menace, I should mention that while the London
Conference was under way, there was a major battle
against Al-Shabaab in the Hiran region. We hope that
the upcoming joint African Union-United Nations
review will consider these issues and come up with
concrete recommendations, including on the issue of
providing AMISOM. with complementary, predictable
and sustainable funding through United Nations-
assessed contributions, within the framework of the
enhanced partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union.

Lastly, Somalia has indeed come a long way and,
more than ever before, there are better prospects for
peace, security and stability in the country, provided
that the positive momentum generated in recent years
can be maintained and sustained. The challenges that
Somalia still faces are enormous, and a lot of work
must be done. That is why Somalia needs the continued
support and solidarity of the international community
as it strives to overcome those challenges. I would like
to conclude with some words of my Prime Minister
from his remarks at the London Conference last week,
when he said that

"[w]e in the region would continue to shed our
blood, pay immense sacrifices and do whatever is
just and necessary to restore the long-sought-after
peace and tranquillity in Somalia and across the
region. There is no greater contribution, no greater
solidarity than this."

