Mr. Richardson (United States): The United States
is very pleased to join with other members of the Council
in supporting this draft resolution. The Inter-African
Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui
Agreements (MISAB) has accomplished much to restore
peace and security to the Central African Republic.

The United States wishes to express its support to
the participants in the force - Togo, Senegal, Burkina
Faso, Mali, Chad and Gabon. The dedication of these
countries to peace, and their troops on the ground, has
been the critical element in restoring stability to the
Central African Republic. It is also an important
milestone in the development of the indigenous African
peacekeeping capability. In this sense the Inter-African
Mission will be an important precedent and a test case for
further African peacekeeping efforts. We will be
following its progress closely.

We are pleased that the Security Council today can
reinforce the authority of the mandate of the Inter-African
Mission: to monitor the implementation of the Bangui
Agreements and to take other actions regarding
disarmament of ex-rebels, the militias and individuals.
Our vote today in favour of this resolution provides
formal acknowledgement of the vital role that the force
has played.

We must express, however, our concern at the
continued instability in the Central African Republic.
Hostilities have abated since the signing of the Bangui
Agreements and the creation of the Inter-African Mission
on 25 January. But the job is not over and all elements
have not renounced violence or turned in their weapons.

We also wish to take special note of the financial
and other contributions of France, Kenya and other
donors which have made the Inter-African Mission
possible. Today's resolution states that the expenses and
logistical support for the force will continue to be borne
in the future on a voluntary basis. It is our understanding
that this Mission will not become a United Nations-
assessed operation.

 

We welcome the provision of this resolution that calls
for bi-weekly reporting from the Inter-African Mission on
the situation in the Central African Republic. This will
provide the Council with a regular update and ensure
effective Council oversight of the operation it is approving
today. We also believe that the Secretary-General should
take steps to increase the United Nations knowledge of
developments in the Central African Republic, so that he
can provide his own views to the Council.

Once again I wish to express the appreciation of my
Government for the efforts of the Inter-African Mission to
restore peace to the troubled Central African Republic and
strengthen its democratically elected Government.

