Mr. Bugingo Rugema (Rwanda): My delegation
welcomes the opportunity to participate in this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
and wishes to express our gratitude to the delegation of
Austria for convening this debate on an issue of critical
importance to the maintenance of international peace
and security.

We welcome the adoption this morning of
resolution 1894 (2009) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and view it as an important step forward
in our consideration of this issue. I also wish to thank
the Secretary-General and the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs for their most insightful
statements and for their efforts in this respect.

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Egypt and Zambia
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
African Group, respectively.

It has been 10 years since the Security Council
first discussed the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, yet civilians still bear the brunt of the
suffering in situations of armed conflict. It is
increasingly clear that resolutions do not automatically
translate into clear mandates and operations on the
ground. In our region particularly, we experience daily
the consequences of a failure to tackle the underlying
causes of conflict and to fully implement protection
mandates, due to either their ambiguous nature or a
lack of capacity.

We therefore welcome the study recently
published by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs on protecting civilians in the
context of United Nations peacekeeping operations. As
a troop-contributing country, we hope that it will lead
the way in bringing clarity to protection mandates, in
bridging existing gaps and in the implementation of its
recommendations.

The genocide in Rwanda and the consequent
conflict in the Great Lakes region have been
characterized by a culture of impunity that has allowed
the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda
(FDLR) and other genocidal forces to fester and
commit heinous crimes against civilians in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We would
encourage Operation Kimia II, supported by the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, to maintain its efforts aimed at
eliminating the threat to civilians posed mainly by the
FDLR and other negative forces in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is imperative
that we end the culture of impunity and ensure that all
who commit such crimes are held accountable for their
actions.
In conclusion, we view the responsibility to
protect as being integral to the protection of civilians,
and welcome the reference to the responsibility to
protect in the resolution adopted this morning. The
General Assembly debate and resolution 63/308 on the
responsibility to protect make it necessary for this
concept to be operationalized as an additional element
in the protection of populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

