Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Shearer,
for his briefing and exceptional work under difficult
conditions. I would also like to warmly thank Ms. Jial
for her touching remarks.

Today, I would like to address three aspects of
the situation in the South Sudan - the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan and its implementation; the
security and humanitarian situation; and the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).

Since the last renewal ofthe mandate in March 2018,
the political landscape and conflict in South Sudan
have changed dramatically. In particular, Belgium
congratulates the parties and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) on their role in the
signing of the agreement in September 2018. Progress
has been made on the ground since then, including the
reduction of large-scale political violence.

However, problems remain in the implementation
of the agreement, including delays in the approval of
security provisions. It is essential that the parties agree
on a joint vision of the future of the security sector
in order to avoid further large-scale Violence. The
success of that process will depend on the meaningful
participation ofwomen in all areas of the peace process,
especially in the committees established in accordance
with the peace agreement. Belgium would like to
emphasize to all parties to the conflict, signatories and
non-signatories alike, that the agreement represents
a window of opportunity to achieve lasting peace in
the country.

We have been alerted by the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/l9l) that armed groups continue to target
civilians and that a disproportionate humanitarian
crisis is affecting the entire country, with l in 3 South
Sudanese becoming displaced. Although political
violence has been reduced, intercommunal violence has
intensified in recent months and more than 500 people
have lost their lives in that type of violence since the
beginning of the year. A better understanding of the
root causes of intercommunal violence is essential in
order to find a way to address them more effectively.

Women and girls in South Sudan are not yet
reaping the dividends of peace, as Ms. Jial mentioned.
On the contrary, sexual violence against women has
even increased since last year. No lasting solution to the
conflict in South Sudan can be found without urgently
and effectively addressing such violence, which targets
mainly women and girls but men and boys as well.

The terrible mass rapes committed in Bentiu at the
end of 2018 are a sad example of such violence. They
revealed gaps in the detection, prevention and response
to incidents of sexual violence. In a horrific way, an
additional nine women and girls were subjected to gang
rape in a separate incident near Bentiu a few weeks
ago. The need for justice for those women is real and
we encourage UNMISS as well as the international
community to support the fight against impunity for
those acts by all possible means.

In a few days' time, we will gather around this
table to adopt a draft resolution on the renewal of the
mandate of UNMISS. The protection of civilians must
remain the priority task of UNMISS and must be a
priority in all decisions relating to the use of resources
by the Mission. The reconfiguration of the civilian
protection sites, which others have alluded to, will be
possible only under the following conditions.

First, the conditions must be truly favourable in
the areas of return. Secondly, a long-term strategy
must be put in place that defines sustainable solutions
for all displaced persons, including refugees. Thirdly,
displaced persons should not be allowed to return to
their village or town of origin unless their relocation
is voluntary, well-informed, safe and dignified.
Fourthly, efforts towards returns must be supported
by gender-sensitive planning in cooperation with
humanitarian actors.

UNMISS must continue to provide protection and
security at the civilian protection sites until those four
conditions are met. We would also like to see UNMISS
increase its off-site patrols. In addition to providing
physical protection, we encourage UNMISS to make use
as well of the full range of unarmed civilian protection
mechanisms, including community engagement,
local mediation, community policing, human rights
monitoring and information analysis.

