Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
express my appreciation for the comprehensive briefings
and reports on the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals by President Carmel
Agius, President Theodor Meron and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz. Let me also welcome the presence of His
Excellency the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Croatia.

The role that international criminal tribunals
have played in the fight against impunity for the most
horrendous crimes, such as genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, cannot be overestimated.
By acknowledging and recognizing the trauma that
remains after conflicts have ended, and by providing
a framework to hold those responsible to account, their
work has helped rebuild the foundations for affected
societies so that they can move forward. Ensuring
justice in the aftermath of conflict is essential for
healing the wounds of war and to sustaining peace.
Holding perpetrators to account in international or
national courts is key to national reconciliation.

We welcome the fact that the two remaining cases
before the ICTY, those of Ratko Mladie and the appeals
case Prlic' et al, will be concluded in November. As we
move towards the conclusion of the ICTY's mission,
we welcome President Agius' plans for a structured
and timely transition to the Residual Mechanism. We
would like to takethis opportunity to thank the staff of
ICTY for their invaluable contributions to international
justice. We would also like to recognize the efforts of
President Agius to lead his team until the completion of
all of the Tribunal's work.

It is important that there be no outstanding cases
at the time of the ICTY's closing. We urge Serbia to
cooperate fully with the Court, as it has done on other
occasions. We call on itto carry out the three arrest
and surrender orders pending since January 2015.
Denying the reality of what happened in the past will
only undermine prospects for peace in the future. We
therefore share the Prosecutor'ss deep concern about
widespread denial of crimes and facts established by
ICTY in relation to its cases, which could have real
consequences for reconciliation in the Western Balkans.
Making a decisive and irreversible break with the past
can happen only when there is truth and accountability.

We look forward to a smooth and effective
transition from the ICTY to the Residual Mechanism.
In that regard, we are encouraged by reports that
ICTY and the Residual Mechanism are considering
lessons learned from the transition of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) a few years
ago. We welcome the work already under way by the
Residual Mechanism.

It is commendable that the Residual Mechanism
issued over 150 decisions and orders during the reporting
period. It has made good use of its flexible organization.
The system of distance judges has proven cost-effective
and efficient. We appreciate the conscious effort to
ensure gender balance within the Residual Mechanism,
as well as the appointment of specific focal points on,
for example, inclusion, gender and issues related to
lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender persons.

Finally, it is of concern that eight individuals
indicted by the ICTR for serious crimes remain at-
large. We encourage all States to cooperate fully with
the Residual Mechanism for the speedy arrest of those
individuals. We also encourage all States to assist
the Residual Mechanism in carrying out its mandate,
including by ensuring that its personnel are not hindered
in performing their duties.

