Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam President, we would like to thank
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Yemen, and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their
valuable briefings.

I will focus on two areas, the developments on the
political and security front and in the humanitarian
situation. As we are meeting here today we are
witnessing constructive and positive developments in
Yemen, particularly the fact that on 5 November the
Yemeni Government and the Southern Transitional
Council succeeded in signing an agreement in Riyadh.
We commend the role of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and its eagerness to lead the negotiations and succeed
in reaching an agreement. The signing of the Riyadh
agreement and the implementation of the first of its
provisions, with the Yemeni Government beginning its
work in the temporary capital of Aden, show clearly
that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the States of the
coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen are keen to
see security and stability restored there.

We hope that the agreement will build trust
and support the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement, paving the way for a comprehensive
political settlement to the crisis based on the three
agreed terms of reference - the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).

We welcome Mr. Griffiths' information on the
remarkable and clear decrease in military operations in
Al-Hudaydah. This is encouraging. We hope it continues
and leads to a dialogue and constructive negotiations.
Accordingly, we affirm Kuwait's willingness to
host the Yemeni parties, under the auspices of the
United Nations, with the aim of reaching a final and
comprehensive settlement of this crisis.

On the humanitarian front, in a hoped-for result
of the positive developments in Yemen, humanitarian
agencies resumed their activities in a number of areas,
and the funding for the 2019 humanitarian response
plan also saw an increase. Kuwait has pledged a total
of $600 million to support the humanitarian activities
of the United Nations in Yemen since the beginning
of the crisis, $350 million of which we have disbursed
to international organizations and relief agencies and
the remainder of which we intend to distribute. In that
regard, we reaffirm how important it is to remove all
obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and to cooperate with humanitarian agencies, notably
the World Food Programme. We are deeply concerned
about the obstacles in the areas under Houthi control,
which Ms. Mueller mentioned in her briefing. We
therefore emphasize the importance of ensuring that all
Yemeni parties comply with international humanitarian
law and allow humanitarian agencies to carry out their
tasks freely, independently and objectively.

We commend the Yemeni Government's recent
constructive role in allowing 10 oil tankers to enter
the country. As Ms. Mueller mentioned, that has had
a positive impact on the country's oil shortages. We
deplore the fact that United Nations experts were
unable to reach the FSO SAFER floating oil tanker in
Ras Isa in order to carry out the necessary inspection
and assessment processes, despite the Organization's
repeated requests, which runs the risk of creating
a serious imminent environmental disaster in the
Red Sea.

In conclusion, we want to reiterate our position
that there can be no military solution to this crisis.
We call on all the Yemeni parties to fully implement
the three pillars of the Stockholm Agreement in order
to support the Special Envoy in his efforts to reach a
political solution based on the three agreed-on terms of
reference in order to end the crisis, preserve Yemen's
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and
ensure non-interference in its internal affairs.

