Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me to start by thanking
the Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law and
Security Institutions in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Alexander Zouev, for his very
informative and thorough briefing. Let me also express
our appreciation to the personnel of the United Nations
Mine Action Service for its daily work to save lives.

Poland welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General on a comprehensive approach to mine action
(S/2018/623), which is indeed a useful source of
comprehensive information on the scale of the current
threat posed by mines, explosive remnants of war and
improvised explosive devices. It enables the Security
Council to gain thorough insight into the situation of
civilians exposed to mine risk, including children,
women, humanitarian personnel and peacekeepers.
We agree with the Secretary-General's observation
that the key role of mine action is sustaining peace.
We therefore believe it critical to incorporate possible
mine action from the earliest stages of planning and
programming cycles when a threat occurs. We share the
Secretary-General's views on the link between actions
on the peace and stability and sustainable development
agendas. Only by integrating those areas through joint
action can solid and durable solutions be accomplished.

Poland would like to underscore the crucial
importance of promoting risk education activities
among the affected populations, including youth and
children, as well as constant support for the victims.
Education is the key solution to minimize the risk of
suffering of thousands of affected civilians. Last year,
the adoption of the first stand-alone resolution on mine
action was a clear sign of the concerns we all share
about the serious threat to civilians, including children,
humanitarian and medical personnel, posed by
landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices. Today we share that concern even
more. The importance of resolution 2365 (2017) and
its message must be emphasized. For Poland, as the
European Union facilitator of a General Assembly
resolution on mine action, the effective and coordinated
engagement of the United Nations in that area is of
utmost importance.

Regrettably, due to protracted active conflicts
and fighting, there is an ever-increasing number of
contaminated areas and the scale of a worldwide threat
posed to the civilian population is very alarming.
The number of casualties caused by mines, explosive
remnants of war and improvised explosive devices
increased more than twofold in 2017, compared to
2014. That statistic is terrifying. Afghanistan, Libya
and Yemen are among those most severely affected by
contamination, not to mention eastern Ukraine, where,
a few months after August 2017, more than twice as
many civilians were killed by remaining explosives.

On a positive note, the joint and coherent efforts of
national and international actors can lead to results. We
saw that in Colombia, where considerable progress in
mine action has been achieved. Last year, we celebrated
two important events. The first was the twentieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction, which
aims to put an end to the suffering and casualties
caused by anti-personnel mines. We are very glad that
in 2017 the number of States party to the Convention
increased to an impressive 164. The second event was
the twentieth anniversary of the United Nations Mine
Action Service.

We would like to reiterate our full recognition for
the important role of the United Nations Mine Action
Service since 1997 in mitigating threats posed by mines
and associated remnants of war. Since 2015, Poland has
regularly supported the activities of the United Nations
Mine Action Service by making annual budgetary
donations. We intend to continue that support this year.

In conclusion, Poland would welcome further
Security Council discussions on mine action. We
believe that countries should continue the practice of
yearly reporting on the issue, which would contribute
to the enhancement of all activities aimed at mitigating
threats posed by contamination.
