Mr. Biden (United States of America): It is an
honour and a pleasure for me to be here today. The
United Nations is held in great esteem by the American
people and, notwithstanding what the Council has
heard, by the vast majority of the members of the
United States Congress. I, for one, hold it in the

S/PV.4245

 

highest esteem, and that is why I deem it such a great
honour to represent my Government today.

One of the items that are on the minds of many
Americans today is not my presence here at the
Security Council but the Supreme Court of the United
States. As I told the Ambassador of Malaysia earlier,
we may be appealing the election to the Security
Council, so I hope you are all ready to vote today. I
will make a case for one of the candidates, but I will
hold off on that right now. One of our colleagues
suggested that the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) should come in and
oversee our election process, but I can assure you that
the Cubans have already made an offer, so we are in
good shape.

I guess I should not be so facetious before such
an august body, but we Americans today are waiting
with bated breath to see what our Court does, and I can
assure you all that, whatever the Supreme Court of the
United States decides, both political parties will accept,
and accept without hesitation, and we will move
forward.

I should like to begin by commending the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Klein, for
his report and his leadership as head of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
particular the Mission's International Police Task
Force, the IPTF, which, I might add, in the Congress in
which I serve was one of the single most significant
and important institutional initiatives with officers
from 45 countries, that I thought had to be taken. It
deserves our praise for its important work in building
an integrated, multi-ethnic police force.

In view of the complex situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we must begin with a strikingly positive
reality. Bosnia and Herzegovina is at peace thanks to
the efforts first of the Implementation Force (IFOR)
and then the Stabilization Force (SFOR), both led by
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). I have
witnessed firsthand the excellent cooperation between
Russian and American troops in northern Bosnia,
something I quite frankly, as a member of the United
States Senate for over 28 years, I was not sure I would
ever witness. I witnessed it, and it was heartening.

We should not minimize the achievement of the
SFOR peacekeepers. During the war, more than
200,000 citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the vast
majority of them civilians, perished. More than 2

million were made homeless, and countless numbers of
all three communities - Bosniac, Serbian and
Croatian - were tortured, raped and otherwise
brutalized. And today, despite sporadic acts of violence
under the security umbrella of 20,000 SFOR troops,
most citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina no longer live
in daily fear for their lives. Shell-shocked cities like
Sarajevo have come back to life, and small-scale
commerce has been revived. Visitors, as I have been on
a number of occasions, encounter a sense of normalcy
in most areas. I repeat: this is a major achievement.

Nonetheless, Bosnia and Herzegovina remains a
country with many challenges to overcome. With a
renewed and more vigorous engagement by the
international community, and above all by SFOR, by
the High Representative and by the United Nations, I
am confident that each of the challenges, all of which
have been laid out by Special Representative Klein,
can be met.

I had planned on speaking in more detail about
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but Mr. Klein has done it so
well I would only be repetitive. I would like to suggest,
though - and this is one of the lessons I hope we have
learned from Bosnia and Herzegovina - that, first and
foremost, every mission must have a clear, credible and
achievable mandate. This was not the case with the
United Nations Protection Force, and it is the case with
SFOR in Bosnia and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in
Kosovo. After a clear and achievable mandate is
decided upon, the military chain of command, in our
opinion, should never include a United Nations civilian
officer.

Secondly, the peacekeeping troops have to be
given rules of engagement that enable them adequately
to defend themselves and that give the people they are
supposed to protect confidence to believe they will be
protected. UNPROFOR peacekeepers were saddled
with very restrictive rules of engagement. It is no one's
fault. It is a lesson I hope we have learned. But
saddling them in the way we did resulted in many of
the Blue Helmets being taken hostage by Bosnian
Serbs and in the incredibly difficult, if not impossible,
position that the Dutch were placed in Srebrenica.
Guarantees of safety of civilians entrusted to them in a
United Nations safe haven were not able to be fulfilled.
We should not repeat that grave mistake, and we have
not repeated that with SFOR or KFOR.

S/PVAZAS

 

Thirdly, when peacekeeping operations are being
formed, United Nations Member States should be
permitted to contribute troops only if they are able to
commit to equip them adequately. Many Council
members visiting Bosnia several years ago witnessed
what I did, with troops literally being put in jeopardy
of freezing in the winter. Never again must we witness
Blue Helmets nearly freezing to death in harsh winter
conditions, or any such situations around the world.

Fourthly, I think the Mission will require more
thorough training of personnel and must consist of
several types of peacekeepers. The skills they need
include many of those of normal combat troops, ones
that they are not trained to have. Civilian police and
judicial functions have been proving to be fundamental
to peacekeeping operations, as Mr. Klein has indicated.
An immediate layer between combat forces and police,
such as international specialized units in Bosnia, is an
important element of any operation, I would
respectfully suggest, in the future.

Fifthly and finally, our experience in Kosovo has
revealed the inadequacy of the current peacekeeping
structures. The Secretariat was unable to respond with
the resources of expertise that Mr. Kouchner needed to
fill the mandate he was given. Furthermore, there were
delays in getting police from donor countries and in
setting up courts, banks, schools and hospitals. The
United Nations must, in our View, redesign its
peacekeeping structure to prevent such mishaps from
recurring. I need not recommend to any of you the
Brahimi report, the implementation of which we think
is badly needed.

The international mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is an ambitious but necessary, often
frustrating but eminently doable, requirement.
Extending the zone of stability throughout the Balkans
is of vital importance not only to the entire European
continent, but also to the continued credibility of this
Organization. For SFOR or the United Nations to
disengage before our goals are accomplished would
only guarantee renewed violence and a much more
costly re-entry in the future. We must stay the course
and prevail, regardless of how long it takes.

I would add that we agree fully with Mr. Klein's
suggestion in his report that the events in the remainder
of the region, particularly recently in Croatia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, give us reason for
much more hope. Those changes, along with the
European commitment to the stability fund, as well as
the genuine, I think, recognition of the need to
integrate the Balkans into Europe, ultimately hold, in
our View, the final key.

What I had planned on doing was talking more in
detail about the report, as I suggested, but it has been
suggested that, in the light of the detail into which Mr.
Klein has gone, I speak to one other issue which I am
sure is on members' minds: the attitude of the next
presidential Administration and the next Congress
towards what is referred to, at least in our country, as
the Helms-Biden amendments that were passed and the
Helms-Biden legislation.

In my 27 years of service in the United States
Senate, I have been a steadfast supporter of the United
Nations, and throughout my career I have worked with
my fellow members of Congress to ensure a bipartisan
approach to our international policy. I am confident
that many of my colleagues join me in the call for a
better, more active relationship between the United
States and the United Nations. But have no doubt, the
United States wants to be a part of the solution for
strengthening the United Nations. I know many of you
have privately and personally entreated me to
determine whether or not there is likely to be any
change in the attitude of the United States Congress or
the next Administration, with regard to Helms-Biden.
The answer is no, there is not likely to be at all.

The majority of the members of Congress believe
in, and intend to continue to support, the objectives
outlined by the President of the United States and other
world leaders at the United Nations Millennium
Summit. However, we will not be able to participate
fully if the United Nations membership fails to come
together and update the regular budget scales and does
not adopt a more rational peacekeeping scale.
Specifically, the United States is committed to seeking
a regular budget ceiling of 22 per cent this year and a
reduction in our peacekeeping contribution from 30 per
cent.

I know Ambassador Holbrooke and other
members of the United States Mission have discussed
the details of our position with everyone in this forum,
as well as in other committees ofthe United Nations, in
some detail. The fact of the matter is that Congress has
expressed it clearly and by an overwhelming vote, and
I hope that it has been understood not as an American
diktat, but as an effort to help fix a problem. As a co-

S/PV.4245

 

author of this legislation - and some of you know that
had I been Chairman of the committee and were I in a
position to get the funding from the United States and
movement on the arrearages - I do not believe we
should have made a connection between the reforms
and the United States keeping its commitment.

But, quite frankly, my view is not a majority
view. What was done was done, and now we are
saddled, and in a sense we have saddled you with
having to focus on so-called reforms. I do not think we
would ever reach an agreement and begin to pay off
our arrearages had we not settled on the Helms-Biden
approach within my organization, the United States
Congress. I have to say that when the Secretary-
General visited Washington three years ago to discuss
the issue with me and other members of Congress, they
were made aware of our dilemma.

So here we are: $100 million in payments have
already been made and more than half a billion dollars
more are ready for disbursement, but it will require
work by all of us. This is in addition to the billion-
dollar increase that the United States Congress has
agreed to move on this year for the United Nations.

We seek a two-way street where the United States
commits to paying its arrears, while at the same time
the United Nations accepts the need for major reform.
For more than 50 years now the United States has been
by far the largest single contributor to this
Organization, and though we may not always see eye to
eye on every United Nations issue, this does not mean
that we are about to walk away from the table. All of us
are here today because we need the United Nations.
The United States needs the United Nations. At the
same time, we also need to be more effective, relevant
and just.

In 1946 Arthur Vandenberg, one of my most
esteemed predecessors, came to this forum and stated,

"We believe that a ceiling upon
contributions for basic administrative
expenditures should be placed at some reasonable
point. I would be less than frank ifI did not say
that the failure to do so may risk a reaction which
could one day jeopardize the stable and
progressive development of this entire
Organization."

While many changes have taken place between
Senator Vandenberg's call for reform and my own, one
thing most definitely has not changed: the United
States continues to believe that United Nations stability
and development will require every Member's voice to
be heard and will require each of us to play his or her
proper role in supporting the Organization. But the
burden must be more broadly shared if the
Organization is to develop and progress.

As I said, members should not think that our
focus on assessment issues means that the United
States is walking away from the United Nations. On
the contrary: the United States Government is in the
process of committing nearly $3.5 billion to the United
Nations in the year 2001, and that includes record
levels of voluntary contributions and a 71-per-cent
increase in the agreed congressional appropriations for
peacekeeping. We want to continue that impressive
record in the future - I personally want to continue
that record.

Moreover, the United States agrees that, as a
permanent member of the Security Council, we have a
special obligation to this institution, and we hope that
the other four permanent members also join us in
bearing that responsibility - which they do. Clearly,
the poorest countries cannot and must not be held to
the same assessment rates as the industrial Powers. We
believe, however, that the financial burden of the
United Nations must be shared, and that a handful of
countries cannot be expected to go it alone.

Together with my colleagues in the United States
House of Representatives and Senate, I am concerned
that the reform efforts may fail. That would seriously
jeopardize the financial base of the United Nations and
could destabilize the United States-United Nations
relationship. As a long-time supporter of the United
Nations, I believe it is critical that this issue be
resolved now. It should not cast a shadow over the
relationship of the United Nations with the next United
States Administration. A negative outcome might have
a devastating impact on any efforts within the United
States Government to promote development aid and to
garner more resources for peacekeeping. And I want to
make it clear that I am saying this as a friend of the
United Nations and as one who believes that we must
continue to move to pay our arrearages.

I anticipate responses to the views I am
expressing on this issue, and I do not mean to suggest
that I do not realize that there are other points of

S/PVAZAS

 

view- and compelling points of view - held by
members ofthe Security Council.

I want to take note of some positive indications
of change and to say that I am truly pleased to see real
and lasting reforms under way in this body; I believe
that these will help permanently re-centre support for
the United Nations within the United States Congress.
In the interests oftime, I will forgo speaking ofthis.

Let me turn finally to the peacekeeping issue. I
know that my time is limited, but I want to make some
brief comments concerning United Nations
peacekeeping operations, recognizing that financial
reforms are only part of the changes needed by the
United Nations. Ambassador Brahimi and the expert
Panel on United Nations Peace Operations have
produced a courageous and, we believe, far-sighted
report on how to reform United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

The report (S/2000/809) clearly indicates that the
threat of personal danger has not prevented thousands
of men and women from participating in United
Nations peacekeeping operations during the past 50
years. Sadly, a number have given their lives in the
service of peace, as did those in East Timor and Sierra
Leone recently; we honour their memory. At the same
time, the report acknowledges that the United Nations
must do a better job in preparing and implementing its
peacekeeping mission. I ask all members of the
Council to join in supporting the need to reform and
strengthen that critical function. Peacekeeping is a
shared task for ever Member and, without the help of
all, countries in crisis will not get the help they need;
and, when they do, our peacekeepers will be put at
unacceptable risk.
The Secretary-General has been particularly
helpful in this discussion, and I am sorry that I am not
able today to thank him personally for his efforts.
However, it seems fitting that he is right now in
Algeria attending the signing of a formal peace
agreement between Ethiopia and Eritrea. I commend
him for his statements to the General Assembly, in
which he said that sovereign boundaries would no
longer provide a defence for madmen who wanted to
exterminate their own populations. That was
visionary- indeed, revolutionary. Perhaps it sprang
from the tragedy in Rwanda; it should serve as a
warning to the despots ofthe world.

I know that the task of the Security Council is a
daunting one, and I know that the task ofthe rest of the
membership is equally difficult in terms of determining
how to address some of the issues I have raised. But
we must never lose sight of our obligation to, as the
Charter charges us, maintain international peace and
security. Yes, we need greater emphasis on
development, but we cannot address development
without peace and security. The financial and
peacekeeping reforms now being discussed will go a
long way towards ensuring that we meet our
commitment - and, quite frankly, that my Government
meets its commitment.

I conclude by saying that we badly need the
United Nations. It would be presumptuous of me to
suggest that the United Nations needs us, but I would
suggest that, at a minimum, it is probably useful to
have us. Quite frankly, my ability and the ability of
Ambassador Holbrooke and his successor to ensure
that the United States meets its obligations will require
that there be changes along the lines of the Helms-
Biden amendment. Again, ifI had been the one able to
dictate the outcome in the United States Congress, no
conditionality would have been attached, but there still
would have been a call for the same reforms that are in
that legislation.

I thank the Council for its indulgence, and I thank
the Council for the opportunity and the honour of
speaking before this body.

