The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document 8/2006/989, which contains the
text of a letter dated 18 December 2006 from the
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security, and
that any acts of terrorism are criminal and
unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation,
wherever, whenever and by whomsoever
committed.

"The Security Council reiterates its
determination to combat all forms of terrorism, in
accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
importance of resolution 1373 (2001) as well as
its other resolutions concerning threats to
international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts, and calls on States to implement
their obligations under those resolutions as a
matter of priority.

"The Security Council reiterates its call on
States to become parties to all relevant
international conventions and protocols relating
to terrorism, and to make full use of the sources
of assistance and guidance which are available.
"The Security Council further reaffirms the
need to combat by all means, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, threats to
international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts.

"The Security Council reminds States that
they must ensure that any measures taken to
combat terrorism comply with all their
obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of cross-United Nations cooperation
on counter-terrorism issues, and confirms that it
stands ready to play its part in the implementation
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288).

"The Security Council calls upon the
relevant United Nations departments,
programmes and specialized agencies, as
appropriate, to consider, within their existing
mandates, how to pursue counter-terrorism
objectives.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Counter-Terrorism Committee's renewed focus
on enhancing implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) through a proactive fulfilment of its
mandate to promote and monitor States'
implementation.

"The Security Council recalls its resolution
1624 (2005) and encourages the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to continue its work on
implementation of this resolution.

"The Security Council calls on the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to report on the status of
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). In
particular, the Security Council encourages the
Counter-Terrorism Committee to report to the
Council on any outstanding issues, when
necessary and on a regular basis, in order to
receive strategic guidance from the Council.

"The Security Council recalls its resolution
1535 (2004) by which it decided to establish the
Counter- Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) as a special political mission
under the policy guidance of the Committee, to
enhance the Committee's ability to monitor
06-67208
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and
effectively continue the capacity-building work in
which it was engaged. The Security Council
stresses that the mandate of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee's Executive Directorate
flows from that of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee.

"The Security Council further recalls its
presidential statement S/PRST/2005/64, which
included the conclusions of the Council's
comprehensive review of CTED in 2005, and
decided to carry out another comprehensive
review of CTED by 31 December 2006, prepared
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee. During
today's consultations, the Security Council
endorsed the report prepared by the Committee
and forwarded to the Council in document
S/2006/989 and agreed with its recommendations
and conclusions.

"The Security Council welcomes the letter
from the Secretary-General dated 15 December
2006 with regard to CTED's reporting lines. The
Council has considered this matter and endorses
the Counter-Terrorism Committee's
recommendation with regard to CTED's reporting
lines so that CTED would henceforth present its
draft work programmes and its semi-annual
reports directly to the Committee.
the

"The Security Council notes with
appreciation the enhanced cooperation among its
three Committees - 1267, CTC and 1540 - that
deal with counter-terrorism and their expert
teams. It encourages the three Committees to
ensure that, in their dialogue with States, they
present a consolidated message from the Council
on its efforts to fight terrorism. Also, it
encourages the three Committees and their expert
teams to avoid duplication, including in their
requests for information from Member States
about their implementation. In this regard, it
encourages the three Committees and their expert
teams to continue to strengthen the sharing of
information among themselves, specifically
information reported by States regarding
implementation. The Council will continue to
evaluate how its counter-terrorism efforts can be
organized most efficiently."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/56.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.10p.m.
