Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Minister Carlos Holmes
Trujillo Garcia for being here. It is an honour to have
him in the Security Council once again.

We also thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
for his informative briefing on the report of Secretary-
General (S/2019/780).

We reiterate the interest and support of the
Dominican Republic in and for the peace process in
Colombia and welcome the determination and sacrifice
of the Colombian people in the process. Since the
signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, Colombia has
set the example for peace. Two years after the signing
of that historic agreement, Colombians have left behind
more than half a century of violence, held peaceful
and inclusive elections and developed transitional
justice institutions.

We welcome the efforts of President Duque
Marquez and his Government to advance the process
of reintegrating former combatants who have laid down
their weapons. We acknowledge the progress made
and challenges seen during the reporting period, in
particular in implementing the "peace with legality"
strategy and in launching the development programmes
with a territorial focus, which are aimed at reintegrating
former combatants and guaranteeing their security.
It is vital that projects aimed at reintegrating former
combatants be sustainable. We encourage former
combatants to remain involved in the peace process. At
the same time, we call on the National Reintegration
Council to strengthen its initiatives and projects, as this
is a crucial time to extend professional training to those
who wish to lay down their weapons.

Social reintegration is a pillar of the peace process.
We therefore request that attention be paid to the more
than 8,000 former combatants who reside outside
of the territorial areas for training and reintegration,
with special focus on those of indigenous and Afro-
Colombian origin and those with disabilities.
We commend the Government of Colombia
for launching the Zonas Futuro strategy, which are
Strategic Zones of Comprehensive Intervention, led by
civilians, in partnership with the private sector and local
communities supported by international cooperation,
monitored by the Verification Mission.

The Dominican Republic firmly condemns the
decision taken by some former combatants to return
to arms, which is a blatant violation of the 2016 peace
agreement. We reiterate that violence cannot be a
legitimate method of defending political positions
of any kind. We also condemn incidents, some fatal,
that occurred in connection with the upcoming local
elections and encourage the Government to take
additional security measures in preparation for those
elections. It is essential to ensure that the elections are
not disrupted.

In spite of the circumstances, young Colombians
remain committed to peace. We acknowledge the
vital role played by Colombian youth in implementing
the agreement and breaking the cycle of violence in
the country. We therefore commend the Verification
Mission and the Colombian Government for their
efforts to include young people and youth organizations
in the decision-making process and in implementing
the Agreement.

Similarly, we believe that it is important that we
be regularly informed about the implementation of the
agreement at the local level so as to ensure that women,
including those of African descent, of indigenous
origin and those who live in rural areas, are included in
the transitional justice and reconstruction mechanisms.

Lastly, we call on the international community
to support Colombia's peacebuilding efforts, while
maintaining a focus on the future.

