Mr. Khan (Indonesia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's important debate. My delegation
hopes that today's meeting will be fruitful, as the
subject continues to deserve our serious attention and
commitment. We wish to offer thanks to the Secretary-
General and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their respective briefings.

Indonesia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Indonesia has always been a strong supporter of the
notion of preventing conflict. In our region, South-East
Asia, Indonesia, together with other States members of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
contributes to international peace and security by
addressing any potential conflict in a timely fashion in
accordance with ASEAN's main principles. We wish
to expand our positive contribution and be part of the
solution to global security challenges. In that context
Indonesia hosted the ASEAN-United Nations Workshop
on Lessons Learned and Best Practices in Conflict
Prevention and Preventive Diplomacy in Djakarta
in April 2013. The workshop enabled frank, candid
discussion among actors. They examined various cases
of conflict prevention and preventive diplomacy and
identified various tangiblejoint activities in that regard.

We are fully aware that in the current globalized
world potential sources of conflict are multilevel and
multifaceted. They are therefore dramatically changing
the nature of conflict as you, Mr. President, rightly
point out in the concept note (S/2014/572, annex).
Those sources of conflict of course introduce various
key political capacity resources and operational issues
that need to be addressed by the United Nations
system, in particular the Council in consultation with
all Member States. Considering the range and strategic
nature of conflict factors and the solution mechanisms,
it is vital that open dialogues like today's continue.
Maximum common understanding and ownership
and the utilization of different conflict-solving tools
should be sought. We are of the view that the Security
Council can be more proactive in forestalling conflicts,
in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Council's related resolutions.
We therefore welcome the adoption of the resolution
2171 (2014) on this issue. Indonesia agrees with the
emphasis by the Council that conflict prevention is the
primary responsibility of States, and actions undertaken
within the framework of conflict prevention by the
United Nations should support and complement the
conflict-prevention roles of national Governments, as
appropriate.

We also agree that peacebuilding must be an
important component of a comprehensive prevention
strategy, along with tackling the root causes of conflict.
Indonesia supports such a holistic approach, as well
as a greater role by the Peacebuilding Commission to
further strengthen the United Nations system's work
to prevent conflicts and help forestall their relapse,
in accordance with the agreed mandates. It is indeed
necessary for the Council to make further use of the
advisory, advocacy and resource-mobilization roles of
the Commission.

All peaceful conflict-prevention methods, such as
mediation, negotiation and conciliation, require trust
and confidence.My delegation therefore reiterates
that all United Nations conflict-prevention measures
should involve consultations to reach consensus among
Member States and related parties. Transparency on
these approaches should be fully upheld.

While the role of the Security Council and its
representatives in addressing areas of potential or
existing conflict is appreciated, we would like to stress
that the early engagement of the Secretariat in the
prevention of the potential conflicts must not interfere
in the internal affairs of States.

Finally, Indonesia wishes to reiterate the importance
of financing cooperation and of capacity-building
support to regional and subregional organizations in
support of efforts to peacefully settle local disputes
through regional arrangements.

