Mr. Mayoral (spoke in Spanish): This is my third
briefing in 2006. Paragraph 16 of resolution 1617
(2005) specifies that every 120 days I am to report to
the Security Council. I would like to say that by adding
to the list of persons and entities associated with
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and monitoring, with the
support of the Monitoring Team, the implementation by
States of the established sanctions measures, the
Committee continues to play a very important role in
the fight against international terrorism.

Since my last briefing, six individuals and one
entity have been added to the list, and one individual
has been removed. In its efforts to improve the quality
of the list, the Committee has also approved a number
of technical changes. That has been one of the
objectives of my delegation. The Committee has also
acknowledged receipt of five notifications presented in
accordance with resolution 1452 (2002) for the release
of frozen assets of the persons on this list.

As regards the dialogue with States, there was a
briefing for Member States on 26 July at the United
Nations, attended by 50 representatives, at which the
new developments in the work of the Committee were
presented. Committee members feel that such briefings
can be mutually beneficial both to members and to
those who attend by allowing the direct exchange of
views and clarifications regarding relevant sanctions-
implementation issues.

With respect to visits to States, in October or
November I intend to visit several countries that the
Committee considers important for an exchange of
06-54204
ideas. My last trip, to the Middle East, was very
instructive and served to put forth new ideas regarding
the implementation of sanctions in States that have
accumulated valuable knowledge and experience in the
fight against terrorism.

The Committee has also highly benefited from
information from the experts of the Monitoring Team
as a result of their trips to previously selected States
and international organizations. The Monitoring Team
organized two meetings of the heads and deputy heads
of intelligence and security services to study the
terrorist threat from Al-Qaida and related groups, as
well as issues related to the implementation of the
measures under resolution 1267 (1999). Officials from
the North African States and Pakistan participated in
one meeting, while officials from States in the Western
Sahara region participated in the other. In both
meetings we saw the value of engaging officials at the
highest level who have direct responsibility for
countering terrorism with the work of the Committee.

Regarding further improvements to the sanctions
regime, the consideration of the Monitoring Team's
fourth and fifth reports mandated by the Council
provides the Committee an opportunity to assess and
reflect upon how to further improve the sanctions
regime. The Committee commended the Monitoring
Team for its fourth report and on 10 August 2006
submitted its position on the report to the Security
Council in document S/2006/635. The Monitoring
Team submitted its fifth report on 31 July 2006. That
report is now being considered by the Committee. The
Committee also requested the Monitoring Team to
advance the submission of its sixth report to
7November, given that the Monitoring Team's
mandate will expire at the end of 2006.

Members of the Council may be aware that the
Committee's website has been expanded. It now
contains general information about the work of the
Committee, a checklist and a standard form for
submitting information for inclusion on the list. I trust
that States will fully utilize the practical guidance
provided on the Web in their interaction with the
Committee.

On 25 July the Committee approved further
improvements to the Consolidated List, including the
assignment of permanent reference numbers and the
entries transcription of their original alphabets. I ask
Member States to take advantage of those
06-54204

improvements for the implementation of sanctions
measures when submitting names for possible
inclusion in the List.

I now wish to turn to the issue of cooperation
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) in the implementation of
sanctions. Through the activities of the Monitoring
Team, the Committee has continued to enhance and
coordinate its cooperation with the CTC and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) by, among other things, harmonizing the
relevant work of experts, such as trips to selected
States. In that regard, earlier this month, Monitoring
Team experts and experts from the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED) undertook another joint
visit to a State. We are currently considering the
possibility of carrying out additional joint visits to
other States before the end of the year.

The Monitoring Team has continued to work
closely with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and with experts from the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), in order to identify ways to assist the 31 States
that have not reported or have fallen behind in their
reporting obligations to all three Committees under
relevant Security Council resolutions. The three expert
groups recently prepared a joint paper by the three
Committees proposing a common strategy to deal with
this issue. That proposal is now under consideration.

With regard to cooperation with Interpol and
other international organizations, with the support of
the Monitoring Team, the Committed has continued to
prepare Interpol-Security Council special notices,
which are issued for individuals on the Committee's
List. The Committee recently agreed to Interpol's
proposal to publish posters of persons wanted by
Interpol who are subject to United Nations sanctions.

Constructive cooperation between the Committee
and Interpol contributed to the Council's adoption, on
8 August, of resolution 1699 (2006). As members will
recall, through that resolution the Security Council
called on the Secretary-General to take the necessary
steps to increase cooperation between the United
Nations and Interpol in order to provide the sanctions
committees established by the Security Council with
better tools to fulfil their mandates more effectively, as
3
has been the case with the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999).

The Committee has continued to expand its links
with international and regional groupings such as the
European Union, the Organization of American States,
the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
International Civil Aviation Organization, the
International Air Transport Association and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

With regard to the future work of the Committee
and the challenges confronting it, in the coming
months the Committee will focus on the following
matters. First, the Committee will concentrate on
concluding the revision of its guidelines. At its
meetings, the Committee has worked intensely to
revise its guidelines. At the end of July, we were very
close to reaching a consensus agreement on the
proposed listing procedures. That would have allowed
the Committee to fully focus on intricate de-listing
procedures. The Committee is well aware of the
numerous calls urging it adopt fair and clear listing and
de-listing procedures for the Consolidated List. Once
adopted, such measures would facilitate the
implementation of sanctions by States. I urge all
members of the Committee to make additional efforts
to achieve that objective as soon as possible by
endeavouring to reach a consensus agreement and
making the concessions necessary to reach a
compromise.

With regard to further improving the quality of
the List, the accuracy of the List continues to be crucial
to ensuring the success of established sanctions. I once
again encourage States to submit the names of
individuals and entities that they believe should be
included on the List due to their association with
Al-Qaida or the Taliban, as well as all additional or
updated information regarding names already on the
List.

With regard to the submission of the written
assessment of actions taken by States to implement the
mandatory measures pursuant to paragraph 17 of
resolution 1617 (2005), although the Committee has
postponed the submission of that document - which
was due on 31 July - the Committee recognizes that
this assessment could prove to be very important to the
Council's consideration of a new resolution when the
time comes at the end of 2006 to review current
sanctions measures with a view to their possible
strengthening. The Committee will therefore strive to
complete that task as soon as possible.

With regard to other very complex and urgent
issues, the Committee will have to address such issues
as Al-Qaida's use of the Internet and how best to assist
States to implement sanctions in the event that the
identity of an individual is uncertain due to a lack of
sufficient identifying information on the List.

As members are aware, the work of Committee
Chairman is not easy. However, I have enjoyed the
support of all its members, which has made my work
easier. With that support, and with the assistance of the
Monitoring Team, I intend to continue to make
progress on all outstanding issues before the
Committee. Nevertheless, the success or failure of the
sanctions regime rests primarily with States and their
effective implementation of sanctions. We need as
much information as possible from States in order to
know where sanctions are and are not working
effectively. More important, we need that information
to identify the areas where further improvements to
sanctions and their implementation are necessary. That
is why I again appeal to countries to submit their
checklists if they have not already done so. To date, we
hare received only 54 lists. I also want to encourage
States to avail themselves of the opportunity provided
by resolution 1617 (2005) to participate in Committee
meetings in order to discuss relevant sanctions issues
more in depth.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
previous appeals to the Council in the light of the
recently adopted United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, in which we have all unequivocally
reaffirmed our firm determination to prevent and
combat terrorism.

