Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the People's Republic of China's accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July. I would like to say how much we in Africa,
especially we in Mali, appreciate your cooperation
with our respective countries. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security for their very
thought-provoking and considerate briefings on this
issue this morning.

The delegation of Mali aligns itself fully with
the statement previously delivered by the delegation
of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

The African continent still harbours an array of
challenges - first and foremost among them the quest
for peace and security. In the context of our debate this
afternoon, I would like to share with members of the
Council some suggested courses of action in the area
of enhancing African capacity in the field of peace
and security.

First, the old adage that prevention is better than
cure still holds true. That is why the first point I wish
to make is a plea for the strengthening and enhancing
of African capacity in terms of conflict prevention.
On that point, as I am sure those present will recall,
the African Union and subregional organizations, such
as Economic Community of West African States and
many more such groupings on the African continent,
have set up early-warning mechanisms that serve the
purposes of handmaiden of preventive diplomacy.

Crisis prevention also necessitates staying the
course for the long haul to mitigate and eventually
eradicate the factors and root causes of tension and
conflict, namely, poverty, poor governance, injustice,
human rights violations and marginalization. It would
be remiss ofme not to mention at thisjuncture the shared
action we must pursue to counter the illicit economy
that fuels conflict in Africa, in particular trafficking
of all types, including trafficking in weapons, drugs,
currency, black market goods and human beings.

Secondly, it is important to note that regional and
subregional cooperation wards off common threats,
such as terrorism, violent extremism and transnational
organized crime. African countries have also made
great progress in that regard. The most recent example
of such progress is the establishment of the Joint Force
Force of the Group of Five States for the Sahel (G-5),
which grew out of the shared determination of the
Heads of State of Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania, the
Niger and Chad to pool their efforts and their resources

so as to effectively and efficiently counter terrorism
and other forms of organized crime.

I should also like to draw attention to the fact that,
alongside its focus on security, the G-5 Sahel, first
and foremost, is a forum for addressing development,
governance and the resilience of its people. The setting
up of the Joint Force embodies the determination of the
Heads of State of the region, supported by the African
Union, to foster the requisite conditions for sustainable
development and peace in the region; for we are firmly
convinced that lasting peace cannot be achieved in the
absence of development and investment. In that regard,
I should like to express my gratitude for the strategic
partnerships and alliances that have been gradually
established by well-disposed friendly countries and
international partner organizations to backstop the G-5
Sahel initiative and to support the broader region.

Moreover, we are all very well aware that there
is no purely military solution to extremist ideologies.
That is why I think it is crucial that Africa equip itself
with a peaceful counter-radicalization strategy that is
fit-for-purpose, and that it do so in and through Africa's
own mechanisms, in particular by heeding the advice
of the Panel of the Wise, traditional or religious leaders
and civil society, including women and the youth. Wwe
also know that education has a core role to play in terms
of providing a spirit of civic belonging and fostering
peaceful coexistence in our respective countries.

Thirdly, it is necessary to underscore the importance
of cooperation between the United Nations and African
regional organizations, especially the African Union,
with a view to further developing African conflict
resolution management and prevention capacities, as
well as boosting African ownership of post-conflict
peacebuilding. I commend the initiatives and measures
currently under way between the Secretary-General and
the African Union Commission. That brings forth the
need to highlight the pressing need to work to fine-tune
consistency and coordination that are a sine qua non
for the various joint actions inked with our bilateral
and multilateral partners who participate in conflict
management and resolution in Africa.

I would like to conclude with an appeal for concrete
and meaningful action to help Africa to eradicate,
completely and sustainably, the wellsprings of tension
and enable it to turn its attention to development.

