Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I,
too, warmly welcome the presence at this table of
Senator Biden as the United States representative. It is
extremely important for the Security Council and for
the United Nations that he is here and that he has used
the occasion to address us not just on the subject on the
agenda, but also on the subject that will be uppermost
in our minds between now and 22 December. I very
much appreciate his approach to those particular
difficulties. I share in their entirety the remarks of my
French partner on the subject. And I believe that if the
result of our negotiations on the scale revisions can
encapsulate the fundamental intentions of the United
States Congress and the fundamental intentions of the
rest of the United Nations membership - and I believe
they can - then we shall have achieved a remarkable
step forward both for the United Nations and for the
United States.

Since the Senator is here, I also want to pay
tribute to the United States role on Bosnia over the past
decade and his personal role in that. This subject,
above all, has illustrated how much can go wrong when
the United States is playing separately from the
international community and how much can go right
when we are all playing together.

The United Kingdom welcomes very much the
Secretary-General's report on the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and
the Special Representative's briefing this morning. I
pay a particular tribute to Mr. Klein and his team for
what they are continuing to achieve in Bosnia. His
leadership is extremely important to the objectives of
the United Nations there.

I support and endorse the European Union
statement just made by the French presidency, but I
would like to make a couple of points in addition to
reflect what I think, as Mr. Klein has said, is relative
progress, but still progress that has flaws on the ground
that have to be addressed.

My first point concerns the local police system.
We welcome the contribution that UNMIBH has made
so far in reforming the police system, to which the
Special Representative has rightly devoted a great deal
of attention, but we share the Secretary-General's
concern about the slow pace of police reform in areas
of the eastern Republika Srpska and in canton 10. We
welcome the High Representative's recent decision to
dismiss the canton 10 Minister of the Interior for
repeated obstruction of reform.

We also applaud UNMIBH's efforts to highlight
the scale of illegal immigration, but the results are still
very disturbing. Illegal immigration and the associated
corruption and organized crime have ramifications for
all of Bosnia's European neighbours, including the
United Kingdom. The ongoing challenge for Bosnia
and Herzegovina is to build credible State-level
institutions in order to combat the problems
successfully. An effective State Border Service is a key
part ofthe solution, and should remain a priority.

The rise of nationalist parties in the elections
shows that there is no ground for complacency, as does
the statistic that 62 per cent of Bosnia's youth wish to
leave the country. The incoming authorities at entity
and State level have a very serious challenge to meet in
proving to the young people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina that they do indeed have a future in the
country of their birth.

S/PVAZAS

 

