Mr. Niang (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you personally, as
well as the Government of Equatorial Guinea, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and to welcome the organization of this
high-level debate on transnational organized crime at
sea as a threat to international peace and security. This
is an issue of crucial importance for African countries
in particular.

Allow me also to thank the briefers for their
informative statements, namely, Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, and Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga,
Executive Secretary ofthe Gulf of Guinea Commission.

Crime at sea was once linked to control over
the oceans and naval power games, but today it is a
multi-faceted scourge involving terrorism, illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing, illegal migration,
piracy, armed robbery against ships, arms trafficking,
human trafficking, smuggling, environmental and
ecological threats and many other ills. Consequently,
transnational organized crime at sea is one of the
most serious threats to international security and
global economic stability. This shows the relevance of
today's debate, which challenges us to analyse the root
causes, the means of prevention and the mechanisms to
effectively combat this scourge.

Our common commitment to the security of
maritime spaces must be commensurate with the
crucial challenges that the sea represents in achieving
peace and sustainable economic development, in
particular for developing countries. That is why
we need to demonstrate constant political will and
tireless determination.
For its part, in accordance with its international
commitments and aware of its maritime vocation,
Senegal has set up a framework for coordinating State
action at sea to effectively combat maritime crime
in all its forms and manifestations. The Government
of Senegal has taken an inclusive and participatory
approach and put in place an institutional coordination
architecture based on a national maritime security
system and a national maritime emergency response
plan. Those instruments make it possible to plan,
organize and coordinate State action to better prevent
and stop of criminal activities at sea, in accordance
with the provisions of international maritime
conventions. The relevance of such a mechanism means
that it is cited as a reference within the international
maritime community.

In addition to those institutional measures, our
country has adopted a relevant legal framework
through various instruments, such as the criminal
code, the criminal procedure code, the Code of Conduct
for the Merchant Navy and the Code of Conduct
for Responsible Fisheries, all of which are aimed at
effectively punishing various criminal acts at sea.

Senegal has also significantly strengthened its
coastal surveillance capacity by equipping its naval
forces with new vessels and aircraft to better secure
waters under its national jurisdiction and to fight, in
particular, against illegal fishing.

Despite all those efforts, we must recognize that
countering maritime crime through national legislation
is not an easy task. Although we have at our disposal
several complex legal instruments, controlling this
phenomenon is not easy, including for the agents
responsible for combating these offences. The situation
also raises the delicate question of the integration into
national legislation of the legal instruments adopted by
the United Nations in order to effectively prevent and stop
illicit acts committed in both international and national
waters. We therefore strongly call for the strengthening
of technical cooperation on the ground to build the
capacity of Member States to effectively combat crime
at sea in all its forms and manifestations. At the same
time, we must promote direct communication between
administrations and harmonize texts and laws to ensure
a consistent legal framework.

The challenges in the fight against organized
crime at sea are enormous. No State alone can
address them effectively. A correct understanding of
the issues requires more action by the international
community to develop and strengthen consultation
frameworks in order to better coordinate action and,
above all, anticipate the problems related to these
phenomena. We must therefore welcome the continued
mobilization of States and subregional organizations,
in particular in Africa, which have made substantial
progress in institution-building and the adoption of
legal frameworks to ensure maritime security and
safety architecture.

For example, in response to the increasingly
complex crime in the Gulf of Guinea, the Summit of
Heads of State and Government on Maritime Safety and
Security in the Gulf of Guinea was held in Yaounde in
2013, which represented a manifestation of the collective
commitment of the States in the region. In View of the
progress made since then, with the operationalization,
in 2016, of the Interregional Coordination Centre for
Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea,
which adopted a four-year programme for 2017-2021,
we should welcome the efforts made in this area.

We must also welcome the adoption, on 15 October
2016 in Lome at the Extraordinary Summit of the
African Union, of the African Charter on Maritime
Security and Safety and Development in Africa, the
Lome Charter, which is in line with the 2050 Africa
Integrated Maritime Strategy for the seas and oceans,
which aims to make maritime space one of the main
drivers of Africa's economic and social development.

Let us never forget that the main causes of maritime
insecurity are to be found on land, namely, the vast
networks of illicit activities that are progressively
being built on a foundation of poor governance,
extreme poverty and socio-political violence. We
must vigorously combat criminal and terrorist groups,
without forgetting to address the deep-rooted causes
that give rise to their activities. In that regard, among
other things, it is essential to strengthen partnerships
to make rational use of fisheries resources and to
have better governance and sharing of transnational
marine resources.

