Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this debate. We thank
as well the Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste for being
with us here today and for his very helpful briefing,
and Ms. Ameerah Haq for her briefing and for all the
work that she and all her colleagues in the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
have been doing and continue to do to help Timor-
Leste.

The year 2012 will be pivotal for Timor-Leste
and its people, who will again be asked to elect a
parliament and a president. As Timor-Leste works
towards these important milestones, we are pleased to
note the continued stability in the security situation, as
well as the country's encouraging economic growth. It
is especially pleasing to note that no discernable
increase in crime or disorder has resulted from the
handover of full policing responsibility to the Timorese
national police.
I would like to focus on three topics today. First
is the nature of the United Nations presence once
UNMIT has departed. Second is the role that the
United Nations will be expected to play in contributing
to the stability of Timor-Leste post-UNMIT. Finally,
there is the withdrawal of UNMIT personnel.
We welcome the progress made in post-UNMIT
transition planning, as detailed in the recently released
joint transition plan. We comment the cooperation of
UNMIT and the Government of Timor-Leste in
producing a detailed document of this nature.
Continuing that cooperation, the United Nations, with
the Government of Timor-Leste, also needs to present a
clear vision of the role that the post-UNMIT United
Nations presence will play in Timor-Leste. That vision
should focus on identifying priority areas of work and
setting benchmarks to measure success, avoiding the
United Nations commitment becoming open-ended.

In this regard we would welcome a United
Nations strategic assessment of the options contained
in the joint transition plan, drawing on input from the
Department of Political Affairs and the United Nations
Development Programme to help ensure the right
model with the right focus.

As UNMIT prepares to depart next year, it is
crucial that the Mission's withdrawal is conducted
carefully and efficiently. A clearer timetable for the
post-election withdrawal of UNMIT personnel needs to
be articulated, along with robust contingency planning
in the event of any breakdown in security or stability.

We hope the Government of Timor-Leste, for its
part, and all Timorese political actors will continue to
refrain from any inflammatory rhetoric as they strive
for credible and peaceful elections in 2012. We also
expect the Government to continue to act to prevent to
impunity and to bring to justice those responsible for
war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. The
Government will need to ensure adequate budgetary
provision for domestic policing to enable the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste to further establish itself as
the primary provider of security in Timor-Leste.

Next year will present a variety of challenges for
Timor-Leste and for the United Nations personnel who
continue to serve there. We are grateful for all that has
been achieved to date and ask the United Nations to
maintain its efforts and to move towards successful
completion and winding up of UNMIT and the
establishment of a follow-on United Nations presence.
While we hope that peace and stability will prevail in
coming years, we should also take this opportunity to
reassure the Government of Timor-Leste that the
withdrawal of UNMIT will not mean an end of the
Security Council's interest in Timor-Leste.

