The Secretary-General: Today's Security
Council meeting reflects the Council's determination to
confront reality rather than escape from it; to recognize
an evil rather than excuse it. The Council's decision a
year ago to establish the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) was a swift and concrete reaction to the terrorist
attacks of 11 September. It showed that the Council
was willing to act, as well as speak, in defence of every
country and every citizen threatened by international
terrorism.

Terrorism is a global threat with global effects. Its
methods are murder and mayhem, but its consequences
affect every aspect of the United Nations agenda -
from development to peace, to human rights and the
rule of law. No part of our mission is safe from the
effects of terrorism, and no part of the world is immune
from this scourge. By its very nature, terrorism is an
assault on the fundamental principles of law, order,
human rights and the peaceful settlement of disputes
upon which the United Nations is established.
Countering terrorism, therefore, is in the interest not
only of States and intergovernmental institutions, but
also of local, national and global civil society. This
Organization therefore has a clear obligation to deal
with this global threat. But it is also well placed to do
so. The United Nations has an indispensable role to
play in providing the legal and organizational
framework within which the international campaign
against terrorism can unfold.

Let me here pay tribute to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Chairman, Sir Jeremy Greenstock,
for its work in ensuring the implementation by all
Member States of an effective counter-terrorism
strategy. Through its work, the CTC has become an
important agent for international consensus on counter-
terrorism, calling for the effective implementation of
the 12 international anti-terrorism conventions.
Moreover, the CTC has helped to strengthen global
capacity in this field through a coordinated programme
of needs-assessment and technical assistance. Let me
also say that I very much welcome the Chairman's
intention to consult with the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Sergio Vieira de Mello.

Last autumn, to identify the long-term
implications and broad policy dimensions of terrorism
for the United Nations, I set up a Policy Working
Group on the United Nations and Terrorism. It
combined the expertise of key agencies, programmes
and departments within the Organization with that of
independent specialists. On 28 June this year, the
Group submitted a report with recommendations on
steps that the United Nations can take. The report,
which I made public on 10 September, contains
proposals for a strategic definition of priorities to
orient the Organization's work in this complex field. I
endorse the three-pronged strategy suggested by the
report.

When approaching issues related to terrorism, the
United Nations will set itself three goals: dissuasion,
denial and cooperation.

First, we must dissuade the would-be perpetrators
of terror by setting effective norms and implementing
relevant legal instruments, by mounting an active
public information campaign and by rallying an
international consensus behind the fight against
terrorism. To achieve effective dissuasion, it is
essential to remember that the fight against terrorism is
above all a fight to preserve fundamental rights and
sustain the rule of law. By their very nature, terrorist
acts are grave violations of human rights. Therefore, to
pursue security at the expense of human rights is short-
sighted, self-contradictory and, in the long run, self-
defeating. In places where human rights and
democratic values are lacking, disaffected groups are
more likely to opt for a path of violence or to
sympathize with those who do.

Secondly, we must deny would-be terrorists the
opportunity to commit their dreadful acts. We can do
this by supporting the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to monitor compliance with Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001); by greater efforts to
achieve disarmament, especially through strengthening
global norms against the use or proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction; and by giving technical
support to States seeking to curb the flow of arms,
funds and technology to terrorist cells.

To be effective and sustainable, a strategy of
denial must be grounded in both international and
domestic law. It is not good enough to sign the key
international instruments. We must implement them as
well.

Given the levels of inhumanity to which modern-
day terrorists have descended, efforts to curb the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction have
assumed new urgency.

Other legal instruments - such as those that deal
with transnational crime, narcotics and money-
laundering - are essential to denying sources of
finance for terrorist networks. States must ensure that
these instruments are adopted and effectively applied.
Moreover, the struggle against terrorism demands
closer analysis of its links with crime, narcotics and the
illicit trade in weapons.

There may, in addition, be a need for the General
Assembly to consider making more resources available
to ensure that the work of the CTC is effective and
sustainable over the long-term. As I have mentioned in
the past, the CTC's unprecedented effort to review
national reports on the implementation of international
legal instruments relating to terrorism has stretched,
almost to breaking point, the Secretariat's resources for
processing documentation.

Thirdly, we must sustain cooperation in the
struggle against terrorism, on as broad a basis as
possible, while encouraging subregional, regional and
global organizations to join forces in a common
campaign. In overcoming as elusive a transnational
threat as terrorism, cooperation is essential.
Fortunately, there has been some progress. The United
Nations is committed to working with international
partners in the fight against terrorism and to achieving
unity of purpose and action. Just as terrorism must
never be excused, so genuine grievances must never be
ignored simply because terrorism is committed in their
name. It does not take away from the justice of a cause
that a few wicked men or women murder in its name. It
only makes it more urgent that the cause is addressed,
the grievances heard and the wrong put right.

As the United Nations unites to defeat terrorism
in the months and years ahead, we must act with equal
determination to solve the political disputes and
longstanding conflicts which generate support for
terrorism.

To do so is not to reward terrorism or its
perpetrators, it is to deny them the opportunity to find
refuge in any cause, any country. Only then can we
truly say that the war on terrorism has been won.

