The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Canada,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan, New
Zealand, the Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan and
Turkey in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan, His Excellency Mr. Rangin Dadfar
Spanta.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Pakistan, His Excellency Mr. Shah Mehmood Qureshi.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Spantd
(Afghanistan) and Mr. Qureshi (Pakistan) took
seats at the Council table; the representatives of
the other aforementioned countries took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan.

It is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/434, which contains the special
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1806 (2008) on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, and Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator.

I give the floor to Mr. Eide,


