Mr. O'Brien: Greatly to my regret, my inaugural
statement to the Security Council on the humanitarian
situation in Syria continues where my predecessor left
off, chronicling yet another month of grim statistics to
convey the horrors of a brutal conflict and the immense
suffering of beleaguered civilians, particularly women,
children, the elderly and those living with disabilities.

What began in Syria as unrest in March 2011 has
been transformed into a war characterized by a complete
failure to protect civilians, generating gargantuan levels
of suffering for most civilians. Since the adoption of
resolution 2139 (2014), almost 18 months ago, each
of the Secretary-General's reports have detailed the
widespread violations of international humanitarian
law and the inability or unwillingness of all parties
to uphold their basic minimum legal obligations. The
latest report (S/2015/56l) is no different and comes,
depressingly, as no surprise, highlighting how much
worse the situation has become for so many civilians
across Syria. There are 12.2 million Syrians in need of
humanitarian assistance today. It is estimated that some
220,000 people have been killed in Syria since the start
of the conflict.

Violence has continued to escalate across the
country in recent weeks, causing death and destruction
and complicating and severely impeding brave aid
efforts. Indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks by
all parties to the conflict, including through the use of
barrel bombs and other explosive weapons in populated
areas, remain by far the primary cause of civilian deaths
and injuries. Not even residential neighbourhoods or
places of community life - public markets, schools,
hospitals and places of religious worship - are immune
to attack. In the face of such violent, indiscriminate
onslaughts, it is simply not difficult for any of us to feel
what it must be like for the Syrian people, community
by community. As the Council can imagine, it is the
worst of all choices - either flee or be killed.

In early June, 60 civilians were killed and 120
injured when missiles were fired on the central market
of Janudiyah, west of Idlib city. Later that month, nine
civilians, including six from one family, were killed
when mortar rounds from a non-State armed group hit
the heart of a shopping area in the city of Damascus.
In late June, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive
device near a mosque in Al-Tal, in rural Damascus,
killed 14 civilians just after evening prayers had
concluded. Attacks on medical facilities continued,
with 14 recorded in June, 12 of them from air strikes.
Such attacks further degrade the capacity to provide
medical care when and where it is most needed, and
blatantly ignore the special protection afforded to
medical facilities and personnel under international
humanitarian law. Over the past several weeks, the
Government of Syria and allied forces have pressed
their attack on Zabadani in rural Damascus, leading
to an unprecedented level of destruction and deaths
among civilians. At the same time, non-State armed
groups have threatened to overrun two Government-
held villages near Idlib city, Kefraya and Foah. I remain
extremely concerned about the 15,000 civilians caught
in the middle of the fighting in those areas. Regarding
the deaths Ijust mentioned, I do not have the precise
number, and since it has not been verified and I have
focused today's statement totally on incontrovertible
facts, I am therefore not able to give that number.

Intense fighting across the country has also caused
a surge in displacement. Considerably more than
100,000 people fled the southern areas of Hasakah city
following the advances of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) last month. In Raqqa governorate,
more than 70,000 had to flee as fighting escalated
between ISIL and non-State armed groups. In southern
Syria, more than 40,000 fled Dar'a city following an
offensive launched on it by non-State armed groups.
Altogether, more than 1 million people have been
displaced from their homes in 2015 so far, many for
the second or third time, and those in addition to the
7.6 million who were already internally displaced as of
the end of 2014.

Another tragic milestone was recorded when the
number of registered refugees reached 4 million in
early July, the largest refugee population from a single
conflict worldwide in more than a quarter of a century.
I commend the neighbouring countries which shoulder
this extraordinary burden with remarkable generosity
and hospitality, despite the destabilization it brings.
The members of the international community must do
more to support these refugee-hosting countries, as
well as themselves receiving a higher share of those
seeking safety.

The parties to the conflict continue deliberately
to cut essential services to civilians. In July, non-State
armed groups cut the water supply in Aleppo city,
affecting some 1.7 million people. Such acts, which
are clear violations of international humanitarian law,
serve only to worsen humanitarian conditions. Overall,
water availability has been reduced by half around the
country since the start ofthe conflict. Many people have
only sporadic access for a few hours per day. The lack
of access to clean water has resulted in a significant
increase in water-borne diseases during the hot summer
months, with thousands of cases of acute diarrhoea,
hepatitis A and typhoid reported, as families can drink
only unsafe water.

More broadly, the relentless conflict in Syria
is gradually destroying the country's social and
economic fabric, eroding the development gains
made over several generations: 80 per cent of people
living in poverty; rampant food insecurity amid rising
prices; degradation of vital infrastructure and limited
access to basic services; and families and community
networks destroyed. Neither should we lose sight
of the immeasurable human impact of the crisis, the
trauma and emotional toll on civilians, particularly
young people, too long exposed to living in a climate of
violence and fear. This Will have profound implications
for generations to come. A child born in 2011, entering
school this year, will know only war. With the bombing
of schools and the fear experienced by young people,
this is producing a completely lost generation of
educated Syrians, which bodes ill for the future we all
hope Syria will one day start rebuilding.

Despite the difficult environment, United Nations
organizations and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) operating from within Syria and from
neighbouring countries support millions of people in
need using all available modalities, including across
borders pursuant to resolution 2165 (2014), which the
Security Council united behind. In the first months of
2015, United Nations agencies and NGOs provided food
assistance to 5.8 million people per month, medicine
and supplies for nearly 9 million treatments, and water
and sanitation support for almost 5 million people; and
it provided basic relief items such as blankets and other
necessities of life for nearly 3 million people.

With unimpeded access, imagine how many more
millions could be reached.

But access is severely restricted, and, of course,
to make a difference, it is vital that humanitarian
organizations have the resources necessary to do their
critical work. The response plan for Syria is only
27 per cent funded. I thank donors for their generous
contributions so far and urge them and others to step
up their financial support to the humanitarian response
effort. Until there is a political settlement, humanitarian
needs will only grow.

The courageous efforts of humanitarians to
reach people with assistance should not hide the fact
that widespread fighting, shifting conflict lines and
intentional obstacles and restrictions put in place
by all parties continue to significantly hinder the
delivery of aid to people in need in Syria. Seventy-
seven humanitarian workers have been killed since the
start of the conflict. A total of 32 United Nations staff
members, 28 of whom are United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
staff, continue to be detained or are missing.

Some 4.6 million people, around a quarter of the
country's population, live in areas that remain extremely
hard to reach for humanitarian actors. Of these, some
422,000 people are in areas that remain besieged by
the parties. These people remain largely cut off from
assistance and face a daily struggle to survive. In June,
humanitarian actors were able to bring assistance only
in one besieged area following an airlift ofWorld Health
Organization medical assistance to areas of Deir ez-
Zor city, besieged by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. That is less than 5 percent ofpeople in besieged
areas. No other type of United Nations assistance was
permitted into any other besieged area during June.

United Nations organizations and partners
delivered medical supplies and treatments to more
than 4 million people in June, including over 350,000
treatments across conflict lines. But there were some
areas where these items were prevented from being
delivered, including to Talbiseh, in Homs governorate,
where life-saving medical and surgical items were
removed from aid convoys by Government authorities.

Some progress was made when the Government
approved an additional number of inter-agency convoys
in June. However, 45 convoy requests, including 33
made on 1 July, remain pending, and I call upon the
Government of Syria to positively consider and grant
these requests. At a time when needs are deepening,
we must have rapid, sustainable access to deliver
essential humanitarian items to all people in need, in
all parts of the country, without delay or hindrance.
It is the obligation of all parties under international
humanitarian law to facilitate this.

In advance of my proposed visit to Damascus next
month, I can only report on the verified facts, but the
facts speak for themselves. I am shocked and outraged;
Syria today - among, sadly and appallingly, an
enlarging pool of humanitarian need and human misery
across many parts of the world, but notably in this
region - is the most acute, unrelenting and shameful
blot on the world's humanitarian conscience.

I hope that my proposed visit to Damascus next
month will provide an opportunity to constructively
engage with the Government to address some of the
significant access challenges that seriously impede
humanitarian operations and prevent ordinary Syrians
from getting the assistance they so desperately need.

Carving out space to meet the humanitarian
needs of Syria's people is today's imperative. But, as
we have said repeatedly to the Council, there are no
humanitarian solutions to this crisis. Each day that
passes without the parties upholding their most basic
obligations to protect civilians, and the strong demands
of the Council, results only in more lives lost; more
people displaced; more people without access to basic
services; and a generation of children who struggle to
obtain an education or have any sense of a future for
themselves. It is their innocent voices and their suffering
that need advocating, as indeed it is my mandate, and
thus that of all of us within the United Nations, to do.

A political solution is more urgent than ever to end
this futile, hopeless cycle of brutality and violence. We
must show the people of Syria that the world has not
forgotten them or the plight of their country. I urge the
Security Council to consider its options through their
eyes, the eyes of the beleaguered, now long-suffering
Syrian people.

