Mr. Chua (Singapore): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's debate. I will deliver a shortened
version of my statement; a longer version is being
circulated in the Chamber.

As is well known, Singapore strongly supports
Security Council reform, particularly in the area of
working methods. The working methods of the Security
Council are of fundamental interest to all Member
States. The Council has the power to authorize military
action and international sanctions - decisions that are
binding on all Member States. Through the veto, the
five permanent members (P-5) can also prevent the
Council from taking such measures. Yet most of us
have no way of influencing the decisions of the Council.
We are called and dismissed entirely at the Council's
discretion, even on issues that affect our countries
directly. We are expected to dutifully contribute to the
Council's mandated operations and comply with its
decisions or lack thereof, even if they are not in the
interests of the international community.

Public statements made by the P-5 would
suggest that they share our position on the need for
improvements to the Council's working methods. At
last year's open debate (S/PV.6672), almost all of the
permanent members spoke in support of improving the
Council's working methods. This morning, we have
also heard various permanent members express similar
support for and commitment to reforming the Council's
working methods.

My delegation welcomes those commitments.
We are therefore puzzled that whenever serious
opportunities for improvements in working methods are
presented, they are more often than not blocked by none
other than the P-5. Naturally, the P-5 will point to an
increased number of open meetings and outreach to the
general membership as evidence of their commitment
to improving working methods. But meetings are no
substitute for genuine improvements.

Few issues galvanize the P-5 into a unity of purpose
and action as quickly as opposition to working methods
reform. Member States are no doubt familiar with what
happened in May when the group of five small countries
presented draft resolution A/66/L.42/Rev.2, designed
to improve the working methods of the Council. The
draft resolution's aims were frankly rather modest, and
the impact of the recommendations would have been
limited even if they had been adopted, but the P-5
resorted to strong-arm tactics in order to ensure that
A/66/L.42/Rev.2 never saw the light of day.

One particular incident highlights the P-5's
determined resistance to the reform of the Council's
working methods, despite whatever they may proclaim
to the contrary. In response to a query from the
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth
session, the Office of Legal Affairs (OLA) gave an
interpretation that "it would be appropriate if the
General Assembly were to adopt the draft resolution
with the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the General
Assembly membership". Member States learnt of that
legal opinion, not from OLA or even from the President
of the General Assembly, who had first raised the
query. Instead, it was a permanent member who faxed
and emailed OLA's legal opinion to all Member States
the morning of the formal consideration of the draft
resolution, with the admonition to all Member States to
support a no-action motion on A/66/L.42/Rev.2. How
did that P-5 mission procure the OLA's legal opinion,
even before the President of the General Assembly
himself had circulated it to the United Nations
membership? What does that say about the P-5's real
position on working methods of the Security Council?
Do deeds match words?

Let me cite another example. Draft resolution
A/66/L.42/Rev.2 had asked the P-5 to consider
refraining from vetoing action aimed at preventing
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity. That
aspect was considered particularly controversial by the
P-5, which were affronted by the suggestion that limits
be placed on the use of their veto power. That position
was shared by all the P-5, even those who fervently
support the principle of responsibility to protect. Those
permanent members that repeatedly express outrage
at what is happening within the Council on issues like
Syria are the same ones that blocked A/66/L.42/Rev.2.
Trumpeting moral outrage over the Council's non-action
is particularly hypocritical because whatever divisions
there may be among the P-5, they are united in having
no limits placed on their use or abuse of the veto.

My statement today is not intended to be a diatribe
on the Security Council or the P-5. I hope that I will
not be misunderstood. Indeed, my delegation believes
that the Security Council, and permanent members in
particular, shoulder a long-standing responsibility on
behalf of the international community. By and large, the
Security Council does good work on behalf of Member
States in preserving international peace and security.
However, the P-5's continued resistance to constructive
proposals on working methods does not serve the
interests of the United Nations membership or the
legitimacy and transparency of the Security Council,
or even ultimately the interests of the P-5 themselves. I
hope that it will not take a crisis of seismic proportions
to precipitate a fundamental change.

