The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States
of America.

I would like to say a few words about each
presentation and briefing today. However, before doing
so, I want to thank Mr. Javier Ruperez for his hard
work, professionalism and dedication as the Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
Executive Directorate (CTED). The CTC made
significant headway under his leadership. I wish the
Executive Director the very best in the future. Thank
you, Mr. Ruperez.

Regarding the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban
and associated individuals and entities, Ambassador
Verbeke, the 1267 Committee has made important
progress under your strong leadership; and I thank you
and your staff. I would like to thank the Monitoring
Team for its invaluable assistance in helping the
Committee discharge its mandate. As you mentioned in
your statement, the Council adopted two key
resolutions in late December, and I will comment
briefly on each of them. The Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1730 (2006), which established the
Focal Point for removing names from sanctions lists.
The United States was a leader in this effort, and we
worked closely with France and others on the Council
to develop this important mechanism. We are confident
that the Focal Point adequately addresses the concerns
heard from Member States about a perceived lack of
fairness in the sanctions process.

The Council also unanimously adopted in
December resolution 1735 (2006), which strengthens
the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime. This most
recent resolution in the 1267 family addresses many
important issues, but I would like to focus on just
one - the Taliban. The Committee has not updated the
Taliban sanctions list since 2003; and it no longer
reflects the realities on the ground. The United States
strongly believes that the Committee must focus on
updating the list to make it a relevant and potent tool in
the fight against the Taliban and Al-Qaida in
Afghanistan. As resolution 1735 (2006) clearly lays
out, we believe in a three-pronged approach:
sanctioning new Taliban who are responsible for the
current upsurge in violence, de-listing former Taliban
who have severed their ties, and adding new and
updated biographical information to help States better
enforce the sanctions.

Ambassador Verbeke, the United States is
confident that, under your dedicated leadership, the
Committee can make progress on updating the Taliban
list and the other important issues on its agenda.

Regarding the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
Chairman Arias, the United States appreciates your
effective leadership and welcomes your report. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate play an essential role
in ensuring that States implement their obligations
under resolution 1373 (2001), and we support all of the
items you have identified as ways in which the CTC
and its CTED can work to achieve concrete results.

We will examine your assessments and explore
opportunities for providing capacity-building
assistance to States. The United States recently
provided assistance based on such an assessment. In
April, we assisted Tanzanian officials with training in
combating the financing of terrorism and money-
laundering and the preparation and submission of
suspicious transaction reports, areas of need that the
CTC and CTED had identified. Under the Millennium
Challenge Account Threshold Program for Tanzania,
the United States Agency for International
Development is partnering with the Tanzanian Ministry
of Finance, the Eastern and South African Anti-Money
Laundering Group and the Bank of Tanzania to provide
technical assistance in the establishment of a Financial
Investigative Unit, another area that the CTC and
CTED highlighted.

The United States will continue to work with you,
Mr. Ambassador, to help countries identified by the
CTC and its CTED in need of similar assistance.

As concerns the 1540 Committee, Chairman
Burian, thank you for your presentation and for your
accomplishments since you assumed your position 18
months ago. Resolution 1540 (2004) is a significant
tool for addressing the threat to international peace and
security posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, their means of delivery and related
materials; and we applaud the Committee's efforts to
monitor and promote implementation of the resolution.
The Committee has done a good job in terms of

collecting information, but it is now time to take that
information and aggressively move forward on
implementation, including how to process requests for
technical assistance.

We support the Committee's cooperation and
outreach efforts with regional intergovernmental
organizations, such as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum,
the Organization of American States, the African Union
and the Caribbean Community. These organizations
have practical expertise in cooperating with bodies like
the 1540 Committee. Participation in regional
workshops, such as the one we held in San Francisco in
February with the ASEAN Regional Forum, as well as
the OSCE 1540 workshop in November 2006, have
provided a useful opportunity for practitioners to
gather with others from their region to learn more
about resolution 1540 (2004) and to share strategies
and ideas for implementing the resolution.

On the basis of the recommendations contained in
the Committee's April 2006 report to the Council
(S/2006/257), we encourage States to develop action
plans with regard to implementing resolution 1540
(2004). The United States action plan is designed to
encourage and support the Committee in fulfilling its
mandate. Under our action plan, we intend to help
other States identify gaps in laws and controls and
develop regional and State-specific assistance priorities
for stemming proliferation activity, and to coordinate
our assistance with other donors and recipients to assist
in fulfilling obligations under resolution 1540 (2004).

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the representative of Germany.

