At the outset, I would like to thank the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Sergey Vershinin, for presiding over this meeting. I am also grateful to the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov, for his valuable briefing. As a matter of principle, Tunisia has consistently supported the just cause of Palestine and the inalienable and integral rights of the Palestinian people. Accordingly, Tunisia has called for intensified efforts at the international level to revive the peace process and launch genuine, credible negotiations between the two parties to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, within a specific time frame, leading to a just and comprehensive peace that would bring about an end to the occupation and enable the Palestinian people to enjoy all its legitimate rights and establish its independent State on the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital. The peace process has been at a standstill, particularly in recent years, while the Israeli occupation's policies and acts of aggression against the Palestinian people have continued and escalated, exacerbating the atmosphere of despair, hardship, tension and volatility in the region. We therefore wish to emphasize once again that the international community, particularly the Security Council and the Middle East Quartet, must fulfil its role by salvaging the two-State solution and restarting negotiations on the basis of the internationally agreed terms of reference. We also emphasize that the Security Council must implement the relevant resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016), and prevail on Israel, the occupying Power, to withdraw from all occupied Arab territories and comply with the internationally recognized resolutions. A just and comprehensive peace is the best and only way to restore security and stability in the region. Today we have a genuine opportunity to move forward towards that noble goal through the proposal of the Palestinian President, Mahmoud Abbas, to convene a conference of plenipotentiaries, with the participation of the stakeholders, with a view to embarking upon a peace process grounded in international law, the resolutions of the United Nations and the relevant terms of reference. We hope that the Secretary-General, the Quartet, the Security Council and all international and regional stakeholders will coalesce to lay the groundwork for the initiative. Tunisia stands ready to contribute to any constructive efforts geared at bringing an end to the occupation and achieving security and stability for all the peoples of the region. National reconciliation has an important part to play in strengthening Palestinian unity and bolstering the two-State solution. Tunisia once again welcomes the positive steps taken by all Palestinian factions towards that goal and welcomes the consensus that Palestinian legislative and presidential elections can be held in the next few months. We urge the international community to press Israel, the occupying Power, to allow the Palestinian general elections to be held in East Jerusalem. On listening to the briefing of the Special Coordinator, we were deeply concerned to hear that the occupation authorities have continued to enact settlement policies, demolish homes and target civilians. Such conduct is a grave violation of the principles of international law and a flagrant act of defiance towards the authority of the Security Council, given the absence of any form of accountability. Tunisia condemns those practices, reiterates its rejection of Israeli annexation plans and insists that such plans must be definitively abandoned. We call for protection to be granted to Palestinian civilians, and for an end to the illegal blockade on the Gaza Strip and to all forms of collective punishment, particularly in view of the urgent and alarming challenges resulting from the coronavirus disease pandemic. Given the ongoing suffering in the Palestinian territories and in refugee camps, Tunisia reiterates its absolute support for the mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which plays a vital role in alleviating the plight of refugees and supporting stability in the region. Tunisia urges all regional and international actors to step up the humanitarian response in the occupied Palestinian territory and help the Palestinian Authority tackle the effects of the pandemic and the economic repercussions of the occupation. Lastly, Tunisia remains committed to peace as a strategic goal and is ready to support any initiative aimed at shoring up peace based on the agreed parameters, including the Arab Peace Initiative, in order to uphold peace, security and the principles of justice and peaceful coexistence among the peoples of the region. We believe that the participation of the Palestinian side is a prerequisite for any initiative to resolve the conflict and find a fair and lasting solution to the it.
