Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate the
friendly country of Poland on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August; we
wish you every success, Sir.

I also thank the Executive Director of UNICEF,
Ms. Henrietta Fore, and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, for their invaluable briefings,
as well as the other speakers. We further thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this meeting and
Poland for choosing this very important topic.

I would like to offer the support of my country to
the United Nations in pursuing the noteworthy agenda
of the protection of children and armed conflict by
drawing the attention of the world to the deliberate
abuse of children perpetrated by various States and
armed groups. We completely condemn that and call
for the international community to fight it by all
means necessary.

One example of such deliberate abuse of children,
including killing and maiming, is the ongoing actions
of Israel against children in Gaza and the West Bank,
including in Al-Quds Al-Sharif. Israel continues to
premeditate the killing by gunfire of children who
are armed with no more than stones, not to mention
its practice of arbitrary detention, torture, killing and
injuring of 2,800 Palestinian children in 2018. Another
example of that abuse is the recruitment and use of
children on the battlefield, as well as training them in
barbarous camps, where they chant sectarian slogans.
They are further used as human shields or mine clearers,
then wept over when their limbs are severed or they are
killed in the field.

Yet another example is what Iran is doing in its
support of sectarian militias in Lebanon and Syria,
especially Hizbullah. The Iranian regime indoctrinates
innocent children in military marches and makes them
carry weapons and chant slogans that they do not
understand. It also continuously supports the Houthi
militias, as confirmed in United Nations reports
confirming the smuggling of Iranian weapons to
the Houthis, in flagrant violation of resolutions 2216
(2015), 2231 (2015) and 2140 (2014).

The Secretary-General's report (S/2019/509) fairly
recognizes the efforts made by the coalition forces
in Yemen to mitigate the injury of children and the
significant decrease in the number of casualties in 2018.
My country's Government insists that all necessary
procedures to protect children in armed conflict be
taken in Yemen. We work with our sister countries
in the coalition to make the child protection unit,
established with the agreement of the United Nations
and under the coalition's leadership, a model for
replication worldwide, as well as a centre of excellence
and knowledge to share with neighbouring countries.

Allow me to say that so far we find that the
numbers cited in the report on the casualties of children
caused by the coalition forces are overstated. All
those figures were taken from areas controlled by the
Houthis, and some were impossible for United Nations
monitors to verify. Moreover, United Nations bodies
failed to provide the coalition command with complete
information on the casualties, locations, dates and
times. In the absence of accurate data in those areas,
those figures amount to little more than guesswork.

However, in the very few cases where the coalition
forces were provided with sufficient details, those data
were taken seriously, investigations were conducted,
detailed reports were made and steps taken to prosecute
the perpetrators. We are, in fact, fully cooperating with
the United Nations and the Yemeni authorities to take
all the necessary steps to return any recruited children
who might be found to their countries and to help the
Yemeni authorities to rehabilitate those children and
reintegrate them into society. We acknowledge that the
life of each and every child is very dear and that the
natural place for children is in the classroom or on the
playground, not on the battlefield.

I would also like to say that the humanitarian aid
that Saudi Arabia has offered to the Yemeni people
is in the hundreds of millions of dollars, including its
most recent contribution of $40 million to UNICEF for
the protection of children. That support, according to
United Nations officials, has saved tens of thousands of
children from death at the hands of hunger or morbidity.

We hope that the international community will
condemn the rebels who continue to refuse to implement
resolution 2216 (2015) and who continue to defer the
implementation of the Stockholm agreement on the
withdrawal from Al-Hudaydah, which is considered
to be the first step towards a comprehensive political
solution to restore security, stability and legitimacy in
Yemen and put an end to the scourge of war and its
impact on the steadfast Yemeni people.

