Mr. Valle (Brazil): I take this opportunity, Sir, to
congratulate you heartily on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to wish you
much success in your term as President. I extend
compliments to Ambassador Munir Akram for his very
successful conduct of our work during the month of
May, which was characterized by a highly demanding
agenda.

My delegation welcomes both the presence and
the important and encouraging statement of the
Chairman of the National Transitional Government of
Liberia, His Excellency Mr. Charles Gyude Bryant. In
addition, I express appreciation to Special
Representative Jacques Klein for introducing the report
of the Secretary-General and for the work he has been
carrying out as Head of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL).

My delegation welcomes the progress achieved so
far in the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement signed at Accra in August 2003. The
present report (S/2004/430) lists a number of positive
developments that have taken place within the period
under review: improved conditions for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and for the beginning of
national recovery; establishment of an interim national
police force; progress in judicial reform and in the
promotion of the rule of law throughout the country;
empowerment of the Cabinet of the National
Transitional Government; the appointment of a new
National Elections Commission; and the development
of legislation relating to the establishment of an
Independent National Human Rights Commission and a
Truth and Reconciliation Commission.

UNMIL has been central in providing adequate
security conditions for the implementation of the Accra
Agreement. We are very pleased to learn that UNMIL
has successfully relaunched its programme of
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation (DDRR) and that, since December 2003,
58 per cent of the anticipated number of combatants
have been disarmed. It is particularly gratifying to
know that an intensive public information programme
has decisively contributed to that result. My delegation
has always insisted on the relevance of public
communication in complex operations, in particular
that of radio broadcasting.

Nonetheless, the Secretary-General's report also
takes due note of the low number of weapons being
surrendered in the disarmament process. We are
concerned by information received from the Panel of
Experts on Liberia that arms trafficking has not been
dismantled and that factions could easily rearm. We
believe that the complete deployment of UNMIL and
cooperation among peacekeeping operations in the
region can contribute to addressing this threat.
Furthermore, renewed efforts should be made to
support the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) in the implementation of its
moratorium on small arms. As a matter of fact, in the
light of the discussion held by the Council last week on
complex crises (see S/PV.4980), cooperation with
ECOWAS in developing programmes that could have
an immediate social impact in Liberia should also be
envisaged by the international community.

At present, greater attention should be devoted to
job-generation activities through supporting both
labour-intensive enterprises and individual economic
initiatives. Failure in providing economic alternatives
may damage current DDRR efforts. In that context, the
Economic and Social Council could have an important
role to play in assisting in the management of
economic recovery; the experience gained in Burundi
and Guinea-Bissau could be instrumental to that effect,
as pointed out by the President of the Economic and
Social Council, Ambassador Marjatta Rasi, at last
Friday's meeting.

Our delegation welcomes the positive
developments taking place as a result of the adoption
of a regional approach by UNMIL, the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone, the United Nations Operation
in Cote d'Ivoire and the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau in the implementation
of their mandates. It is also heartening to learn that the
human rights situation in Liberia and access to
humanitarian assistance have improved since March.
The continuous training of law enforcement agents will
contribute even further to that end.

Before closing, I would like to congratulate
UNMIL and the National Transitional Government on
the progress now being achieved in Liberia and to
appeal to donor countries to help the National Elections
Commission in mobilizing the material and human
resources needed for the holding of presidential and
parliamentary elections in October next year as
stipulated in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. The
risks involved in postponing democratic elections
would be too high to be ignored.

