Mr. Prodi: I am truly thankful for the opportunity
given me, as Chairman of the African Union-United
Nations panel on modalities for support to African
Union peacekeeping operations, to present the results
of our work. Allow me to first address two basic issues.

First, I deeply acknowledge both the quality of
the individual contributions that each member provided
during the intense work of the panel and the generous
support received from United Nations staff. I am
particularly thankful to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.

Secondly, it has been clear from the very
beginning that while the terms of reference of the panel
were framed in technical terms, the issues have strong
political implications.
The foreword to the panel's report (8/2008/813)
clarifies the link between peace and development. No
peace means no development. Yet the complexities
inherent in that statement are such that it is often
difficult to reconcile the need for regional engagement
with the capabilities available.

The responsibility of regional actors to address
issues of peace and security in their own regions is
indisputable. This is not to say that the African Union
or the regional economic communities should replace
the United Nations. That is clear. Rather, the principles
of the United Nations Charter must be reinforced and a
framework must be developed in which our collective
response can ensure an appropriate answer to any given
circumstance.

It was with this in mind that the panel approached
its work and, in delivering its report, I hope that we can
move towards a more systematic approach in our
response to the challenges to peace and security in
Africa.

The African Union is to play its full part. It must
have the means to support future short-term operational
deployments, and also the capacity to develop the
essential capabilities necessary for the long-term.

In addressing the high-level meeting chaired by
former President Mbeki, in April last year (see S/PV.5868), I underlined the need for closer
cooperation between the international and the regional
levels and the need for more effective responses by the
international community in crisis situations. We are in
a new era in which the scale and complexity of the
challenges demand increased cooperation between all
actors.

Addressing those challenges calls for effective
relationships, improved coordination and a clear
understanding of each other's strengths and
weaknesses. We have come a long way in the past few
years, and I acknowledge the enormous progress that
has been made by the African Union and the regional
economic communities of Africa. We can all learn from
that process.

However, that process needs to be consolidated
so that it can truly enhance the capacity of the African
Union to contribute to global security and enable it to
play a front-line role in international efforts to bring
peace to the continent.
09-2716]
Indeed, the ability of the African Union to
respond to continental crises within the context of a
broader international framework requires significant
capabilities. Developing those capabilities requires the
permanent support of the international community,
including less traditional partners and donors. We must
do it in spite of the present competition for scarce
resources. Achieving this objective requires improved
coordination, new mechanisms and brand-new
instruments.

Thanks to the African Peace and Security
Architecture (APSA), significant progress has been
achieved in many fields, from conflict prevention to
the deployment of peacekeeping missions and the
development of long-term capacity. We must ensure
further progress in this direction.

The APSA cannot operate in isolation, and the
report emphasizes the importance of establishing a
shared vision between the United Nations and the
African Union when addressing issues of mutual
concern. That implies new, strong coordination
between the two Councils. The joint meetings that have
already taken place represent a major step forward, but
the panel is keen to encourage a more regular exchange
through which greater continuity of approach could be
cultivated and a shared vision truly established.

At the level of the African Union Commission
and the United Nations Secretariat, the panel
recognizes the great progress made and the solid basis
for cooperation that has been established, both in terms
of supporting operational deployments and long-term
capability-building. Nonetheless, there is still
significant room for improvement. Limiting
operational support to individual missions is
understandable, but it does not necessarily promote
sustained and efficient cooperation.

If the African Union Commission and the United
Nations Secretariat aim to develop the level of
cooperation necessary to support effective mutual
synergy, they must be able to work together in a much
more structured way. To that end, the panel
recommends the creation of a mechanism through
which the respective organizations could exchange
views on a more regular basis. Various potential
models exist that can be used in order to implement
that process without creating new structures.
The ability to work together can be constrained
by the limited resources of the African Union

Commission. Improving coordination is therefore not
sufficient. It is necessary, but not sufficient. It has to be
supported by the institutional capacity that will
increase African ownership of the process. That can be
achieved only once the Commission is properly staffed
by skilled personnel provided by the African Union's
member States.

Inevitably, it is military capability that catches
the headlines in terms of the development of the
African Standby Force, but the report underlines the
point that peace on the African continent cannot be
achieved through the deployment of military force
alone. Capacity needs to be developed across a wide
range of activities, such as intelligence, early warning,
conflict prevention, post-conflict reconciliation and
reconstruction. Here, I repeat, there is a need to
develop a shared vision.

As recently stated by the current President of the
African Union, Muammar Al-Qadhafi, if Africa does
not develop a common political view it will never be in
charge of its peaceful destiny. Developing a shared
vision is one thing; implementing, clearly, is another.
That requires partnership underpinned by credible
capability, and that requires huge resources.

The panel examined a range of possible options
by which greater financial predictability could be built
and sustained in the long term. The technical details of
that proposal must be further developed in the near
future.

The recommendation that United Nations
legislative bodies approve the use of assessed
contributions under certain criteria recognizes the
importance of the United Nations/African Union
relationship, as well as the advantages to be gained by
exploiting the African Union's comparative advantage
in quickly deploying a bridging operation until
conditions are established for longer-term United
Nations engagement. The panel was sensitive to the
wide range of different views on that proposal, and it
expressed the opinion that it is time for the United
Nations to expand all aspects concerning the role of the
African Union in resolving peace and security issues -
of course, in coordination with the efforts of the United
Nations.

Similarly, the recommendations concerning the
need for logistical support require much closer
examination. In particular, there is an opportunity to
break with some of the traditional approaches of the
past and to take advantage of more innovative ideas
that avoid the need to stockpile large quantities of
equipment, which is something that is increasingly
important in the current economic climate.

In relation to long-term capacity-building, the
panel recommended the establishment of a multi-donor
trust fund. The very concept of a multi-donor fund
implies that all those that have an interest in a peaceful
Africa shall be called on to contribute financial, human
and technical resources in order to build that capacity.
New donors were encouraged, are encouraged and will
be encouraged to start and increase their contributions.
If, as we hope, a large multi-donor fund is successfully
established, its size and complexity will require
expertise that is found in very few international
institutions. I know that this is debated, but that is why,
in the start-up phase, we recommend the involvement
of the United Nations Development Programme.
However, in order to ensure the progressive
empowerment of the African Union, the headquarters
of that structure will be initially located in Addis
Ababa. The African Union is expected to take over full
responsibility in a short period of time, and thereafter
have full ownership of the fund.

Moreover, it should be stressed that, from the
very beginning, the African Union will be in charge of
defining priorities and projects in the area of capacity-
building. In various meetings with the heads of State or
Government of countries interested in supporting the
role of the African Union in peacekeeping, I have
found a generally positive attitude with regard our
proposal for a multi-donor fund dedicated to long-term
capacity-building. I understand that the engagement of
a Prime Minister is different from that of a Minister for
Finance, but it was very a very encouraging
development.

That idea also requires additional consideration in
order to define the detailed modalities and to determine
how it can work in synergy with existing mechanisms
such as the African Peace Facility, which was created
and supported by the European Union.

In conclusion, I would emphasize that some of
the recommendations can be implemented relatively
easily, in particular those dealing with strengthening
the political relationship between the United Nations
and the African Union. Some of them are already
moving forward as part of an ongoing process. Others

require much more detailed analysis than was possible
to do under the panel.

The panel conducted the bulk of its work when
the consequences of the current economic downturn
were not yet fully expressed. Nonetheless, it is
important that support for the African Union increase
in the future. It is too important. We have to work
better together, and we have to find more efficient
instruments for cooperation.

All of us must be engaged in developing the
African Union's capacity. The support of African
Union member States is as critical as the material
support of non-African States Members of the United
Nations. Ownership must belong to Africa, but all
Member States, particularly those with interests in
Africa, need to be committed to supporting the process.
It is clear that there cannot be development without
peace, but it is also clear that peace in Africa affects
not only Africa's future but the future of all of us. This
report should therefore be seen as a significant step in
a longer process that will require further consultation
and work for the development of its recommendations.

