Mr. Daeic' (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I would like to express my
gratitude to Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his engagement in the
realization of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
under resolution 1244 (1999), and to the members ofthe
Security Council for the attention they accord to this
issue on a continuous basis.

In View of the exceptional importance that Serbia
attaches to the work ofUNMIK, I would like to point out
the significance of the recent adoption of the Mission's
budget as recommended by the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, as well as
the initial proposal of the secretary-General to increase
the budget. That adoption reflects the realistically
assessed need for ensuring adequate staff and financial
capacities to the Mission so that it can meet the needs
associated with the implementation of its mandate. At
the same time, the strengthening of UNMIK sends a
powerful message on the importance of the mandate
and the role of the United Nations as the overarching
international presence in Kosovo and Metohija.

Bearing in mind UNMIK's substantial and long-
term role in building and maintaining stability in the
province, as well as the need for its adaptation and
strengthening following the reconfiguration of other
segments of the international presence, I expect this
trend to continue in the future. I trust and believe that it
will have a positive effect on ensuring a comprehensive
and more deliberate approach on the part of the Mission
with regard to assessing and resolving a whole range
of problems facing the Serbian and other non-Albanian
communities in the realization of their fundamental
rights and in promoting the still very fragile security
and rule of law in the province. In view of the sensitive
environment in which it operates, it is evident that the
Mission often refrains from criticizing the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Kosovo and
Metohija in stronger terms. Regrettably, the even-
handed approach in its reporting did not contribute to
the Institutions taking more constructive positions.

In the context of the contribution to be made to the
creation of conditions for unimpeded implementation of
UNMIK's mandate and to support the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, facilitated by the European
Union, I would like to underline that the continued
convening of Security Council meetings to discuss
this issue every three months is of key importance.
Regular quarterly reporting and UNMIK's ever-more
visible presence in the field can have only a positive
impact on the strengthening of trust and the readiness
of the Serbian and other non-Albanian communities
to become involved in the processes initiated by the
Brussels dialogue.

By and large, the reporting period behind us was
marked by electoral activities, and therefore a substantial
part of the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/640) was
devoted to the electoral process in Kosovo and Metohija.
Noted during the reporting period were pressure and
intimidation brought to bear on the Serbian community.
That went hand in glove with threats to the security
of the members of that community, aimed at breaking
the unity of the Serbian voting bloc. However, such
practices received inadequate coverage in the report
before us. Nonetheless, it is with satisfaction that I
note that the success achieved by the Serbian list in the
elections has confirmed the political unity of the Serbs
in Kosovo and Metohija, which is a guarantee that the
constructive policy with respect to the protection of
their interests will be continued.

The current stalemate in the formation of Pristina
institutions, however, gives us cause for concern,
especially with regard to the continuation of the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. In that
connection, the statement of Ramush Haradinaj, one
of the candidates for "Kosovo Prime Minister", made
upon his return to Kosovo and Metohija from France, in
which he threatened, speaking to "enemy Serbia", that
"we will do to them far worse than we did back then"
is particularly worrisome. I call on the international
community and the judicial institutions in Kosovo
and Metohija again not to remain silent in the face of
hate speech and the threats to ethnically cleanse the
remaining Serbs. We are reminded in the present report,
just as we were in the previous one (S/2017/387), of the
inflammatory statements made by Albanian political
leaders regarding the creation of the so-called greater
Albania. They pose an added threat to the process of
reconciliation and the normalization of relations.

Alongside the unacceptable unilateral acts of, and
the attachment of conditions and caveats by, Pristina,
such as the resolution on the suspension of the dialogue
and making its continuation contingent upon the fate of
those charged with the commission of the most heinous
crimes against the Serbian population, the threats are
aimed at increasing tension and postponing compliance
with obligations assumed under the agreements already
achieved. Serbia welcomes each and every appeal by
the international community in favour of renewing the
dialogue, including the call by the Secretary-General
addressed to both sides to resume the dialogue and
provide new impetus to the process. Yet I cannot but note
that they cast a pall of relativity over the responsibility
of the Pristina side, which was the one that broke off the
dialogue unilaterally in the first place.

Notwithstanding numerous obstacles and
challenges, Belgrade continues to take part in the
dialogue constructively, responsibly and devotedly, with
the aim of solving the outstanding issues in a status-
neutral framework and contributing to the stabilization
of the situation and the creation of conditions for
unimpeded progress by the Western Balkans region
towards European Union (EU) membership. It is
noted in the report that limited progress has been
achieved on the technical aspects of the dialogue,
and in the implementation of the telecommunications
agreement specifically, in which the Serbian side again
demonstrated its readiness to fulfil the obligations it
assumed. However, the other side continues to lag
behind and refuses to implement the agreement on the
community of Serbian municipalities and the judiciary,
even though the agreement on the establishment
of the community forms the central part of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations and is the key to the survival of the Serbian
people in Kosovo and Metohija.

In fact, I was the one who signed the Brussels
Agreement, along with Hashim Thaci, four years ago.
In those four years, we have not put into practice what
we agreed to, that is, the formation of the community
of Serbian municipalities. How long are we going to
wait for that to occur? I know that 1 million reasons
can always be found to avoid fulfilling the obligations
already undertaken. But four years is too long to argue
about not doing it; it is better to say, "We do not want
to implement the Brussels Agreement". In that context,
I expect the Council's objective View of the situation,
and not a case where the situation is defined in relative
terms, whereby it is said that all sides are guilty for
not implementing what has been agreed upon. Serbia
will fulfil everything signed off to in the Brussels
Agreement. I was the one who signed the Agreement.

The unilateral acts that Pristina adopts repeatedly,
like the recent directive banning the use of Serbian
passports issued by the Coordination Directorate of
the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Serbia
to enter and exit Kosovo and Metohija, is also noted
in the report. That is yet another piece of evidence,
which has been provided time and time again, that the
constructive and responsible approach by Belgrade
within the dialogue and the implementation of the
agreements reached thus far is continually met by
Pristina's obstructionism and lack of political will
to work towards achieving genuine progress in the
normalization of relations. That position of the Pristina
institutions is a clear signal to the Security Council,
the European Union and the international community
for them to bring strong pressure to bear on Pristina so
as to make it fulfil the obligations that it has assumed
and finally establish the most important element of the
normalization of relations - the establishment of the
association/community ofSerb-majority municipalities.
The prevention of the establishment of a Kosovo army
of Kosovo was a clear indication that Pristina does heed
the suggestions of the international community.

The unilateral suspension ofthe dialogue by Pristina
concerning the electoral process and the intensification
of the nationalistic rhetoric by Albanian political
leaders accounted for the lack of progress within high-
level dialogue during the previous reporting period, as
well. The hope that the continuation of the dialogue will
be possible was recently raised by the statement made
in the wake of the informal meeting between President
Aleksandar Vucie and President Hashim Thaci with EU
High Representative Federica Mogherini on 3 July to
the effect that it has been agreed to work on starting
a new phase of the dialogue and that it is important to
implement the agreements reached thus far. Moreover,
I would like to add that Belgrade invested much effort
to ensuring that the dialogue was successful, and
Mr. Tanin and the Secretary-General, in his report,
also mentioned that the relation between the Serbs and
Pristina's institutions changed substantially through
Serbian participation in the elections. They participate
in governance and the exercise of power.
We wonder why the Government has yet to be
formed in Kosovo, since the elections have already been
completed. The Serbs are therefore not the problem
in that regard. The problem originates from the great
political instability in Kosovo and Metohija. Seen from
the point of View of the Serbian side, I do not know how
to judge the various statements made by the candidates
for Prime Minister concerning Serbs and Serbia, but
Serbia will continue to play a constructive role. As the
Government remains to be formed, we face a situation
in which everything that has been agreed to in the
Brussels Agreement is once again deferred. I therefore
reiterate that it has been four years since the signing of
the Brussels Agreement.

I must underline once again that there can be no
genuine reconciliation unless all crimes, without
exception, are tried and responsibility is taken for
war crimes committed by perpetrators in one's own
ranks. The fact that no legally valid sentence has been
adjudicated yet for the killing of 1,000 Serbs in the
period since the end of the conflict demonstrates that
the judiciary in Kosovo and Metohija is unable to carry
out that task. That justice is hard to come by for the
Serbian victims in Kosovo and Metohija is evidenced
by the recent shocking acquittal of all those indicted
for war crimes in the Klecka case and the decision
of the Constitutional Court of Kosovo to uphold the
appeal and acquit Sami Lushtaku, a former member
of the Drenica Group of the Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA), a prominent member ofthe Democratic Party of
Kosovo and the mayor of the mayor of Skenderaj/Srbica
municipality, who was initially sentenced to 12 years of
prison for war crimes in the Drenica 1 war crimes case.

Furthermore in acquitting Lirim Jakupi, also
known as "Commander Nazi", the judiciary in Kosovo
and Metohija showed once again that it is a tool in the
hands of politicians. Such instances are just another
indication that there is no intention to stop the practice
of covering up and relativizing crimes committed
by the members of the terrorist KLA in the Serbian
southern province during the conflict in the name of
the aggressive expansionist cause ofa Greater Albania.
I also take this opportunity to remind the Council of
the monstrous massacre of Serbian farmers in Staro
Gracko, when 14 people - the youngest of whom was
barely 17-years-old - were brutally killed 18 years
ago on 23 July 1999. The perpetrators of that heinous
crime have not been found, and the decision to cease
investigation eliminates the possibility of them ever
being found at all.

Let me also remind members of the Council that
14 years ago on 13 August 2003 Serbian children were
gunned down on the Bistrica river. Ivan Jovovic' and
13-year-old Pantelija Dakie were killed while four
other children were gravely wounded. The frightening
massacre in which innocent children were killed only
because they were Serbs was committed so as to send a
message to all remaining Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija
that they are not wanted; a message to all those expelled
from Kosovo and Metohija to forget about their return;
and a message that ethnic cleansing will be completed
no matter what. Spilling the blood of Serbian youth on
the Bistrica was intended to symbolize the erasure of
every trace of existence and survival of the Serbs on the
land of their fathers. Moreover, nobody was charged or
tried for that horrendous crime.

Genuine democracy is predicated on a society's
renunciation of crimes and organized crime in which
an independent judiciary must play a pivotal role.
However, the judiciary in Kosovo and Metohija has
shown time and again that it is an instrument in the
hands of those who should be the first to bear the brunt
of the long sword ofjustice. Yet as long as paramilitary
clan leaders and the patrons of criminal cartels freely
walk the streets in the towns and villages of Kosovo
and Metohija, democratization and multi-ethnicity of
its society will merely remain a dead letter. A common
European future can only be built on the foundations
of a genuine renunciation of the criminal legacy
irrespective of who the perpetrators and the victims
are. It will be possible only when a killer is called a
killer in Kosovo and Metohija, regardless of whether
the victim's name is Adem, Ivan, Ramush or Pantelija.

The message conveyed by the decisions to acquit
terrorists and perpetrators of gruesome crimes is that
justice is unattainable for the Serbian and Albanian
victims of the terror of the so-called KLA, and that
Kosovo and Metohija Serbs are dispensable. At the
same time, that is telling evidence that the international
community has failed to establish in Kosovo and
Metohija a society based on the rule of law. In addition
to the aforementioned acquittals, the report of the
Secretary-General accords considerable attention
to numerous systemic shortcomings of the judiciary
in Kosovo and Metohija, as well as to its inability to
take on and win over the political muscle of the former
leadership of the KLA.

Let me recall that, in a memorandum issued
following his most recent mission to Kosovo and
Metohija, the Council of Europe Commissioner for
Human Rights also stressed that, 18 years since the end
of the conflict in Kosovo and Metohija, thousands of
people continue to wait forjustice and that it is high time
that conditions be established for effectively trying war
criminals, facilitating the return of internally displaced
persons and for clarifying the fate of missing persons.
Such assertions are a testament to the fact that Kosovo
and Metohija institutions are far from the standards of
an independent judiciary and unable to try war crimes
committed against the non-Albanian population in a
credible and impartial way.

In view of the fact that the Specialist Chambers
established to try war crimes are now fully operational
and that there are no legal obstacles to bringing
indictments, I expect that all those suspected of
committing war crimes against the Serbs and other
non-Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija will be credibly
indicted and that witnesses will be accorded proper court
protection. Serbia stands ready to provide all necessary
documentation and evidence on brutal multiple rapes,
torture and savage killings by the members of the KLA.

Serbia is fully committed to safeguarding peace.
Its primary interest is to save lives and property for the
residents of Kosovo and Metohija and create conditions
for the sustainable return of internally displaced
persons. Regrettably, the ethnically motivated attacks
on Serbs, such as the recent setting on fire of the cars
of Dragisa Milovic' and Oliver Ivanovie, which continue
unabated, obstruct the return of internally displaced
persons in any significant number. These incidents are
a consequence of the unending increase of tensions
through hate speech and a lack ofa systematic response
by the Kosovo institutions to numerous security and
initiative problems facing non-Albanian communities.
They reflect the non-existence of a genuine will to
create conditions for security and a sustainable life
together in Kosovo and Metohija.

The data from the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees for the first half of
2017, which has recorded only 218 voluntary individual
returns of the members of minority communities, are
self-defeating, to say the least. It is clear that the failure
by the police to classify the ethnically motivated crimes
as such as well as the lack of systematic monitoring of
the situation in this area do not contribute to increasing
the number of returnees, nor does the international
institutional discrimination of the Serbs, which is
manifest in arbitrary arrests, ethnically motivated
restrictive measures and the constant violation of
basic rights.

We therefore appreciate the activities of the
Head of UNMIK aimed at establishing contact with
municipal authorities and community representatives
for the purpose of protecting community rights,
promoting reconciliation, building intercommunity
confidence and ensuring the return of internally
displaced persons going forward. I propose that greater
attention be accorded in the next reports to the question
of widespread and pervasive threats to the human rights
of the non-Albanian communities, in particular of the
most vulnerable, returnees, inter-ethnic and mixed
communities within Kosovo Metohija, which are
exposed to unrelenting intimidation campaigns.

My statement is also a call to intensify
programmatic activities, maximize projects, build
confidence and improve the current situation. Of key
importance is the full implementation of UNMIK's
mandate, including the application of the rule of law,
human rights, reconciliation among communities
and the return of internally displaced persons. The
challenges are many in these areas, as is evidenced not
only by the quarterly reports of the Secretary-General
on the work of UNMIK, but also by the aforementioned
memorandum of the Council of Europe Human Rights
Commissioner and his visit to Kosovo and Metohija last
February. In his report, the Commissioner expresses,
inter alia, serious concern that 18 years after the end
of the conflict, the ethnic lines of division as well as
numerous obstacles to voluntary returns of internally
displaced persons are still very much in evidence. In
that context, it is necessary that all actors involved
in the solution of the issue of internally displaced
persons recommit themselves to working zealously to
create conditions for their return, which needs to be
unimpeded and sustainable in the long run. Indeed, this
is one of the main elements of UNMIK's mandate.

Institutional violations of rights are also seen in
the area of the protection of the Serbian cultural and
religious heritage in Kosovo and Metohija. In that
connection, I recall the public condemnation by the
Special Representative of the European Union, in
which he called on the Kosovo authorities to respect the
rule of law in terms of enforcing the judgment of the
Constitutional Court of Kosovo that upheld the Visoki
Decani monastery's ownership rights to 24 hectares of
land surrounding it. The report ofthe Secretary-General
recounts multiple breaches of law, disregard for judicial
institutions and their decisions, refusal to cooperate
with representatives of the international community and
violation of the rights of the Serbian Orthodox Church
and its faithful. Civil society organizations expressed
concern about contravention of the law on the special
protective zone for the historic centre of Prizren.
I take this opprorunity to call on the international
community to step up its efforts to provide physical
and legal protection to the monuments of the Serbian
cultural and religious heritage that continue to be
plundered, damaged, set on fire or destroyed, including
the destruction and desecration of numerous Orthodox
Christian cemeteries, reported extensively by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Mission in Kosovo and Metohija. Pristina's expressed
intention to resubmit its request for admission to
UNESCO is therefore hard to understand, in the least.

I would like to point out that these unilateral acts
violate the Charter of the United Nations and resolution
1244 (1999), while Pristina's efforts to join various
international organizations have a negative effect on
the continuation of the dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina, which is currently at a delicate stage.
The most recent example is the request by Kosovo for
admission to INTERPOL, which cannot be interpreted
as an effort to promote its capacity to combat crime
and terrorism and create institutional preconditions
for inclusion in the exchange of information within the
INTERPOL purview, especially since this capacity is
already available through the UNMIK Liaison Office.
Further, there is a special department within UNMIK
for dealing with these issues. The request is just another
push by Pristina to promote its unilaterally declared
independence through the abuse and politicization of
the work of international organizations.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the positive
results achieved in the dialogue demonstrate that there is
no alternative to dialogue. The results also demonstrate
that stronger mediation leadership is needed to ensure
that agreements reached so far are implemented. The
indicated commitment to starting a new phase of the
dialogue at the highest level and to bringing new impetus

to the dialogue will require a genuine resolve by both
sides towards working to achieve a compromise; such
resolve has so far been missing on the part of Pristina.
It will also require a different kind of thinking, so as to
avoid agreements being misunderstood as a defeat for
one side or the other.

Serbia is firmly committed to the dialogue
intended to promote regional stability. However, it is
of paramount importance that the dialogue be based
on mutually acceptable solutions to all outstanding
issues, without prejudice to the future status of Kosovo
and Metohija and with full respect for resolution 1244
(1999). We believe that a serious and credible approach
is needed - one that will be courageous and realistic,
as well as forward-looking, as exemplified by President
Vucie's initiative to launch a country-wide dialogue on
Kosovo and Metohija.

Finally, as I expect that Ms. Citaku will offer
information to document stories about genocide, ethnic
cleansing and everything else that she talks about, in
order not to have to reply to her later I should like to
ask the Secretary-General and Special Representative
Tanin that in their future reports they not forget the
persecuted and exiled citizens of Kosovo and Metohija.
What does it mean that they do not mention this aspect
anymore? Since 1999, 18 years later, only 1.9 per
cent of internally displaced persons have returned to
Kosovo. What does this mean? They were once exiled,
but nobody mentions that fact any more. They had
not been a colonial Power there; they had lived there
for centuries. As is well known, the first capital of
Serbia, the town of Prizren, is located there. All our
monuments are protected under the United Nations. I
say to Ms. Citaku that it is not all right to laugh now,
but if she can prove that there is a single monument of
hers there and then I will stop laughing at her. Four
monuments protected under UNESCO there date back
to the twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth centuries:
Visoki Deeani, the Patriarchate of Pee, Our Lady of
Ljevis and Gracanica monastery.

The Serbs have lived there for centuries. More

than 200,000 Serbs were exiled and persecuted after
1991. Do Council members believe that we should not
mention this anymore? Do they believe that their exile
has become legitimized simply because it actually
took place? Is anyone ever going to mention the need
of Serbs to return to Kosovo and Metohija? If you do
not believe me, Mr. President, or if you think that I am
lying, I will tell you that statistics are a very terrible
thing. When Ms. Citaku says that someone committed
ethnic cleansing and genocide, that would mean that
there are fewer Albanians than before because they
werevictims of genocide and ethnic cleansing.

However, according to the data we have, it turns
out that Serbs carried out genocide and ethnic cleansing
against their own people. According to the 1981 census,
during Tito's leadership and not under Milosevic,
43,875 Serbs lived in Pristina. According to the 2011
census, which Ms. Citaku herself compiled, only 430
are left. Where are the other 43,000 Serbs? In the span
of 30 years, there were 100 times fewer Serbs living
in Pristina. Does that mean that ethnic cleansing and
genocide were carried out against Albanians? Were
ethnic cleansing and genocide carried out against Serbs
or Albanians?
In 1981, there were 18,285 Serbs Urosevac.
According to Ms. Citaku, as the representative of her
authorities here, there are now only 32, which is 600
times fewer Serbs. In 1981, there was 17,000 Serbs and
Montenegrins in Pec'; now, according to Ms. Citaku's
census, there are 332. In 1981, there were 1,898 Serbs
in Dajkovce; today, there are only 17. Podujevo is right
next to the administrative line with Serbia, and through
which the famous Pristina-Nis highway passes. It is
where 2,242 Serbs used to live. Only 12 Serbs reside
there now, which accounts for 200 times fewer Serbs.
Prizren the town in which I was born - was the
capital of Serbia in the fourteenth century. In 1981,
there were 11,651 Serbs living in that town. According
to the 2011 census, there were 231; now, there are only
27, not 27,000. That amounts to 400 times fewer Serbs.
There can be do denying those truths.

 

Those who committed crimes against Albanians
should be prosecuted but please let it not be said that
they were the primary victims of ethnic cleansing. The
main victims of that atrocity were the Serbs, given
the statistics that I have just quoted. Where are those
Serbs now? Because they were forced out of Kosovo
and Metohija and into exile, are we supposed to forget
them? Should they never be mentioned again by the
Council? For the Council, does the history of Kosovo
and Metohija start on the day of its declaration of
independence? That is why I ask that when the Council
addresses this issue, please bear in mind all of the
facts presented.

I would like to thank the Security Council. Serbia
is not against dialogue with Pristina. It is, however,
against unilateral action. Even now, the representatives
of Pristina will mention that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo should be brought to
an end. Their statement will then be distributed here, as
a statement made by a representative of the Republic of
Kosovo. Has the United Nations recognized Kosovo?
Nonetheless, despite all that I have stated, we would
like to engage in dialogue. They will state, however,
that there is nothing to discuss. If the issue has been
resolved, why do they attend the meetings of the
Security Council?

I would also like to issue a warning to all countries
that call for Kosovo to be recognized and ask them to
bear in mind that this is a question of our territorial
integrity and sovereignty. They should be grateful that
their own sovereignty and territorial integrity are intact.
Those two subjects are too serious to be discussed in
cliches. We would like to reach a lasting solution on
the issue of Kosovo and Metohija, but that will happen
only through respect for the legitimate interests of both
Albanians and Serbs.

If someone were to show up here and proclaim
that, from today onwards, this will be a new State,
without the agreement of the country from which
the territory is seceding, that would be deemed to be
a breach of international law and a violation of that
State's authority. It is very clear that the circumstances
have changed but a mutually acceptable solution must
take into account the rights and interests of both sides.

With regard to Kosovo, it has nothing to do with the
right of people to self-determination. Ms. Citaku is not
Kosovar; she is Albanian. As a people, the Kosovars
do not exist. The right to self-determination is a right
granted to people who are stateless. Her people - the
Albanian people - have their own State. This issue
relates to a national minority that used to live in the area
of Serbia and Yugoslavia, who unilaterally declared a
new State. We would like to discuss all of the facts,
but we cannot accept that they have nothing to discuss
with us. If there is nothing to discuss with us, please
do not address any comments to Serbia. A Kosovar
Government can then be formed. No one is preventing
that. As can be seen, Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija play
a constructive role.

I would like to thank the Council for listening
to my statement. I wanted to state this in advance
because I know exactly what Ms. Citaku will mention
in her briefing because it is all she talks about - a
humanitarian disaster, genocide and ethnic cleansing.
I just outlined the outcome of the decades-long
policy towards the Serbian people. Please bear that
in mind because Serbians did not arrive in Kosovo as
representatives of a colonial Power. They have lived in
that territory for centuries.

This situation could occur in any of the member
States represented here, so no one should be hasty in
calling for others to recognize Kosovo. That is an insult
to Serbia. Serbia is a small country and is certainly
not threatening or imposing, but we ask for respect
because Serbia, as part of Yugoslavia, together with
other Member States - the United Kingdom, France
and Russia - established the United Nations after the
Second World War, unlike others that fought on the
side against which the First and Second World Wars
were waged. We remain committed to the principles of
territorial integrity and sovereignty. I am referring not
to force and violence but to peaceful means ofresolving
issues. I believe that we have many common interests
and are on the right path to resolving the issues, ifthere
is mutual respect on both sides.

