The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Japan.

The international community has been drawing many
lessons from the human tragedies that took place in
Rwanda in 1994. One of those lessons was that, in order
to achieve national reconciliation, it was essential to deal
with the root causes of the problem by addressing the
issue of social justice through the pursuit of socio-
economic development, on the one hand, and through the
establishment of the primacy of justice based on the

 

principle of the rule of law, on the other. I believe that, for
this very reason, the International Tribunal for Rwanda was
established by the Security Council.

With this recognition clearly in mind, the Security
Council decided four years ago to establish the International
Tribunal for Rwanda. The Council's primary goal in doing
so was to put an end to the acts of genocide and other
violations of international humanitarian law that had been
committed in Rwanda and to take effective measures to
bring to justice the persons responsible for them. Thus, the
establishment of the International Tribunal was meant to
contribute to the restoration of peace in Rwanda and to the
process of national reconciliation in that country.

My delegation believes that the motives and goals
which underlay the Council's action in 1994 remain
unchanged to this day. Concerned by reports that standard
judicial procedures have not necessarily been observed in
Rwanda, we in the Council today feel more strongly than
ever that the Tribunal must provide a model mechanism for
bringing criminals to justice.

The International Tribunal for Rwanda was created to
function primarily as a judicial mechanism. However, in the
opinion of my delegation, the significance of the Tribunal
goes beyond its being just a judicial mechanism. Through
its examples, the Tribunal can show how a judicial system
should function under the rule of law, assuring due process
even to those accused of committing the most heinous of
crimes. Through its own practice, the Tribunal can
demonstrate to the Rwandan people that emotional acts of
revenge and retribution will only feed further destructive
enmities. Peace can persevere only if it is accompanied by
justice, based on the rule of law and the respect for the
human rights of all.
Recognizing these significant roles and functions
expected of the International Tribunal for Rwanda, Japan is
going to vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.
My delegation hopes that the adoption of this draft
resolution will help the Tribunal fulfil those tasks by
enhancing the capacity of the Tribunal.

We must frankly admit that during the three and a half
years of its existence the Tribunal has not always been
successful in performing the functions expected of it in an
exemplary manner. There are problems of an administrative
and managerial nature that have been adversely affecting its
effective functioning. While I understand that there are
many difficulties in the environment in which the Tribunal
has had to operate, and while I also note that some serious
efforts are being made in order to overcome its
inefficiencies, I am of the View that the Tribunal itself
must make further sincere efforts to remedy the present
situation. Simply creating the third Trial Chamber will not
be enough to cure the Tribunal of its present deficiencies
and to restore its full potential. It is with this
consideration in mind that Japan strongly feels that the
letter from the President of the Security Council to the
President of the Tribunal pointing to the need to facilitate
the efficient functioning of the Tribunal should be part
and parcel of the decision of the Security Council to
authorize the expansion of the Tribunal.

In conclusion, I should like to express the ardent
hope of my delegation that with the addition of a third
Trial Chamber the International Tribunal for Rwanda will
be able to function more effectively in such a way that
the expectations of the international community will be
met to the full.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/1998/353.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1165 (1998).
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.35 pm.

