Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I associate myself with the warm words of
congratulations to the Secretary-General. We are all
looking forward to continuing to support his efforts for
the reform of the United Nations. His presence here
today confirms his intention to work in the closest way
possible with the Security Council.

I would also like to express gratitude to you and
to your delegation, Mr. President. You had a very
difficult month, filled with events that arose
unexpectedly, but, in my view, you coped with your
duties very well. Despite all of the difficulties, it was
possible both to find solutions to specific problems
which could not be postponed - as the resolutions on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and on Western
Sahara - and to make further progress in the
development of the instruments available to the
Security Council. We have already referred to the
meetings on the report of the Secretary-General on the
prevention of conflict.

All of this was a direct act of implementing the
decisions of the Millennium Summit and,
unquestionably, I agree that such meetings should be as
informal and interactive as possible. They can be
useful as we try to draw lessons from the past month
and think about how we will be working in the future.

In that connection, I recall the mission to Kosovo
and the discussion that took place afterwards. We did
not have Macedonia on the agenda, but it was always
invisibly present, as were the Balkans as a whole. So I
think that the dialogue that we began with the
Secretary-General on these issues should be more
specific in the months to come. The Security Council
should look at how its relevant resolutions on the
Balkans are being implemented.

I share the assessment of the importance of the
resolution on cooperation with troop-contributing
countries. The activity of the Security Council on the
question of United Nations peacekeeping will continue.
The report of the Secretary-General on peacekeeping
has already been issued, and we consider that the
Council must actively support the Secretary-General's
efforts to continue to improve the United Nations
peacekeeping machinery; but the Security Council
itself, of course, must make its own contribution to this
work in accordance with its own competencies.

Here I would like to recall that we, of course, also
need to follow up the implementation of our decisions.
One of the mechanisms which must be useful for our
work on peacekeeping so far is not helping us very
much. I am referring to the Military Staff Committee.
The Security Council has twice already 4 in
resolutions 1327 (2000) and 1353 (2001) -
emphasized the need for the study of means to make
more active use of the Military Staff Committee in
order to strengthen United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and we are expecting the Military Staff
Committee do respond to the Council's resolutions.

In conclusion, I would like to support
Ambassador Valdivieso in saying that for planning our
work it is extremely important to stick to the agenda,
and that those questions that need to be discussed
under "other matters" should be discussed after the
planned items on the agenda.

Once again, Mr. President, I would like to
congratulate you and the Secretary-General.

