Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I would
like to thank Special Coordinator Robert Serry for his
briefing and his dedicated work.

Let me start with a word on the heinous terrorist
attack in Bulgaria last week. Like the whole Council,
Germany has condemned in the strongest terms that
attack, which targeted Israeli citizens. We are looking
forward to the results of the ongoing investigation.
Those responsible for the attack must be found and
brought to justice. We extend our condolences to the
families of the victims.

Before I turn to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, let
me first address the situation in Syria. Last week, the
double veto against the draft resolution on Syria marked
a decisive split in the Council. The Council has failed
once again to assume its responsibility. It has not been
able to agree on clear messages - neither to Damascus,
that the use of heavy weapons must stop, nor to the
people of Syria, that the Council fully supports Kofi
Annan's effort to solve the crisis politically.

As I said last week, the Syrian people will pay the
price for this failure. Not only has the use of heavy
weapons increased, but we now hear reports that
even fighter jets are being used in the Syrian regime's
onslaught on its own people. Our agreement to extend
the mandate of the United Nations Supervision Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic (UNSMIS) should not
be seen as a whitewash of the Council's failure. The
agreement does not reflect consensus in the Council; it
is merely the lowest common denominator.

We continue to believe that the Syrian regime
must face consequences if it continues to trample on
international law and its own promises. We are very
worried about the prospect of a civil war in Syria, and
we urge all Council members to do their utmost not to
put the efforts of the Joint Special Envoy, Kofi Annan,
in peril.

The Al-Assad authorities are not only unleashing
heavy weapons and gunships against their own people;
two days ago, they even went a step further, making
threats to the international community of the use
of chemical and biological weapons. Such a threat is
ruthless and inhumane. The international community
has strongly, and rightly, condemned that threat,
which my Foreign Minister described as monstrous.
We will continue to hold the Syrian authorities fully
accountable for any use of such weapons and for the
safety of their storage. We reiterate our call to all those
within the Syrian regime to reconsider their options.
One day there will be a new Syria. One day there will
be accountability for their deeds. And one day they may
wish they had taken the right decision for themselves,
their families and the future of their own country.

The increasing number of refugees from Syria
into neighbouring countries shows clearly the serious
regional repercussions of the conflict there. Germany
commends Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey for
offering refuge to civilians fleeing Syria. My country
has increased its humanitarian assistance to those
refugees. Another cause for concern is the entry last
week of Syrian armed forces into the area of separation,
in violation of the disengagement agreement between
Israeli and Syrian forces. We welcome the fact that the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force has
liaised with all sides in an effort to prevent an escalation
of the situation.

Let me now turn to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Last month saw another spike in rocket attacks from
Gaza. The situation on the Sinai has become more
difficult. While fully recognizing Israel's legitimate
right to self-defence, we continue to call on all
sides to exercise the utmost restraint in that volatile
regional situation, and to consider the humanitarian
consequences of all use of force.

Lasting security in the Middle East can be achieved
only by addressing the root causes of the conflict.
An end to that conflict, which will bring to an end
the occupation and allow all the people of the region
to live in security and realize their aspirations to
freedom and self-determination, can be reached only
through a negotiated, two-State solution. The basis for
that two-State solution must therefore not be allowed
to erode further. Germany has been following with
concern recent decisions on settlement expansion and
Government subsidies for developing settlements, as
well as the discussion of the status of certain settlement
outposts. Let me be clear: international humanitarian
law applies to the entirety of the occupied territories.
The road map obliges Israel to dismantle all outposts
erected since March 2001. They cannot be legalized.
All settlements are illegal under international law. We
are also worried about the increasing number of acts
of violence committed by settlers, including attacks
involving firearms.

The social and economic development of Area C
is critical to the viability of a future Palestinian State.
We are worried by recent reports about Israeli plans to
demolish eight Palestinian villages in Area C so that
the area can be used for military training. Together with
our European partners, we have engaged in a dialogue
with the Israeli authorities with the aim of preventing
demolitions, improving the efficiency, transparency
and accountability of planning and permission
procedures, and increasing Palestinian participation.
We support and are in close liaison with the efforts and
work of the Quartet representative and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Area C.

Germany follows the human rights situation on both
sides of the Middle East conflict with close attention.
We have urged Israel to abide by all its obligations
founded in international law. Conversely, we have
urged the Palestinian Authority to address human rights
concerns, particularly those regarding the security
forces. The recent death sentences carried out by the
de facto authorities in the Gaza Strip are unacceptable.

The resumption of substantive negotiations on
final status issues is the only way to make progress
towards a solution. Those negotiations will be difficult
and will require painful concessions from both sides.
They therefore need an environment of mutual trust.
Palestinians must be able to believe that the Israeli
Government truly wants a two-State solution and is
ready to make the necessary concessions. And Israelis
must be able to believe that they have a partner on the
other side that is interested in solving the conflict once
and for all in a way that will provide security.

