Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by welcoming your presence here, Madam
President, and the fact that the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Indonesia is presiding over our meeting,
which reflects the importance of the subject we are
discussing today. I thank Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing, which was very precise and
informative, as always. I also thank the Commissioner-
General of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
Mr. Pierre Krahenbiihl, whose presence in the Chamber
today is very welcome. I would like to pay tribute to
Mr. Krahenbiihl's commitment and to UNRWA's work
with Palestinian refugees and its contribution to the
stability of the region. I also want to welcome the
participation in our work of the Special Representative
of the President of the United States, Jason Greenblatt.

I would first like to mention the situation in Gaza,
where the humanitarian, political and security equation
is particularly alarming. Earlier this month, the Gaza
Strip once again experienced an outbreak of violence
that runs the risk of tipping into a new conflict, like
the other three it has experienced over the past decade.
France, which will never compromise Israel's security,
has condemned in the strongest terms the firing of
rockets into populated areas of Israeli territory from
the Gaza Strip on 4 and 5 May. Those shootings and
the ensuing clashes have once again claimed civilian
casualties on both sides. The developments since
2014 are of an unprecedented gravity. Israelis and
Palestinians alike have the right to live in peace, dignity
and security.

The efforts of Egypt and the United Nations
Special Coordinator have made it possible to achieve
a ceasefire, which must be consolidated and sustained.
We call on the parties to exercise the utmost restraint in
that regard. Beyond that, however, there will be lasting
stability in Gaza only in the context of a negotiated
settlement, including the full return of the Palestinian
Authority and the lifting of the blockade accompanied
by credible security guarantees for Israel.

We also recall that the stabilization of the Gaza
Strip requires an immediate improvement in the
humanitarian situation in the territory, to which all
stakeholders must contribute. In that respect, Israel's
announcement of the expansion of the fishing zone is
a step in the right direction. In the Gaza Strip, where
two-thirds of the population is composed of Palestinian
refugees, the main humanitarian actor is UNRWA.
In Palestinian refugee camps in Gaza and the region,
access to education, health and, for some people, food
aid depends entirely on UNRWA.
Beyond the humanitarian dimension, the dignity of
Palestinian refugees and their ability to build a future
are at stake. It is also a question of the stability and
security of a region that has been shaken by crises,
to which we cannot allow the addition of yet another
factor of fragility. We must therefore respond to
Pierre Krahenbiihl's call for us to maintain our level
of collective financial engagement this year. UNRWA's
ability to maintain services is not guaranteed beyond
summer, and the issue of the reopening of UNRWA
schools will arise in August. The mobilization of us
all will be crucial in the preparation for the donors
conference, scheduled for late June in New York.
France, for its part, has doubled its contribution to
UNRWA in 2019.

Our support for UNRWA will also require political
mobilization for the renewal, in the fall, of the three-year
mandate entrusted to it by the General Assembly. Until
a just, equitable, realistic and lasting solution to the
Palestinian refugee problem is found in the context of
a peace agreement, the UNRWA mandate will remain
necessary, not only for the refugees themselves and
their future and the stability of the region, but also for
the international community. We cannot collectively
afford to leave the refugee camps to themselves, at the
risk of making them the ideal recruitment pools for
terrorist groups that are active in the region.

The situation in Gaza, with which I began my
statement, cannot be dissociated from the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict as a whole or from the two-State
prospect. There will be no viable Palestinian State
without Gaza and no lasting and just peace without
a Palestinian State. On the ground and in people's
minds, however, the acceleration of settlement activity
undermines the foundations of the two-State solution.
Today, we are inching ever closer to the point of
no return.

In addition to the facts, legal developments have
led to the progressive application of Israeli law to the
inhabitants of West Bank settlements. That situation
does not correspond to the aspirations of either the
Palestinians or the Israelis, and it is emerging in
violation of international law, including the resolutions
of the Council.

As we can see, the issue we are facing collectively
is urgent and fundamentally political. We take note
of the scheduled holding of an economic workshop
in Manama on 25 and 26 June, at the initiative of the
United States and Bahrain. France stands ready to
support all efforts, including of an economic nature,
as long as they are in line with the prospect that we
have defined together: the establishment of a viable
and independent Palestinian State, real conditions for
the economic resurgence of Palestine and, beyond that,
the construction of a stronger and more integrated
regional economy.

We must not hold back from engaging in serious
negotiations to implement the two-State solution,
with both States living in peace and security within
recognized borders, with Jerusalem as the capital. That
is what the law says. That is the objective that France is
pursuing, as a friend of Israel and the Palestinians, and
it is on that basis that we will evaluate the initiatives
that can be undertaken.

