Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate and once again bringing to
our attention an issue that is and must remain, as the
Secretary-General said to us last November in vibrant
and powerful words, "an absolute priority" (S/PV.578], p. 2) for the Security Council and for Member States.

Italy fully associates itself with the statement to
be delivered later by the Republic of Slovenia on
behalf of the European Union. I will just add a few
remarks.

We warmly welcome the statement of Under-
Secretary-General Holmes and his extremely focused
and action-oriented approach. He has offered us, I
would say, a really outstanding, very disturbing,
frustrating and almost appalling briefing.

We all know and welcome the progress made by
the Security Council on this issue as recalled by
Mr. Holmes. First of all, resolution 1674 (2006)
reaffirms the principle of the responsibility to protect, a
"cardinal achievement" (S/2007/643, para. 11) of our
Organization and one that must be read and
operationalized in a non-confrontational manner. In
general terms, concerning the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, I feel that the briefing of the Under-
Secretary-General requires us, for our part, to look at
the issue with a ground-centred operational approach,
as he has done. We must never lose sight of the fact
that what matters most at the end of the day is if and
how we are able to deliver and have an impact on the
ground in bringing relief to those who suffer.

I think that is why the briefing of Under-
Secretary-General Holmes is so disturbing: because it
questions how much of an impact we are able to have.
In fact, as I was saying, the Under-Secretary-General
paints a very disturbing and troubling picture of
conflict situations throughout the world, including
constraints and denials of access of humanitarian
personnel to vulnerable people caught in conflict and
negative developments in the conduct of hostilities,
among which is the scourge of sexual violence. We are
convinced that when used as a method of warfare and
when it deliberately targets the civilian population or is
part of a widespread attack against civilian population,

sexual violence in situations of armed conflict is a
threat to international peace and security, and therefore
the business of this Council. It is time that we fulfil our
responsibility and move from merely denouncing those
crimes to taking concrete action to end them.

In operational terms, the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2007/643) was very clear, precise
and focused on which actions we need to take in the
following weeks and months. We are strongly in favour
of the proposal regarding an informal forum for
consultations on protection concerns at the expert level
among Council members. Here I will not repeat what
was so eloquently clarified by Ambassador Holmes. I
definitely think that that informal mechanism for
consultations would enable us to facilitate a systematic
consideration of the protection of civilians in the
Council's deliberations, specifically when considering
the establishment, assessment and renewal of
peacekeeping mandates. There should be no new
mechanisms, just, as underlined by Under-Secretary-
General Holmes, an informal gathering, a "light" tool
for that enhanced operational and ground-centred
approach I was just referring to. It will make the
difference if it will give an added value to this ground-
centred approach. I call on my colleagues: let us
deliver on such proposed action and try to sit down at
the same table. Discussing together is the best way of
achieving our goal. Once again, what is at stake is our
credibility in delivering.

I have just two final remarks on other operational
tools.

First, on peacekeeping, United Nations operations
must be clearly mandated to ensure the protection of
civilians and subsequently report on it. Once again, I
welcome the joint study being conducted by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, mentioned in
the report of the Secretary-General.

Secondly, on access, we have greatly appreciated
the update received on the enhanced mechanism for the
monitoring and reporting system. More systematic and
timely reports by the Emergency Relief Coordinator to
the Council on serious access constraints are necessary.
We need an effective system of proactive monitoring
and prevention, and here I would like to underline the
term "proactive". The attention of the Council must be
drawn to the different types of access constraints -
which do not necessarily mean violations, as has been

highlighted - as soon as they arise. And then we must
react and find ways of being effective operationally
and not just through statements. We do not have the
luxury of wasting time when innocent lives are at
stake.

