Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to add my voice to others congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month, and to pay tribute to the
stewardship of Ambassador Araud and his French team
during the month of February.

I am grateful for Ambassador Takasu's detailed
report and for the diligent work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) over the
past three months. His report shows that sanctions have
had an effect. For example, they have led to several
seizures of illegal Iranian arms exports, and I commend
the thorough work of the States that have acted in
accordance with their international obligations to
ensure that Iran's illicit activities have been disrupted.
Sanctions have also made it harder for Iranian banks to
finance proliferation activity and for Iran to develop its
nuclear programme.

However, while existing measures have had some
effect, they have not yet led Iran to change course on
its nuclear activities. That is clear from the most recent
report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), whose charge-sheet against Iran is getting
longer with each report. It reinforces our fears that Iran
is acting duplicitously and illegally. I would highlight
five particular areas covered, including one new
example of non-cooperation.

First, Iran showed its contempt for Security
Council resolutions through the construction of the site
at Qom and announcing its intention to build 10 further
enrichment plants. The report states that the
development of the Qom site is inconsistent with Iran's
obligations under the subsidiary arrangements of its
Safeguards Agreement and raises concerns about the
completeness of its declarations.

Secondly, the report states that Iran has provided
the Agency with measurement results indicating that
enrichment levels of up to 19.8 per cent were obtained
between 9 and 11 February. Moreover, the report
highlights that, although the Agency told Iran not to
start enriching to 20 per cent, Iran continued to do so
anyway. It states that Iran has now installed 8,610
centrifuges, of which 3,772 are operating, and has
increased its stockpile of low enriched uranium to
more than 2,000 kilogrammes.

Thirdly, the IAEA Director General makes clear
that there has been no Iranian cooperation with the
IAEA on outstanding issues concerning possible
military dimensions for 18 months, and he states that
the information available to the Agency on these issues
"altogether raises concerns about the possible existence
10-25834
in Iran of past or current undisclosed activities relating
to the development of a nuclear payload for a missile".

Fourthly, the report also highlights new areas of
non-cooperation. For example, Iran has refused to
allow the Agency to take samples of heavy water
stored at Esfahan or access to the heavy water
production plant.

Fifthly, the report makes clear that Iran has still
not implemented the Additional Protocol. The Director
General urges Iran to take steps to fully implement its
safeguards and other obligations, and we fully support
the IAEA efforts in this regard.

Iran's true intentions were also shown by its
failure to respond constructively to the proposal to
replace fuel rods at the Tehran nuclear research reactor
using Iran's stocks of 3.5 per cent low-enriched
uranium. That proposal met Iran's wish to secure fuel
for this research reactor, and it would have been a real
confidence boost to the prospects for a broader
dialogue with Iran on nuclear matters. But despite
initial signals that Iran could accept such a deal, it
instead made counter-proposals in complete opposition
to the spirit and purpose of the agreement.

Iran's current trajectory is illegal and
destabilizing. The IAEA report emphasizes again that
they are unable to verify that Iran's nuclear programme
is for non-military purposes. Without this reassurance,
there is a very real possibility that Iran's actions could
lead to increased proliferation across the region.

However, the prospect of tough sanctions means
that this scenario is not inevitable. Despite Iranian
boasting, we can still persuade Iran to comply with
IAEA requirements by making the cost of their current
nuclear programme too great to bear. Further measures
would demonstrate that the international community is
united behind a diplomatic resolution to Iran's nuclear
issue and would stave off any pre-emptive moves by
others to resolve this issue by other means.

Adopting further measures represents the best
prospect for bringing Iran into serious negotiations to
resolve the IAEA concerns. Such measures should be
smart and effective. They should target areas with an
impact on the regime's policy calculations. They
should show the regime the extent to which the costs of
their nuclear programme outweigh any dubious
benefits.
10-25834

At the same time, we should reaffirm our
willingness to continue to engage with Iran. The E3+3
has offered economic benefits, such as investment and
trade, help so that Iran could develop civilian nuclear
power and a renewed relationship with the
international community based on respect and equality.

We have never denied Iran's right to pursue a
peaceful civilian nuclear programme, but with that
right comes responsibility, and Iran needs to restore
trust by the international community. Their continued
silence on possible weaponization activities, combined
with the revelation of secret enrichment sites and
aggressive rhetoric, does little to restore trust in their
intentions, but merely adds to our concerns about the
programme.

The United Kingdom and its international
partners, including the European Union, are committed
to the dual-track strategy, and we hope that the
Security Council will continue to support us in these
efforts.

