Mr. Brammertz: I am honoured to appear once
more before the Security Council to present the report
of the Office of the Prosecutor on the implementation
of the Tribunal's completion strategy.

In my presentation, I will provide the Council
with an update on the work of the Office of the
Prosecutor in the following areas: the ongoing judicial
proceedings, the cooperation of States, the interaction
with prosecution services in the former Yugoslavia and
organizational matters.

During the reporting period, prosecution work in
trials and appeals has been intense. We are currently
prosecuting 26 individuals in seven trials. Two
fugitives - Ratko Mladie and Goran HadZie remain at
large. Their arrest today remains the highest priority.

To fulfil the mandate of the Tribunal, they must be
arrested and brought to trial as soon as possible.

The cases that are now before the Tribunal are
broad and complex. Bringing evidence forward to
prove charges of the magnitude contained in our
indictments is a substantial undertaking and in every
case a major challenge. All cases involve senior
political and military figures from the conflict in the
former Yugoslavia. Several involve the prosecution of
six or more political or military leaders. In one such
case, the trial is awaiting judgement. In the two other
cases, the prosecution phase is complete and the trial is
well into the defence phase. These multiple accused
trials can be considered as major achievements and
vindication of the use of joinder as one of the key
pillars of the Tribunal's completion strategy.

The appeals work in the Office of the Prosecutor
continues apace. The Office is currently working on
10 active appeals cases. We expect a marked increase
in our caseload in the second half of 2009 after the trial
judgements of the multiple accused cases. By then, we
expect to have an overall inventory of more than
23 appeals cases.

In the reporting period, my Office has also
conducted a number of important contempt cases. My
Office prosecuted individuals involved in the
divulgation of information about protected witnesses
and interference with protected witnesses.

We remain strongly committed to the Tribunal's
completion strategy. In all cases before the Tribunal,
we have taken steps to present cases more efficiently
and expeditiously. We have reduced the scope of the
criminal conduct charged, streamlined indictments and
submitted evidence in written form, thereby reducing
the amount of live witness testimony. We also continue
to submit motions proposing to introduce evidence that
has already been adjudicated in other trials. As a result,
progress has been made in addressing the length of
trials and in moving through the Tribunal's trial
programme.

While trials and appeals are progressing, I remain
concerned about the problems of witness interference,
particularly in the form of witness intimidation, which
directly affect our ability to present a case in an
effective and timely manner. Where appropriate, we
have addressed those concerns with the Registry and
Chambers. I also ask States in which witnesses reside
to continue assisting the International Tribunal in this

respect. It is important to create a climate that is
conducive for witnesses to testify, and provide the
necessary guarantees to witnesses who decide to speak
before the Tribunal.

In order to succeed in completing the trial and
appeals programme, we still rely heavily on
cooperation from the States of the former Yugoslavia
and the support of the international community.
Cooperation from the States of the former Yugoslavia
remains critical in several areas: access to archives and
the provision of documents, access to and protection of
witnesses and the search for, arrest and transfer of the
remaining fugitives.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has continued to grant
access to Government archives and to provide the
documents requested. We hope that the political and
institutional difficulties currently faced by Bosnia and
Herzegovina will not negatively impact on the
satisfactory cooperation it is providing to my Office
today. We also continue to encourage the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to adopt a proactive approach
to investigating and prosecuting those that support
fugitives evading justice.

Croatia has responded to most requests for
assistance from the Office of the Prosecutor. However,
we continue to seek access to key documents and
archives in the Gotovina case. Over the past year and a
half, these specific documents have been at the centre
of discussions with Croatian authorities. After several
failed attempts to obtain these documents and at the
request of the Office of the Prosecutor, the Trial
Chamber ordered Croatia to provide a detailed report
specifying the efforts undertaken to obtain the
requested documents. In response to the Chamber's
order, Croatia provided a report and supporting
documents. Since my written report, Croatia also
provided additional documents requested by my Office,
thereby complying, in part, with the Tribunal's order.

However, still at this date, key military
documents remain unaccounted for and, in our view,
further steps remain to be taken. The matter remains
before the Tribunal. As the trial is in progress, it is
crucial that the remaining requested key documents be
made available immediately.

Since my last report to the Security Council,
Serbia's cooperation with my Office has significantly
improved. The changed general political environment
has led to a more decisive and proactive approach to

cooperation by authorities at the political, judicial and
operational levels.

The assistance provided by Serbia during the
reporting period in terms of access to archives and the
provision of documents has also improved. Serbia has
provided timely responses to the majority of requests
for assistance and provided significant assistance in the
provision of important documents relevant for trials.

Serbia's National Council for Cooperation with
the Tribunal has played a key role in this area.
Significant improvements have also been achieved as a
result of the Serbian authorities recently participating
in working meetings with my staff, which has
facilitated the identification of relevant documents in
their archives. Further cooperation is needed to obtain
information in relation to certain important missing
documents from those archives that are critical to the
cases.

My Office also continues to seek access to certain
key military documents in the trial against Momcilo
Perisie. In that case, the Trial Chamber has ordered
Serbia to investigate and produce a report in relation to
the missing documents. Since my written report, Serbia
has provided a response, which we are currently
reviewing and which may require further follow-up.

The most critical area of cooperation remains the
apprehension of fugitives. The arrests of Stojan
Zupljanin and Radovan Karadzie, carried out by the
authorities of Serbia, were important milestones in
Serbia's cooperation with my Office. They were the
result of improved, effective leadership and
coordination between political and judicial authorities,
as well as security services.

Agencies in charge of tracking fugitives have
stepped up efforts to locate and apprehend the two
remaining fugitives, Ratko Mladie and Goran Hadzie.
Planning and coordination between the various security
services has improved and the authorities are
conducting more pro-active, comprehensive and
widespread actions to arrest those remaining fugitives.
However, the work of the current authorities is
complicated by the need to overcome shortcomings of
the previous management of the civilian intelligence
services, in particular, their failure to analyse and act
upon information obtained in relation to the search for
the two fugitives.

During my visit to Belgrade last November, the
authorities presented their action plan to search for and
arrest the two remaining fugitives. Should these plans
be successfully implemented, the analytical capacity
reinforced and the necessary political support
maintained, additional positive results could be
achieved.

I also encourage States and international and
regional organizations to continue supporting the States
of the former Yugoslavia in their cooperation with my
Office.

The transfer of investigative case files and
material to competent national jurisdictions and efforts
to strengthen the capacity of national jurisdictions
remain key components of our completion strategy. We
are well advanced in the process of transferring cases
and investigation files to the States of the former
Yugoslavia. All but one of the ten cases involving
13 accused transferred pursuant to rule 11 bis to the
States of the former Yugoslavia have been completed at
the trial level. At present, rule 11 bis transfer
procedures have been fully used and no further cases
appear suitable for transfer.

With regard to the investigative material or
category 11 cases, the Office of the Prosecutor has
transferred material involving a total of 15 suspects
covering seven municipalities. In 2009, we intend to
transfer the last batch of investigative material with
some 20 identified suspects to prosecutors in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

During the reporting period, my Office remained
actively involved in responding to requests for
assistance submitted by national judicial authorities
from the States of the former Yugoslavia. In this
reporting period, we have responded to a total of 57
requests for assistance.

My Office continues to support efforts to
strengthen the capacity of the judiciaries of the States
of the former Yugoslavia to deal with war crimes cases
at the national level. International support to national
courts in States of the former Yugoslavia will remain
crucial in the coming months and years. In this context,
my Office supports international and national efforts to
strengthen the Special Department for War Crimes in
the Office of the Prosecutor of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Trials, including trials transferred by the
Tribunal could otherwise be jeopardized.

We strongly support the improvement of
cooperation in judicial matters between States in the
region. Owing to obstacles preventing the extradition
of nationals and to legal barriers precluding the
transfer of war crimes proceedings among these States,
there is a danger that many lower- and mid-level
perpetrators of war crimes committed in the early
19905 in the former Yugoslavia will evade justice. To
address this impunity gap, these issues should urgently
be addressed by all authorities concerned.

Despite efforts aimed at speeding up trials and
appeals proceedings, there will be delays in the
timelines for current and future trials and appeals.
These are principally caused by the recent arrests of
Radovan Karadzic' and Stojan Zupljanin and a number
of factors in ongoing cases such as the sickness of the
accused, the change of defence counsel and cases
proceeding slowly because the accused have elected to
represent themselves.

We therefore predict that we will require our
current staff levels through 2009. Without the retention
of that level of resources, it will be extremely difficult
to complete the Tribunal's remaining trials and appeals.
A revised budget has therefore been submitted
reflecting the projected trial and appeals workload for
2009. We ask that the downsizing process in relation to
staffing for trials should not take place before the end
of 2009 and into 2010.

To complete this work, we will also need to rely
on our dedicated and committed staff members. I
therefore once more ask the Security Council and other
organs of the United Nations to support measures that
will allow identified staff members to stay at the
Tribunal until the cases that they are working on are
completed.

We will continue to participate in consultation
with the President and Registrar in discussions with the
Security Council on the establishment of an
international residual mechanism.
I would like to express my gratitude for all the
support provided by the Security Council to the
International Tribunal. Without its assistance, the
achievements of the Tribunal would not have been
possible.

Your support will remain crucial in this final
phase of the International Tribunal's existence in order
to obtain the arrest of the two remaining fugitives,

Ratko Mladic' and Goran Hadzic, but also in order to
successfully complete our work. Thank you all very
much for your attention.

