Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me begin by

thanking Ms. Nakamitsu for her informative briefing.

I will focus on three points: first, the developments
in Idlib; secondly, the use of chemical weapons; and
thirdly, the need for attribution and accountability.

First, with regard to the developments in Idlib, as
others before me have said, we are extremely concerned
about the escalation of violence in Idlib due to recent
air strikes. The risk of a further escalation of violence
is deeply concerned. Such an escalation would lead
to an unspeakable humanitarian catastrophe, with
major regional consequences. The Council has the
responsibility to prevent that worst-case scenario.

Let me repeat our key messages. All warring parties
must abide by existing Security Council resolutions. A
military offensive in Idlib would put at risk the lives of
more than 3 million civilians living in the region and
result in a new humanitarian catastrophe. The guarantors
of the Idlib de-escalation zone and the Syrian regime
need to work towards a peaceful, non-violent, negotiated
solution for Idlib. Any measure to counter terrorism
must comply with obligations under international law,
in particular human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law. Combating
terrorism is no excuse to target without distinction or
proportionality. Parties need to uphold international
humanitarian law throughout Syria, and in particular
in Idlib, and provide humanitarian access to those in
need. Any use of chemical weapons is unacceptable,
including in Idlib. It is prohibited by international law
and would have devastating human and humanitarian
consequences. We support the call of the Secretary-
General for restraint in the use of force, with the
protection of citizens as the first priority.

Secondly, with regard to chemical weapons, we
thank the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) for its fifty-ninth report (see S/2018/804). We support the objective and professional
work of the OPCW Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic and call on all warring parties in Syria
to continue their efforts to ensure that the Fact-finding
Mission can continue its work independently. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands looks forward to the final
report on the attack in Douma on 7 April.

We condemn the recent trend of spreading deliberate

disinformation on chemical weapons attacks, including
in the Council, to create confusion. There is no credible
information supporting the allegations of one Council
member against the White Helmets and against Western
countries. In our view, the Security Council should
focus on common ground. We all condemn the use
of chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone and under
any circumstances; we all agree that impunity must be
countered to defend the international non-proliferation
architecture; and we all agree on the standard that the
use of chemical weapons is never permitted. Together,
we should reinforce the international norm that
chemical weapons should never be used again.

My third point is about attribution and
accountability. Let me refer to the points made by our
Kuwaiti colleague on the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism and reiterate the importance
of the outcome of the special session of the Conference
of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention
on 27 June. There an overwhelming majority of States
members of the OPCW reconfirmed and strengthened
the standard against the use of chemical weapons.

We once again plead for follow-up to the
conclusions of the OPCW Fact-finding Mission and its
future attribution mechanism by referring the situation
in Syria to the International Criminal Court. We remain
convinced that the OPCW can make an important
contribution to fighting impunity in Syria by sharing
information with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic.

In conclusion, the people of Syria have suffered
far too long. They have suffered from mass atrocities,
violence and the use of chemical weapons. Working
with all possible instruments inside and outside the
Council, the Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue
its efforts to achieve accountability for those crimes.

