Mr. Rendon Barnica (Honduras): Impunity is a
difficult problem to resolve. This phenomenon is a clear
sign that a State at a given point does not have control
over its society, and that those involved in various crimes
are beyond the reach of the law.

In Burundi, where people have been afraid to
denounce others because of fear of reprisal or because
they belong to the same ethnic group, there has been a
growing consensus that there needs to be an impartial and
objective investigation of the assassination of President
Ndadaye in October 1993 and of the subsequent
massacres. My delegation considers it to be a positive act
that the Government of Burundi has officially asked the
United Nations to initiate the establishment of an
international commission to investigate the facts and to
bring those responsible to justice, as is mentioned in the
Convention of Government.

Resolving the problem of impunity in Burundi and
at the same time opening the way to reconciliation and
dialogue is no easy task. But Burundi has in its favour the
universal desire for peace and stability in the country.
There is also a consensus of all parties that a climate of
internal peace and stability should be created, together
with instruments, such as the Convention of Government
that can provide an appropriate framework for the
attainment of lasting peace.

Responsibility for the maintenance of peace and
security in Burundi resides precisely with the people and
the coalition Government established on the basis of the
Convention of Government signed on 10 September 1994.
In this respect, it is important to underscore the efforts
being made by the Burundi Government to achieve
national reconciliation through programmes for
confidence-building among the different components of
society.

This initiative by the Government of Burundi to
establish an international commission, as provided for in
the Convention of Government, is commendable. It will
promote the restoration of a state of law and improve the
functioning of the judicial system. It is, moreover, aimed
at resolving a fundamental problem in Burundi, one which
jeopardizes its security: the image of impunity.

My delegation completely understands the
importance of establishing an international judicial

 

commission of inquiry, which is why we decided to sponsor
the draft resolution. We agree that the cooperation of
Burundi's authorities and institutions is essential if the work
of the commission is to be successful. In this respect, we
believe that the commission must operate in Burundi with
complete freedom, independence, and security, with broad
access to all the information in the possession of the
Government.

