Mr. Tsiskarashvili (Georgia): Georgia commends
Brazil's timely initiative in organizing this open debate,
which is aimed at addressing one of the most
challenging matters before the United Nations. We are
also grateful for the incisive concept paper prepared by
the presidency of the Council (S/2011/50).

While Georgia has aligned itself with the
statement made by the Acting Head of the delegation
of the European Union, I would like to take this
opportunity to stress some additional points.

My delegation shares the view of the entire
United Nations family that security and development,
along with human rights, are inseparable and mutually
reinforcing notions. It is obvious that no development
agenda can be fully realized in the presence of security
restrictions and that, vice versa, genuine security will
never be achieved without a development.
Interdependence is evident; development contributes to
greater security and security creates an environment
conducive to development.

In this context, many speakers today have
comprehensively described examples of how
development issues impact the core aspects of peace
and security. Georgia could not add more, but
subscribes to the positions expressed by the other
delegations. At the same time, we are convinced that
special attention has to be paid in our deliberations to
the impact of an insecure environment on the
development agenda. It is crystal clear that instability
and volatility have harmful effects on all aspects of
national development agendas.

My country is a vivid example of this. Lack of
security, a general atmosphere of chaos and
lawlessness, ethnically-based and other gross human
rights violations, as well as thriving organized crime in
the occupied territories of Georgia, have an overall
harmful effect on all major aspects of the national
development agenda, especially within the occupied
territories themselves. Economic and social
development, general healthcare, natural resource
management, environment protection and other areas
are challenged. The ongoing occupation and continuing
violation of the ceasefire agreement by the occupying
Power make it enormously difficult to bring these
disturbing developments to an end.

Nevertheless, these dire conditions can in no way
serve as an excuse for Georgia to just settle with
blame-shifting and to give up efforts to move forward.
To this end, Georgia has undertaken the unilateral
obligation not to use force and thus contribute to
facilitating the establishment of secure conditions in
the occupied territories. Moreover, in order to assist
human development in those regions of Georgia, the
Government adopted the State Strategy on Occupied
Territories: Engagement through Cooperation and a
subsequent action plan, which envisage development
and improvement in all fields of social life.

We believe these decisions and commitments will
inevitably contribute to the process of securing peace
and stability in Georgia and will peacefully challenge
the existing status quo established by the use of force.
Obviously, these efforts should advance in concert with
the international community's strong engagement.

My delegation hopes that all the views, proposals
and individual experiences expressed during today's
debate will be adequately followed up and translated
into concrete action, which can strengthen peace,
security and development worldwide.

