Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, I should like to
discharge the pleasant duty of conveying to you, Sir,
my delight at seeing you preside over the Security
Council. I am all the more gratified by your presidency
as a result of the fact that you represent a country, the
Gabonese Republic, with which the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has long enjoyed excellent
relations marked by mutual esteem and respect.

Allow me also to welcome the presence here of
Ms. Migiro, Mr. Costa, Mr. Duarte and Mr. Sylvain-
Goma, and to thank them sincerely for their valuable
contributions to this debate.

I am from a country, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which, owing to its geographical situation
and the breach of international peace and security that
10-28131
it has experienced, unfortunately embodies the tragedy
that Central Africa has suffered as a result of the
proliferation and illicit circulation of arms, in
particular small arms and light weapons, to which
former Secretary-General Kofi Annan once referred as
African weapons of mass destruction.

Indeed, over the past decade my country has been
the theatre of the most murderous war Africa has ever
known. The price that has been paid by the Congolese
people is unimaginable. The Democratic Republic of
the Congo has suffered millions of deaths, millions of
lifelong disabilities, millions of internally displaced
persons and refugees, massive violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law, exponential
growth in the prevalence of HIV/AIDS in conflict
zones, and especially - and this is of great concern for
our future - the sacrifice of an entire young
generation that already comprises the majority of our
population and will be the Democratic Republic of the
Congo of tomorrow.

I wish to spare the Council further litanies.
Today, my country is in the process of reconstruction,
institutional consolidation and rebuilding the nation. If
this process is to be successful, we cannot sufficiently
stress the imperative need to strengthen cooperation
and partnership at the international level, since the
fight against the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons largely transcends Central Africa and extends
to the entire continent and, indeed, the entire world.

How can we face this challenge and together
travel the road to normalization? In Central Africa, we
require peace and stability. We require a peace to keep
or build, even through political settlements likely to
prevent recourse to violence and therefore the demands
of a potential market for arms and ammunition. Our
countries seek better cooperation with the United
Nations bodies primarily responsible for dealing with
small arms and light weapons: the General Assembly,
the Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Office for Disarmament Affairs, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and the position
currently under creation of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

On the ground, we need to rethink and better
populate programmes for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; disarmament, demobilization,
5
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement;
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement; and security sector reform.
Our States should more firmly address the supply
networks for small arms and light weapons through a
process of registering, tracing, marking and identifying
weapons, with the assistance and support of such
organizations as INTERPOL, or through international
instruments under United Nations auspices, without
prejudice to the relevant provisions of the United
Nations Charter, their commitments vis-a-vis other
existing international instruments, and of course their
national security and interests.

We should also clearly identify the links between
the illicit traffic in these weapons and the illegal
exploitation of natural and other resources, as well as
the illicit traffic in narcotics, and in response develop
innovative strategies. Practical cooperation is desirable
among the authorities of our States responsible for
investigations, the Security Council sanctions
committees, peacekeeping missions, and relevant
regional and international organizations. To that end,
coercive measures should be considered not only
against individuals, but also against any State Member
of the United Nations that violates arms embargos
against conflict zones in our subregion.

The efforts of our States to combat the
uncontrolled proliferation of these weapons should be
based on the belief that security, development and
human rights are all interconnected. Our national plans
for combating the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons should incorporate peacebuilding efforts,
gender equality, strategies for the empowerment of
women, broader poverty reduction policies, and
concepts of national and human security. Our States
should be encouraged to strengthen cooperation aimed
at the gathering, storage and exchange of data on small
arms and light weapons. Appropriate training and
capacity-building policies for the implementation of
national arms control and reduction programmes are
desirable. The task would be crushing for our States
without appropriate international assistance, and it
would be difficult for them successfully to implement
policies for peace, stability, security and the protection
of our young democracies.

To fight the scourge of the illicit traffic in
weapons, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
undertaken remedial measures, some of which will
become preventive in the future and all of which are

aimed at strengthening our capacity to counter the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and to
reduce armed violence. My country has thus acquired
an institutional framework, inter alia, through the
creation of a national commission for the control of
small arms and light weapons and the reduction of
armed violence. With the assistance of the United
Nations system, the European Union and a number of
non-governmental organizations, and with the support
of certain States, including the United States, Belgium
and France, my country has taken myriad legislative
measures, bolstered its operational capacities and,
finally, undertaken appropriate steps in terms of
information exchange and the maintenance of registries
on the control, seizure, confiscation and destruction of
weapons. By way of illustration, in 2009 our country
destroyed over 100,000 weapons and 480 tons of
munitions. Furthermore, a weapons-marking operation
was launched on 20 February.

I would also briefly like to mention the efforts
made in awareness-raising and community
disarmament under the aegis of the Government by the
Ecumenical Programme for the Transformation of
Conflicts and Reconciliation. Moreover, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has signed and
ratified all the legal instruments of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) in this
field. With regard to Congolese law, as the Council is
aware, duly constituted international treaties and
agreements take precedence over national law.

I can assure the Council that the States members
of ECCAS - which, as its Secretary-General has
mentioned, include almost a dozen countries, more
than half of which were in conflict situations not long
ago - understand perfectly the seriousness of the
problem of the illicit traffic in weapons. Our countries
are pursuing cooperation in the context of both ECCAS
and the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee
on Security Questions in Central Africa, which was
established as a framework for coordination in May
1992 by Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali.

Working in close cooperation with the
Department for Disarmament Affairs, as many
delegations have mentioned, next month my country
will host the Committee's thirty-first ministerial
meeting, which will focus almost exclusively on a draft
legal instrument on the control small arms and light
weapons in Central Africa, their ammunitions and any
equipment that might be used in their manufacture.

Having said that, I cannot but express my great
satisfaction and gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
your timely initiative to convene today's meeting of the
Council. I very much hope that it will contribute to
sustaining and strengthening the solidarity of the
Security Council and the international community with
the Central African region with a view to eradicating
the illicit traffic in these weapons.

IfI may just exceed a bit more the time that has
been given to me, I wish to inform the Council that my
country will host a regional preparatory meeting in
Kinshasa in connection with the Fourth Biennial
Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of
the United Nations Programme of Action on Small
Arms and Light Weapons, to be held in New York in
June. I should like in advance to thank the delegations
that will join us and the Department for Disarmament
Affairs in ensuring that the Meeting can take place,
thereby underscoring their resolve and commitment to
succeed in defeating a traffic that all of us deplore.

In conclusion, I should like to associate myself
with all the calls on the international community to
provide the Central African region all the assistance
requested in effectively coordinating the fight against
the illicit traffic in weapons. The commitment of the
Security Council is crucial to that end. Our countries
have already welcomed the felicitous partnership that
has been established between the United Nations and
the ECCAS. However, if we wish to work to resolve
the problems posed by the illicit traffic in weapons at
the national, regional and international levels in order
to produce the greatest benefit for our countries and
peoples, that partnership deserves to be built upon, and
even strengthened, with regard both to the necessary
coordination of United Nations efforts and to broader
and more effective cooperation with regional
organizations.

