Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas
for his insightful briefing on the semi-annual report
(S/2017/563) ofthe United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and recent developments in
West Africa and the Sahel.

Since the beginning of the year, we have witnessed
significant positive developments throughout the
region. We highly commend the good offices and
important role that Mr. Chambas and UNOWAS have
recently played in conflict prevention in The Gambia,
Burkina Faso and other regional countries. Meanwhile,
the situation of various parts of the West African Sahel
remains fragile due to the threats of Boko Haram and
other terrorist organizations.

Taking those risks into account, the work of
UNOWAS may become even more challenging after
the closure of the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire and the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
We believe that the establishment and deployment
of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) will positively contribute to maintaining
stability in the region and helping UNOWAS to focus
on conflict prevention, mediation and addressing cross-
border security threats * including drug trafficking
and piracy.

That can be only achieved through a more effective
implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. Addressing impunity and
corruption; advancing structural reforms and security,
justice and the rule of law; promoting human rights;
increasing resilience; and engaging women and young
people are equally important tasks within the Strategy,
which could also serve as a model for achieving stability
and development in other African countries.

Kazakhstan is convinced that this subregional
and comprehensive approach, which links security,
development and humanitarian efforts, is the most
efficient way to achieve peace and prosperity. The
Security Council's recent mission to the Lake Chad basin
once again reaffirmed the necessity of a sub-regional
and coordinated approach that focusses on the root
causes of the conflict and promoting development.
It is therefore essential to enhance coherence and
cooperation among UNOWAS, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the United Nations system as a whole,
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the G-5 Sahel, the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, the Gulf of Guinea Commission, the West
African Economic and Monetary Union and national
Governments. We also need to mobilize international
financial institutions and donor countries to ensure
long-term sustainable funding.

Finally, Kazakhstan will work with the members of
the Council and key actors to find a solution to achieve
a lasting peace in West Africa and the Sahel.

