At the outset, we would like to thank Acting Special Representative Stephanie Williams for her briefing today on the situation in Libya. In our first statement before the Security Council on the Libyan issue in January 2019 (see S/PV.8448), the Dominican Republic praised the efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and the former Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ghassan Salame, for successfully negotiating a ceasefire in Tripoli. We also commended the convening of the conference in Palermo, Italy, in 2018 and highlighted the participation of Libyan representatives, which demonstrated that there was a clear intention to make changes for the benefit of peace and security in Libya. In the months that followed, there were several times when the achievements made up to that point seemed to be fading in the face of growing threats to peace and security in the country. The high level of insecurity, the unacceptable humanitarian situation of migrants, the poor conditions in the so-called detention centres, human trafficking and the constant violations of the arms embargo and the illicit trafficking thereof were all aspects of profound concern for the Dominican Republic. All of those aspects are a constant threat to the protection and well-being of the Libyan people. The ceasefire agreed in Geneva on 23 October by the Libyan Joint Military Commission, under the auspices of the United Nations, revealed a light at the end of the tunnel, harbouring hopes that this time the ceasefire will be permanent. Today we once again express our faith and hope that the current negotiations remain on track in the political, economic, security and human rights spheres, with a view to ensuring that the Libyan people may enjoy lasting peace and stability once and for all after nearly a decade of suffering and armed conflict. In that regard, we join others in commending the tireless work of Ms. Williams and the entire UNSMIL team on the ground, especially in launching the first face-to-face session of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum in Tunis and in calling for a power vacuum to be avoided at this critical time. We are pleased to see the important participation of women in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum, as we believe that women play a crucial role at the negotiating table and in promoting peace, national reconciliation, justice and gender equality. Given this vital momentum and having agreed on a date for the next presidential and parliamentary elections in Libya, we remain concerned that a Special Envoy is yet to be appointed. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has hit every nation in the world, and Libya has been no exception. We call on donor countries to support the countries hit hardest by the pandemic and its devastating consequences by increasing their official development assistance and financial aid and debt relief programmes. We reiterate our call that the vaccine and other health technologies necessary to tackle COVID-19 be equitably accessible and their distribution guaranteed to everyone on the planet. To conclude, we would like to highlight our deep satisfaction that, despite the countless challenges that still remain with regard to the situation in Libya, as our Security Council membership comes to a close the Libyan nation appears to be more determined than ever to use dialogue as the main weapon to achieve a lasting peace.
