We congratulate Germany on assuming the presidency of the Council and wish you, Mr. President, every success. We appreciate the efforts of France during its presidency of the Council last month. We also thank His Excellency Secretary- General Antonio Guterres for his briefing. For over a year, the Libyan capital, Tripoli, has been the scene of attacks by illegal militias, which have targeted innocent Libyan civilians and the internationally recognized legitimate Government. They have committed serious violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law, including attacks on health-care facilities, even in the midst of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, when a missile strike targeted a hospital equipped to treat coronavirus patients in Tripoli. In addition, landmines placed by those militias resulted in scores of Libyan casualties, not to mention the continued systematic extrajudicial killings. The international community has also recently witnessed mass graves in areas that were controlled by the illegal militias. The State of Qatar reiterates its condemnation of those dangerous and illegal practices. It further warns against supporting a certain party against another. It has become clear that the only way to resolve the Libyan crisis is through support for the Government of National Accord and a commitment to the implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement, signed in Skhirat, the Security Council resolutions and the outcomes of the Berlin Conference. The Skhirat agreement was unanimously endorsed by the Security Council, which recognized the Government of National Accord as the sole legitimate executive authority in Libya. Unfortunately, some countries initially endorsed this agreement but have subsequently disregarded it by supporting opposing factions and empowering them against the Government. This is how we have reached where we are now. If the international community is serious about resolving this situation, any agreed political solution based on dialogue and understanding must include a clear and effective international mechanism to hold to account the States that do not abide by these agreements. Not only should the international community hold certain factions accountable for the current state of affairs in Libya, but it should also hold to account the countries that empower them for violations of international law. Unfortunately, we have witnessed systematic violations against the Government of National Accord and of the Skhirat agreement, while the international community has remained silent. We stress the need to return to negotiations anda national dialogue and complete the transitional period. We call for a solution that preserves Libya's sovereignty and unity, realizes the aspirations of the Libyan people and leads to building the State that the Libyans seek and deserve, away from narrow interests, personal ambitions, malicious agendas and unlawful external interference. The international community and the United Nations must work to provide the necessary support to achieve this objective. To conclude, the State of Qatar reaffirms its support for the efforts of the United Nations and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya in implementing its mandate. It also renews its call on actors to ensure respect for international humanitarian law and international human rights law and to hold accountable those responsible for the violations and serious crimes.
