Mr. Apakan (Turkey): First of all, I wish to join
others in thanking Mr. Pascoe, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his briefing. Turkey
also aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by
Sweden on behalf of the European Union.

We are once again going through a crucial stage in
the Middle East. We fully support the efforts to
reactivate the Middle East peace process on all tracks
and will contribute to them in any way we can. A
serious and active engagement between the parties has
become a matter of urgency in the absence of any
functional political process in the region for a long time.

At this stage, upholding the framework of peace
as embodied in the relevant Security Council
resolutions, Madrid Principles, Arab Peace Initiative
and the Road Map obligations is important for serious
negotiations. However, we see two main challenges to
the current efforts. The first one relates to the core
issues. It is a well-established norm in the Middle East
peace process that the core issues, including refugees
and Jerusalem, are subject to final status negotiations
and should not be undermined by unilateral acts. It is
therefore very important that Israel cease its settlement
activities in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, as well
as measures and actions that could change the character
and status of Jerusalem.

The recent incidents in and around Haram
Al-Sharif have shown us, yet again, the sensitivity and
importance of Jerusalem. Here, let me express our
concern regarding the tension in the city and the region
beyond, which carries the potential of poisoning the
atmosphere and harming the peace efforts. The
protection of the sacred nature of Haram Al-Sharif and
the cultural and religious fabric of Jerusalem is a
matter of utmost priority and importance for Turkey.

It is with this understanding that we invite all
parties, starting with Israel, to act responsibly and to
refrain from any provocative action at a time when
efforts are concentrated on reactivating the peace
process. Respect for holy places is one of the key
elements of stability in the Middle East.

Secondly, the situation in Gaza continues to be a
matter of grave concern for Turkey. We have
repeatedly stressed the fact that the current situation in
Gaza is unacceptable. The hostilities at the beginning
of this year traumatized Gaza with a heavy death toll of
more than 1,000 - most of whom were women and
children. Since then, the Palestinians in Gaza have
been facing formidable suffering and hardship.

Time does not itself heal all sorrows. Despite the
large number of pledges made at Sharm el-Sheikh last
March, only a small quantity of aid and material was
able to trickle into Gaza owing to the restrictions
imposed at the crossings.

In spite of our repeated appeals, resolution
1860 (2009) has not been implemented. Today, the
people in Gaza continue to suffer without proper
reconstruction, socio-economic activity or
humanitarian assistance. As part of this picture, we
view the report of the Fact-Finding Mission led by
Justice Goldstone as a document that sheds light on the
Gaza conflict. The report is a comprehensive document
containing pertinent points and observations and
addressing all alleged violations.

We think that the report and its recommendations
should be taken seriously and should be allowed to
follow their course. In this respect, we take the
following two principles as our departure point: first,
we should uphold accountability. We need to ascertain
the facts and take action accordingly. Secondly, we
need to act with coherence. Ensuring consistency has
always been one of the key requirements, when the
international community tackles such issues.

We also agree with the understanding that, if the
parties conduct credible investigations on the
violations as suggested in the report, that would serve
as a necessary and important confidence-building
measure that would contribute to efforts in the political
field. It is our sincere hope that the findings and
conclusions of the report will create an opportunity to
put an end to the deprivation and dramatic conditions
that the people of Gaza are currently going through.

Let me also emphasize the importance of
Palestinian unity. We hope that Palestinian groups can
reach a common understanding as soon as possible.
This is crucial for social harmony in Palestine as well
as for the Middle East peace process. We greatly
appreciate President Abbas' efforts to this end.

On the subject of Lebanon, in the wake of recent
high-level visits to the region, we believe that a
Government under the leadership of Mr. Hariri,
embracing all segments of the Lebanese people, can be
established sooner rather than later. We continue to
facilitate and contribute to the issues in our
neighbourhood.

Every Israeli and Palestinian is entitled to
freedom from fear. However, for a future free from fear
and full of peace and prosperity, we need to establish
confidence and never deviate from a focus on
achieving a just, fair and lasting settlement. For our
part, we continue to work for a viable and
comprehensive peace on all aspects of the Middle East
peace process.

