Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank the three briefers for
their statements on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). Japan fully supports the Secretary-General's
call for all Member States to act in accordance with,
and in support of, the historic Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA) and to avoid provocative actions and
statements. Japan is committed to working closely with
Council members, Iran and all other Member States to
enable the most effective possible implementation of
the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015).

Let me turn now to Iran's ballistic missile launches.
In his recent report (S/2017/515), the Secretary-General
called upon Iran to avoid such ballistic missile launches
that have the potential to increase tensions. Japan
believes that such launches as conducted by Iran in
January are inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015).
As other delegations have already noted today, we
are concerned by the ballistic missile launches, which
can be destabilizing for the delicate situation in the
Middle East.

On that note, we should recall the JCPOA's
enormous potential to contribute to peace and
security in the Middle East. In March, the Permanent
Representative of Iran circulated a letter to the Council
expressing Iran's willingness to take effective measures
to end the crisis in Syria, including via humanitarian
assistance. Iran can and should play a constructive
role in peace and stability in the region, particularly in
Syria and Yemen, and in the international community
more generally. We hope that Iran will implement the
commitments outlined in its March letter.

Japan welcomes the steady implementation of
JCPOA parties' nuclear-related commitments and
commends the critical role of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) critical role in verifying
and monitoring those commitments. We underscore
that Iran's application of the additional protocol and
the transparency measures is key not only for full
implementation of the JCPOA, but also for regional
confidence-building. Japan will continue to support the
independent and objective work of the IAEA.

One and a half years after the adoption of the
JCPOA in January 2016, the uniqueness of the format
of resolution 2231 (2015) has become increasingly
clear. The format does not include a subsidiary body,
but requires extensive data collection, analysis and
reporting by the Secretariat. Given those challenges,
Japan commends the Secretariat's efforts in preparing
six-month reports with a high degree of independence,
objectivity and expertise. In the recent report of the
Secretary-General, we see some pending issues on
which the Secretariat will need to update the Council in
future reports. Given the particular challenges of data
collection under resolution 2231 (2015), we encourage
the Secretariat to utilize such tools as the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014) and the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009),
concerning Somalia and Eritrea, to obtain relevant
information. An objective and credible report will
allow the Council to fully understand the situation and
take appropriate action.

