Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to begin by thanking Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, His Beatitude Louis Raphael
I Sako, Patriarch of Babylon of the Chaldeans, and
Mrs. Vian Dakhil, member of the Iraqi Parliament, for
sharing their valuable insights with us today.

Promoting religious freedom is a priority for
President Obama, and it remains a core value that
influences United States diplomatic engagement
worldwide. In recent days and months, the brutal
persecution of religious minorities has been
metastasizing at an alarming rate. We thank you,
Mr. President, for France's presiding over this meeting
on such an important issue. We also note with great
interest the Secretary-General's announcement of a
United Nations action plan and intention to create an
advisory panel on the matter.

We have all heard today, and some in this Chamber
have witnessed with their own eyes, the horrific
atrocities commited by non-State actors against targeted
religious groups in the Middle East. We have seen how
Governments have been unable or unwilling to protect
members ofthose groups or grant them the benefits and
protections accorded to other citizens. Without that,
those marginalized communities face an existential
threat. Solely because of the faith they practice, Shia
Muslims, Christians, Yazidis, Jews, Ismailis, Druze and
others have been forcibly converted, killed or evicted
from the places where their ancestors have lived for
hundreds and, in some cases, thousands of years. Some
face abduction, and others have been forced into sexual
slavery. My Government has repeatedly condemned the
targeting of civilians of any religious affiliation for any
kind of Violence, and likewise has strongly condemned
the destruction of religious sites and property. Let
me be clear that there must be accountability for the
individuals responsible for these terrible acts.

The threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
also known as ISIL or Daesh, transcends all cultures,
religions and borders. Vulnerable communities across
Egypt, Iraq and Syria are in danger of ISIL's abuses.
We condemn the despicable and cowardly murder of
21 Egyptian Copts by ISIL last month in Libya. ISIL's
atrocities are not solely targeted against the region's
religious minorities, however. The mass executions
of over 700 Sunni Arabs from the Al-Sheitat tribe in
eastern Syria last August, over 600 members of the Abu
Nour tribe in western Iraq in October, and at least 1,000
detained Shia Iraqi Air Force cadets at Camp Speicher
in June attest clearly to this fact.

With more than 60 coalition patrtners, many of
which are represented in the Chamber today, we are
working to degrade and ultimately defeat the common
threat ISIL poses to the world. We are providing security
assistance to combat ISIL, and working to disrupt the
flow of foreign fighters and ISIL's financial resources.
But I also want to specifically note that protecting
religious minorities in the face of the threat that ISIL
poses, notably in Iraq and Syria, is and will remain one
of the key priorities in our strategy to counter ISIL.

The actions we took on Mount Sinjar in Iraq last
summer exemplify that commitment. Tens of thousands
of Yazidis - men, women and children - fled ISIL's
advances on their Villages around Mount Sinjar. Others
were trapped on the mountain with no food, water or
escape route in the scorching August heat. In light of
those dire circumstances, President Obama decided
to take targeted military action and provide critical
assistance, at the request of the Iraqi Government,
to avert further atrocities. Since that time, we have
remained keenly attentive to the ongoing threats against
Yazidis, including the fate of the 4,000-5,000 women
and girls taken captive by ISIL - a situation described
so very powerfully by the honourable member of the
Iraqi Parliament, Mrs. Vian Dakhil. We remain in close
touch with representatives of the Yazidi community.
The persecution of religious minorities in the
Middle East, however, extends beyond these heinous
acts carried out by ISIL. In Syria, the Al-Assad regime's
brutal, heavy-handed tactics in violently suppressing a
peaceful protest movement have fueled the growth of
ISIL and other extremist groups. As throughout the
Middle East, the Christian community's presence in
Syria has dropped precipitously. After four years of
civil war, hundreds ofthousands of Christians have fled
the country to escape the ongoing violence perpetrated
by the Al-Assad regime and extremist groups alike.

In the city of Homs, for example, the number of
Christians has dwindled to as few as 1,000, down
from nearly 160,000 before the war began, after the
city was completely emptied of all but a few residents
following a merciless siege by the Al-Assad regime that
prevented food, water and medicine from entering the
city for almost two long years. Al-Assad's regime has
indiscriminately bombed residential areas across the
country and killed thousands and thousands of Syrians
of all backgrounds. It has bombed dozens of churches,
mosques and an ancient Syrian Jewish synagogue,
highlighting the regime's cynical efforts to violently
suppress its opponents at any cost.

We cannot turn to the dangers that religious
minorities now face from the Al-Assad regime and
extremist groups such as ISIL without first recognizing
the role that the systematized marginalization of
religious minorities vis-a-vis State institutions, legal
structures or Government practices has played in
depriving citizens of their civic rights, due solely to
their religious identity. Blasphemy laws, registration
laws, societal discrimination and plain outright violence
have served to marginalize such groups, making them
unwelcome in their own communities. For instance,
Muslims who practice Sufism have faced persecution
from some Governments in the region. The Baha'i
are another example of a minority group that has long
suffered at the hands of Virtually Government in the
region, either from onerous registration laws or active
and violent Government persecution. All that remains
of the once vibrant and extensive Jewish population in
the region is a handful of small, isolated communities.

The United States continues to seek every
opportunity to assist those suffering under the threat
of extremist groups, including ISIL. The United States
remains the single largest donor to the humanitarian
response for Syria, contributing over $3.1 billion since
the civil war began. That assistance is being provided
to all individuals on the basis of need, regardless of
religious identity or political affiliation, and to meet
the needs of all Syrians, including religious minorities.
The United States Government also continues to be a
primary donor to displaced Iraqis, contributing over
$219 million since 2014. We also expect to make another
major contribution to the Syrian humanitarian crisis at
the upcoming pledging conference later this month in
Kuwait.

Of course, while religious differences can be
exploited to divide societies, religioun can also be a
powerful motivator for bringing people together. We
saw how religion can bind and help heal a community
when ISIL brutally used sexual Violence against Yazidi
women and girls as a tactic of war, attempting to exploit
the destructive power of the stigma attached to rape.
These attempts failed, however, when a prominent
religious leader of the Yazidi community, Baba Sheikh,
called on all Yazidis to welcome these girls back, even
accepting into his home two girls who had escaped
ISIL.

We believe that our nations are strongest when
we uphold the the equality of our people. We in every
country around the world must therefore be relentless
in turning the tides against any effort to sow hatred
along sectarian or religious lines, or deprive anyone of
equal respect, dignity or rights based on the beliefs they
hold. Many of us are already committed to diversity
and respect for freedom of belief and conscience for
all women and men, but all of us must recommit by
speaking out on behalf of the religious minorities
that are fighting for their rights, their lives and their
humanity today.

