Mr. Mladenov: We meet this month as regional
tensions are taking an increasingly perilous turn.
Fighting in Syria is increasing, endangering
de-escalation arrangements and regional stability, as
well as undermining efforts for a political solution.
Despite the positive news from Iraq and the defeat
of Da'esh, much of the Middle East continues to
be in the grips of an ongoing human tragedy of
immense proportions.

Against that backdrop, and after over a century of
hostilities, including 50 years of continued military
occupation, Israelis and Palestinians are still no closer
to peace. Many have lost hope that they will see it in
their lifetimes. The enemies of peace are growing more
confident by the day. They see every failure of the forces
of moderation as a win for the forces of radicalization.
They believe the political odds are turning in their
favour. Day after day they are emboldened. Hindering
peace are also those who push facts on the ground and
who promote unilateral moves blocking the pathway
back to the negotiating table.

None of that will bring us closer to resolving the
conflict. None of it will respond to the inalienable right
of the Palestinian people to statehood or the Israeli
longing for security. It will only drive us farther down
the road of confrontation, suffering and a one-State
reality of perpetual occupation.

Last month the international community discussed
key priorities to advance the goal of peace at the
extraordinary ministerial meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians. At that meeting, I was
encouraged by widespread, unequivocal messages
reaffirming support for the two-State solution, in
line with the relevant United Nations resolutions, and
the need to resume meaningful negotiations over all
final-status issues, including the status of Jerusalem.
Participants also made a critical commitment to
undertaking efforts to address the humanitarian crisis
in Gaza, including support for projects focused on
water, electricity and economic recovery.

My message to all was clear. First, we must
clearly reaffirm that sustainable peace requires a two-
State solution, which can be achieved only through
a negotiated process. Israelis and Palestinians have
defined the final-status issues and only they, together,
can determine their resolution. Secondly, efforts
must continue to seek implementation of concrete
and transformative steps on the ground - including
ending Israeli settlement expansion and advancing
policy shifts, particularly in Area C - consistent with
a transition to greater Palestinian civil authority, as
called for in the 2016 report of the Middle East Quartet.
Thirdly, the Palestinian Authority must continue to
advance institution-building and service delivery to
the Palestinian people and work towards bringing Gaza
back under its control. Lastly, it is critical that any
future peace proposal focus on the two-State solution
and all final-status issues, as per prior agreements and
relevant United Nations resolutions. Failure to do so
could have dangerous repercussions.

Maintaining support for Palestine refugees is
fundamental to the pursuit of peace and stability in
the region. I reiterate my ongoing concern over the
sizeable funding shortfall of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), despite the welcome flexibility of
some Member States in accelerating the disbursement
of their funding commitments. In addition, the
emergency appeals launched on 30 January seek to raise
$800 million for the West Bank and Gaza, as well as for
the Syria regional crisis, to meet the essential needs of
some 1.5 million highly vulnerable people. I encourage
Member States to consider urgently providing new
funding for UNRWA's critical requirements.

As the peace process falters and the gulf between
the two sides widens, Palestinians and Israelis continue
to suffer the violent consequences on the ground. Seven

Palestinians were killed by Israeli security forces
in various incidents across the occupied Palestinian
territory, and one Israeli civilian was stabbed and
killed by a Palestinian in the West Bank. Three of the
Palestinians killed died during violent clashes with
Israeli security forces; one of them was a 16-year-old,
shot near Ramallah. He was the fourth child killed in
such circumstances since the beginning of the year.

I once again emphasize that the use of force must
be calibrated and that lethal force should be used only
as a last resort, with any resulting fatalities properly
investigated by the authorities. I urge Israeli security
forces to exercise maximum restraint in order to avoid
casualties in such circumstances. I call upon all sides to
reject violence, condemn terror, ensure accountability
and work to reduce tensions.

In recent days we have also witnessed dangerous
security incidents in and around Gaza. On 17 February,
four Israeli soldiers were wounded by an improvised
explosive device placed at the Gaza fence. This was
followed by Israeli airstrikes on some 18 Hamas targets,
while Palestinian militants fired two rockets into
Israel - one causing damage to a house in the Sha'ar
HaNegev Regional Council. Two Palestinian teens
were killed by Israeli security forces while reportedly
attempting to approach the fence. Prior to this latest
flare-up, during the course of the past month three
more rockets were fired towards Israel, with two Israeli
retaliatory airstrikes, all without injuries.

I encourage the international community to join
the United Nations in calling on militants in Gaza to
refrain from such provocations and end the building of
tunnels and the firing of rockets towards Israel. Such
actions and the response they elicit only risk the lives of
Palestinians and Israelis, undermine peace efforts and
increase the likelihood of another devastating conflict.
I also take this opportunity to note the need to resolve
the matter of the missing Israeli soldiers and civilians
who are being held in Gaza.

Two additional incidents highlight the risk of
escalation and the need for continued Israeli-Palestinian
security coordination. These were the discovery of 12
roadside bombs in the West Bank on 26 January and
the foiled attempt on 4 February to smuggle, within a
shipment of medical equipment, a dual-use component
used to make explosives into Gaza. I also note that
the trial of 17-year-old Palestinian girl Ahed Tamimi
started on 13 February behind closed doors. She has
been detained on remand for two months to date. As
stated in my last briefing (see S/PV.8167), the detention
of a child must be used only as a measure of last resort
and for the shortest possible time.

Throughout the reporting period, Israel's illegal
settlement-related activities continued unabated. In
response to last month's killing of a resident of the
illegal Havat Gilad outpost, on 4 February, Israel
approved the establishment of a new settlement to
absorb its residents. I strongly denounce the expansion
of the settlement enterprise as compensation for
Israeli deaths. Settlement construction is not a morally
appropriate way to respond to murder. On 12 February,
Israel also advanced two settlement plans for some
85 housing units near Bethlehem. I reiterate the long-
standing United Nations position that all settlement-
related activities are illegal under international law and
a substantial obstacle to peace, and I call on Israel to
seize and reverse such policies.

The demolition and seizure of Palestinian-owned
structures also continued, with 31 structures affected,
resulting in 33 Palestinians being displaced. Particularly
concerning was the demolition of two donor-funded
classrooms serving Palestinian children in the Bedouin
community of Abu Nuwar. This is the sixth demolition
or confiscation in the school since February 2016.
Overall, according to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, 44 schools in the occupied West
Bank are currently at risk of demolition. I urge Israel to
cease this practice.

I briefed the Council last week on the situation in
Gaza. Month after month, we have raised the alarm
about the humanitarian, economic and ecological
calamity underway. It bears repeating that the situation
is unsustainable. Continuing power cuts of up to
20 hours per day severely undermine the provision
of basic services. Without additional immediate
fuel deliveries, the situation could deteriorate, with
dramatic consequences. I reiterate the Secretary-
General's appreciation to the United Arab Emirates and
the State of Qatar for their support in dealing with the
emergency. Their immediate response to our appeal has
helped stave off a further deterioration.

I am encouraged by the trilateral meeting I had
last week with Palestinian Prime Minister Hamdallah
and Israel's Coordinator of Government Activities in
the Territories, Major General Mordechai, in which we
focused on the humanitarian problems in Gaza. Both
sides reaffirmed their commitment to the temporary
Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism and agreed that there
is a need for a joint review to improve its functionality,
transparency and predictability.

As the humanitarian crisis in Gaza escalates,
the implementation of the Egyptian-brokered
intra-Palestinian agreement has stalled. Absent
immediate steps to address the humanitarian crisis and
to revive the economy, we will face a total institutional
and economic collapse in Gaza. This is not an alarmist
prediction; it is a fact. I welcome the proposal of the
Palestinian Government to incorporate into its 2018
budget some 20,000 civil service employees in Gaza.
A positive outcome, however, is contingent, inter alia,
upon the collection oftaxes, the payment of salaries, the
return of Government administration and, ultimately,
security control of Gaza. I urge all sides to intensify
their engagement and to move forward in this process.

For a decade, 2 million people have lived under the
full control of Hamas, with crippling Israeli closures
and movement and access restrictions. Throughout this
period, the international community has provided aid
and humanitarian assistance to alleviate the suffering
and to rebuild what was destroyed in three devastating
conflicts. It is time to break this cycle. It is time to
return Gaza to the control of the legitimate Palestinian
Authority, for there can be no Palestinian State without
Palestinian unity. Those who stand in the way of
reconciliation hurt the Palestinian national cause, and
the price will be paid by generations of ordinary people.

The security situation in the Golan is also a
growing concern. A worrying escalation occurred on
10 February, when the Israel Defense Forces destroyed
what they identified as an Iranian unmanned aerial
vehicle, which had reportedly entered its airspace from
Syria. Shortly thereafter, Israeli aircraft targeted a
Syrian airbase. During the attack, one Israeli jet was
hit, injuring two pilots, which further prompted Israel
to attack what it described as "12 military objectives"
inside Syria. I urge all sides to work towards easing
tensions in that highly volatile area.

I now turn briefly to Lebanon. Heightened
rhetoric was exchanged between Israel and Lebanon
over disputed maritime areas. The United Nations
continues to call on the sides to act responsibly, avoid
security risks and explore with the support of the
United Nations ways to resolve the issue. Preparations
continue for May parliamentary elections in Lebanon
and for the upcoming second Rome conference and
the Cedre conference to support the security sector
and economy, respectively on 15 March and 5 April.
While the situation was generally quiet in the area
of operations of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, and despite heightened rhetoric concerning
proposed construction by the Israeli Defense Forces
in so-called reservation areas in Lebanon south of the
Blue Line, construction began in non-reservation areas
on 7 February with no incidents reported.

In conclusion, and to return to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, I would like to reiterate that
we in the international community must continue
advocating for substantial changes to Israeli policy
on the situation in the West Bank, including a halt to
settlement construction, the demolition of structures
and the prevention of Palestinian development in Area
C. On Gaza, we must work collectively to alleviate
the humanitarian disaster and provide full support to
Egypt's reconciliation efforts. Our support to UNRWA
also remains vital. I also hope that we will be able
to look beyond the closed, dark negotiation rooms,
currently empty of diplomats and politicians, to see that
there are Israeli and Palestinian advocates for peace
working tirelessly to promote change - civil-society
organizations, youth and women's groups and religious
and community leaders, which all have a critical role
to play and must be supported and allowed to express
their views freely. We rarely discuss their role and we
do not speak often enough of the challenges they face,
but their efforts must be recognized and supported.

In this Chamber we have often spoken of the
need for leadership on both sides if we are to reach a
deal - a compromise, through negotiations - that
will enable the Israelis and Palestinians to separate
and be masters of their own fates. But they would not
be negotiations between equals, for one side is under
military occupation. Its leadership has committed to
working for a peaceful solution to the conflict through
negotiations. I urge the international community not
to give up on support for the moderate Palestinian
leadership or for building up the institutions that
will increase the chances of success. Our window of
opportunity is closing, and if we do not seize it quickly,
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will be engulfed in the
whirlwind of religious radicalization that continues to
roil the region.

