Mr. Hernandez-Milian (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for Costa Rica to speak today,
in its capacity as Chair of the Human Security
Network, on behalf of Network members Austria,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Switzerland, Thailand and Slovenia, and
of South Africa as an observer.

We would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
your delegation for having organized this timely debate
on the occasion of the fifth anniversary of the
establishment of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, which reminds us of the importance of
taking a comprehensive and integrated approach to the
whole concept of peacebuilding in order to achieve
greater clarity and coherence. We also welcome the
presence of the various ministers here today and the
statements by the Secretary-General, the Chairman of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Managing
Director of the World Bank.

The Human Security Network would like to take
this opportunity to reflect on the achievements,
existing gaps and priorities in our peacebuilding
endeavours from a human security standpoint.

In recent years, we have witnessed how decisions
within the United Nations system have increasingly
taken the peacebuilding perspective into account. The
United Nations has recognized that preventing the
2

recurrence of conflict goes beyond the mere
implementation of any peace agreement, and that an
early peacebuilding strategy is indispensable to
fostering development and creating conditions
conducive to sustainable peace. The institutional
expression of that conviction was the establishment of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in 2005.

Reinforcing the effectiveness of our collective
peacebuilding efforts remains one of the greatest
challenges to keeping the 2005 promises. The
Secretary-General's report on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304) makes a
useful contribution to our discussions on this issue.

We must continue to promote a synchronized and
integrated approach to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Peacebuilding should no longer be
considered the last stage or an exit strategy for
peacekeeping operations. On the contrary,
peacebuilding is now mandated in some peacekeeping
operations. The Human Security Network calls for the
inclusion of peacebuilding activities in all operations,
beginning with the early stages, that is in the drafting
and strategic planning of missions. There should also
be regular communication and ongoing coordination
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the bodies within the peacebuilding architecture and
the relevant national agencies.

As stated in the Brahimi report,

"When complex peace operations do go into
the field, it is the task of the operation's
peacekeepers to maintain a secure local
environment for peacebuilding, and the
peacebuilders' task to support the political, social
and economic changes that create a secure
environment that is self-sustaining." (S/2000/809, para. 28)

From a human security perspective, the Network
believes that strengthening the capacity of local
authorities is key to meeting the basic needs of their
populations.

In terms of United Nations capacities in
peacebuilding, the Network believes that it is important
to strengthen the bodies that make up the
peacebuilding architecture, namely, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
Peacebuilding Fund. In that regard, we look forward to
discussions on the issue of expanding the pool of
10-31773
experts and civilian volunteers for rapid deployment in
providing assistance in peacebuilding tasks. Those
duties include security sector reform, strengthening
institutions and reinforcing judicial systems -
activities that depend upon good cooperation between
military and civilian actors. As such, we also look
forward to the recommendations of the United Nations
civilian capacity review.

In order to promote peacebuilding, more
technical, legal and financial assistance for the
strengthening of national democratic institutions and
governance needs to be provided on the basis of
process-oriented and sound strategies. Political
stability largely depends upon the legitimacy,
credibility, integrity and transparency of those
institutions, in particular in areas such as security,
justice and elections.

Security sector reform is a crucial element in the
stabilization and reconstruction process. In
acknowledging that there is no exclusive model in
place for security sector reform, we are certain that the
ongoing goal of United Nations security sector reform
will make a valuable contribution to supporting States
and societies in developing effective, inclusive and
accountable security institutions. The Human Security
Network encourages the work carried out by the United
Nations inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task
Force as the mechanism that ensures a broad and
coherent approach as part of the mandates of each of
the Organization's entities. Furthermore, we support
the role of the United Nations in mobilizing
coordinated and comprehensive international support
for national security-sector reform programmes.

Supporting the consolidation and ownership of
national justice institutions is fundamental to building
the capacity of States to peaceably settle disputes. That
could be supported by both judicial and non-judicial
transitional justice mechanisms, such as prosecutions,
truth commissions, reparations for victims, institutional
reform and commissions to resolve post-displacement
disputes over property and land. That should be done
while taking the national context into account.
Mechanisms such as those could, in the end, contribute
to increasing accountability and facilitating the
consolidation of peace and stability.

In post-conflict societies, elections are also a
central element of national ownership in rebuilding the
State. When necessary, electoral assistance should be
10-31773

included as an important component of a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy. The United
Nations has built up valuable experience in providing
assistance to Member States that have requested help in
facilitating a steady democratic transition. In that
regard, the role and support of the international
community are fundamental to ensuring an adequate
peacebuilding process.

Peacebuilding processes are an opportunity to
rebuild social relations. Socio-economic development
models and the design of public policies should
promote social stability through the protection of
human rights and the participation of every individual
and social group. Promoting social integration is also
important for political dialogue, national reconciliation
and the peaceful co-existence of communities with
profound post-conflict resentments and grievances.
Increased funding is required for supporting
reintegration programmes for internally displaced
persons and to support refugees, as well for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes for former combatants. In addition, the
need for assistance to victims should be recognized.

Extreme poverty and inequality are threats to the
consolidation of peace. Greater investment in short-,
medium- and long-term programmes would contribute
to reactivating economies and creating employment
opportunities, as well as to reducing the social risk of
vulnerable groups and helping them to have more
confidence in the peace process. It is important to
ensure an adequate programmatic response that has a
human-centred approach, helps fragile Governments
that face difficulties in providing access to basic
services and avoids the risk of the re-emergence of
chronic vulnerabilities. Areas such as health and
education are of strategic importance in ensuring that
peace dividends are realized as soon as possible.

The Human Security Network welcomes the work
being done by the Peacebuilding Commission thorough
the country-specific configurations to include women
and young people in peacebuilding processes. The
Network would like to highlight the need to include the
gender perspective and to promote equal participation
for women in peacebuilding activities while taking into
account their specific interests and needs. The
empowerment and participation of women and young
people have been recognized as crucial elements in the
success of any peacebuilding strategy, given their
potential for restoring the social fabric.
3

Finally, we would like to highlight the work of
the Peacebuilding Commission and its efforts to build
and expand alliances between the United Nations
system, regional and subregional organizations,
international financial institutions, donors, the private
sector and civil society. Those synergies will contribute
to establishing a common vision in support of
peacebuilding processes in a coherent, comprehensive
and strategic manner. We look forward to the upcoming
review of the work of the Peacebuilding Commission,
which is being facilitated by the Permanent
Representatives of Ireland, Mexico and South Africa.
We also look forward to the important discussion on
how to improve and scale up the Commission's work.
That will be a valuable opportunity for assessing
results, considering lessons learned and strengthening
the Commission's work and its relationship with other
organs and agencies of the United Nations system. We
call on the Security Council to make greater use of the
Peacebuilding Commission's advice in the Council's
deliberations on the relevant situations.

