Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We are most grateful
to the delegations of France and Italy for raising the
subject of protection of cultural heritage in armed
conflicts. Events of recent history pushed that issue
into the spotlight of the international community. We
fully share the main idea of resolution 2347 (2017),
adopted today - to prevent the destruction, trafficking,
looting and smuggling of cultural property during
armed conflicts.

How many of the Seven Wonders of the World is
it possible to see preserved today? Some of them were
lost to natural disasters, and others vanished because of
human behaviour. The importance of the issue that we
are discussing today was very succinctly articulated by
Francois Bugnion, a renowned expert on international
humanitarian law from the International Committee of
the Red Cross. He said:

"Close your eyes and imagine Paris without
Notre Dame... Giza without the pyramids... Peking
without the Forbidden City, New York without the
Statue of Liberty, Moscow without Red Square and
Saint Basil's Cathedral".

The international community has a special responsibility
to safeguard objects of cultural heritage that represent
our nations' identities and have long become an integral
part of humankind's history.

During the time of Jean-Jacques Rousseau and
Emer de Vattel, the principle of making the distinction
between military and civilian property, as well as that
of respecting sites and places of worship and cultural
significance, became one of the foundational elements
of customary international humanitarian law. Since
then, the international community has developed a
wide framework of rules and procedures to protect
cultural property from harm. The core elements of
the respective regime are the Second Protocol to the
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property
in the Event of Armed Conflict and the Additional
Protocols of 1977 to the Geneva Conventions of 1949.
However, cultural property continues to be the object
of destruction, looting and trafficking. In the aftermath
of recent conflicts in Europe, Central Asia, the Middle
East and Africa, the numerous barbaric acts committed
against our very civilization still loom fresh in our mind.

Regrettably, the topic of today's discussion is also
relevant to the situation in my own country as parts
of its cultural heritage are being destroyed, looted,
illicitly excavated and subsequently trafficked out of
Ukraine - including, in particular, to the Russian
Federation - all of which has resulted from the
attempted annexation of Crimea and Russia's military
intervention in Donbas.

Yet States are not the only perpetrators of crimes
related to cultural property. There is a growing trend
of such offences being committed by non-State actors,
including criminal and armed and terrorist groups.
Striking examples of the deliberate and systematic
destruction of our common heritage by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida, the Taliban
and their affiliates have been witnessed by the entire
international community. As a result of such cultural
genocide, future generations are robbed of the
opportunity to admire the beauty of, inter alia, the
temples in Palmyra and the sculptures in Al-Raqqa in
Syria; the ancient cities of Nimrud and Hatra, as well as
the renowned historic mosques and libraries of Mosul
in Iraq; the Sufi shrines outside of Tripoli in Libya;
the unique architecture of Timbuktu in Mali; and the
statues of the Buddha carved into the Bamiyan cliffs
in Afghanistan.

In targeting cultural heritage, terrorists not
only draw attention to their activities and intimidate
Governments, as well as the public. They also attempt
to rewrite history and erase entire chapters from the
collective memory of people. Moreover, they actively
traffick in cultural property that is illicitly excavated
or looted to fund their atrocities. As confirmed by
numerous reports of the Secretary-General, UNESCO
and other relevant United Nations agencies, it has
become a widespread practice, thereby improving the
ability of those groups to continue to commit terrorist
acts. It is high time to take decisive actions to break
that vicious cycle. That is why resolution 2347 (2017)
is so important.

We commend the activities of UNESCO as a key
player in the area of the protection and recovery of
cultural heritage worldwide. Ukraine fully supports the
Unite for Heritage campaign, as well as the draft action
plan on the implementation Strategy for Reinforcing
UNESC's Action for the Protection of Culture and the
Promotion of Cultural Pluralism in the Event of Armed
Conflict. We thank Director-General Bokova for her
personal commitment and dedication.

We hope that today's resolution will reinforce
bilateral, subregional and regional cooperation in
support of the respective efforts of UNESCO, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL,
the World Customs Organization and other relevant
international entities to protect cultural property, which
constitutes our common treasure.

We would like to point out several important
elements of resolution 2347 (2017), the first of which
concerns the primary responsibility of States to protect
their cultural property. Failure to achieve that goal
is the result not of a lack of existing international
instruments, but rather of States' will to abide by their
commitments and obligations.

Secondly, there is the initiative to establish
in-country safe zones for the preservation of moveable
cultural property threatened by conflicts.

Thirdly, establishing inventories of cultural
property and other items of historical, cultural and
religious importance that have been illegally transferred
from areas of armed conflict, notably from territories
under foreign occupation, would be particularly useful
for ensuring their future safe return to their countries
of origin.

Fourthly, there is the matter of bringing to justice

the perpetrators of crimes related to cultural property.
In that regard, we welcome the respective efforts of all
national and international jurisdictions and call for close
cooperation between law enforcement and customs
agencies in investigations, prosecutions, seizures
and confiscations, as well as the return, restitution or
repatriation of trafficked cultural property. We commend
in particular the recent decision of the International
Criminal Court that, for the first time, convicted a
war criminal for intentionally directing attacks against
religious buildings and historic monuments.

Last but not least, the proposed report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2347 (2017) should provide us with an opportunity to
comprehensively examine the problem and assess its
gravity and scale based on information provided by
Member States to develop concrete recommendations
and durable solutions.

We are ready to contribute to that process.

