Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Mladenov and
Ms. Hary for their briefings.

At the outset, the Dominican Republic emphatically
condemns the recent escalation of violence in the region.
The firing of rockets into civilian areas is absolutely
unacceptable. We insist that there is no justification
whatsoever for carrying out such indiscriminate attacks
and that it is imperative to make every possible effort
to achieve an expeditious, complete and definitive
de-escalation.

Safeguarding the lives and ensuring the safety of
Palestinian and Israeli civilians must be at the heart
of all international efforts, bearing in mind that such
acts of violence increase the humanitarian needs of the
population and serve only to hinder any possibility for
understanding and progress towards a peaceful, just
and lasting solution to the conflict.

According to the World Health Organization, during
the period from 12 to 14 November, Israeli forces in the
Gaza Strip killed at least 34 Palestinians and injured
111. According to Gaza's Ministry of Health, eight of
the dead and 46 of the wounded were children, who are
paying a high price for a conflict over which they have
no control. Similarly, injuries were reported in Israel
from the firing of rockets from Gaza.

Guided by respect for human rights and international

law, we are deeply concerned about continued Israeli
settlement activities throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories, including in and around East Jerusalem. We
continue to see how the hopes of the Palestinian people
to consolidate their State are dashed by the systematic
expansion of the settlements, accompanied by a policy
that seeks to legitimize them. Women and children
continue to be victims of an environment of ongoing
violence, which removes all possibility of well-being.
The situation limits the lives and movement of the
affected population.

We agree with international consensus that the
only way forward for Palestinians and Israelis is
through the negotiation of a two-State solution. We
urge concrete action to broaden consensus rooted
in the peaceful resolution of conflicts, international
law, multilateralism - recognizing the important
mediation role of the United Nations - and previous
agreements, based on a two-State solution, with Israel
and Palestine living side by side in peace and security
within secure borders.

The Dominican Republic would like to express its
gratitude to Commissioner-General Pierre Krahenbi'ihl
for his commitment and dedication in the leadership
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and to Palestinian
refugees. The extraordinary circumstances in which the
Agency continues to operate, with significant financial
and political challenges, continues to be a source of
concern. Looking ahead to the Agency's prospects for
the immediate future, we reiterate our call to support
its human development and humanitarian assistance
initiatives, which provide relief for the suffering of
Gaza's inhabitants and Palestinian refugees throughout
the region.

Finally, the Dominican Republic believes that
it is critical to embark upon an intra-Palestinian
reconciliation process that will enable the national
consolidation necessary to advance its legitimate
aspirations as a nation and will lead to a process of
political renewal based on free and inclusive elections.

