Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We are deeply concerned over the continued escalation
of the conflict between Israel and Palestine. In order to
put an early end to the bloody conflict, to reduce
tension and to salvage the Middle East peace process,
which is undergoing a serious crisis, today's Security
Council meeting is very necessary.

We strongly condemn the present series of violent
attacks against civilians. Israeli military retaliation
does not help to mitigate the conflict. Such events,
taking place time and again between Israel and
Palestine, prove the futility of the eye-for-an-eye
policy, for it can only lead to even more violence and
further escalation, harming the civilian populations of
both sides. We call on the two sides to remain calm in
handling the serious situation, to bring to an end the
cycle of revenge and counter-revenge and to try to
solve the dispute through negotiation.

The Chinese delegation believes that the only
way to resolve the question of the Middle East is
through the cessation of Israeli military occupation of
Palestinian territories, on the basis of the principle of
land for peace; through the implementation of all
agreements; and through the restoration of all the
legitimate rights of the Palestinians, including their
right to an independent State. We hope that all
international conciliation efforts will be based on this.
We believe that the Palestinian Authority is a
legitimate and necessary party to any peaceful future,
and its important role must be adequately safeguarded.

President Arafat has made far-reaching
contributions to the restoration of the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people and to progress towards
Middle East peace. China supports President Arafat
and his Palestinian Authority's continuation of their
effort for a solution to the question of Palestine through
peaceful negotiations.
Under the present circumstances, the international
community's attention should be focused on the Israel-
Palestine situation. A speedy and just solution to the
question of the Middle East, in particular the question
of Palestine, is in the interest of all parties, as well as
of regional and international peace and stability. It
requires joint efforts in the form of pragmatic
assistance on the part of the international community.

Given its primary responsibility for international
peace and security, it is incumbent upon the Security
Council to make a timely contribution in response to
the grave situation and to play an active role in
reducing tensions in the Middle East. We believe that
the establishment of a monitoring mechanism in areas
of conflict is in the interest of both sides.

We also believe that the draft resolution under
consideration is balanced. It is a realistic reflection of
the present situation. Therefore, the Chinese delegation
will vote in favour of it.

