Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Ursula Mueller for her briefing. We deeply appreciate
the selfless and courageous work of the humanitarian
workers in Syria and other hotbeds of conflict. We
are also thank Ms. Nujeen Mustapha for telling us her
own story, one that is both tragic and heroic and that
encourages us to redouble our efforts in our quest for a
settlement of the Syrian crisis.

We are seeing a significant stabilization of the
situation in Syria, with real breakthroughs in the fight
against terrorism and declining violence, especially
in the areas controlled by the legitimate Government.
Nevertheless, the situation in the country remains
challenging and will require even greater assistance
on the part of the international community in the work
of consolidating the progress that has been made and
creating the necessary conditions for normalizing the
situation further.

It will be genuinely possible to make continued
significant progress, but to achieve that, the
politicization of the humanitarian issue and the use of
double standards in assessing events in the Syrian Arab
Republic must cease. The time has come to reconsider
long-outdated approaches that have been overtaken by
the evolving situation in Syria, and end the persistent
attempts to blame Damascus for everything and hold
back the processes of normalizing the situation in and
around Syria, including its reintegration into the Arab
family. Bringing a speedy end to the illegal occupation
of Syrian territory, including in the north-east and
in the area of Al-Tanf, would help the joint work of
strengthening peace and stability in the country, along
with a genuine united effort to combat the ongoing threat
of terrorism, which, most alarmingly, is beginning to
spill over the borders of the region.

We want to draw attention once again to the
pernicious and damaging effects of unilateral sanctions,
which are only exacerbating the humanitarian situation
in Syria and other States, wreaking havoc on civilians,
undermining the normal functioning of Syria's medical
and social services and hindering the reliable supply
of vitally necessary fuel for the people. We urge
everyone to join the efforts to rebuild Syria's ruined
infrastructure and restore normal life to the stabilized
areas. With the assistance of Russia and other partners,
the Government of Syria is taking active steps in
that direction. Houses are being built and civilian
infrastructure, hospitals and roads are being repaired.
Since July of last year approximately 900 educational
and 200 medical facilities have been rebuilt, a number
of road bridges and more than 1,000 kilometres of roads
repaired, approximately 1,000 kilometres ofpower lines
laid and 140 water supply facilities, 180 bakeries, 631
electrical substations and more than 14,000 industrial
facilities operationalized. Many thousands of hectares
have been demined.

We welcome the growing economic relations
between Syria and its Arab neighbours. The restoration
of ties destroyed by conflict is a natural and objective
process, while a policy of good-neighbourliness is a
key to strengthening security and stability throughout
the region.

Despite the real challenges, the process of Syrian
refugees' return has maintained a steady positive trend.
Approximately 1,000 people are returning to Syria
every day. More than 190,000 Syrian nationals have
returned to their homeland since July of last year.
We are also seeing positive developments in terms
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) returning to
the homes they had fled. The Syrian Government
is working actively to improve the effectiveness of
the repatriation process and provide the necessary
guarantees. In 413 settlements that suffered the least
from military activities, centres have been opened to
receive and rehouse more than 1.5 million refugees. The
Syrian committee coordinating the return of refugees is
implementing various socioeconomic measures.

By contrast, we are seeing very different and
negative trends in the areas that are not under
Damascus's control. We share the concerns about the
dire humanitarian situation in the temporary shelter
at Al-Hol, which has continued to deteriorate rapidly
despite the efforts of international humanitarian
organizations. A camp designed for 40,000 people is
now coping with twice that number. People are living
in intolerable conditions, and many of them, most of
whom are women and children, as today's briefings
testified, have been through traumatic ordeals. Until
very recently they were living under terrorist control
and were forced to flee indiscriminate air and ground
strikes during counter-terrorism operations in the areas
of Hajin and Baghouz.

We believe it is vital to continue the coordinated
work of resettling Rukban camp residents. That is the
only way the problem can be solved, considering that
almost all its residents have expressed a desire to leave
the Al-Tanf area. Since February some 7,000 people
have been transferred in accordance with their own
wishes from there to areas under Government control.
If that pace continues, as many as 60 or 70 per cent
of the camp's residents could leave in the space of two
weeks. The Syrian authorities are providing guarantees
of decent living conditions for citizens who return from
Rukban. All those who have left the camp have been
provided with medical assistance and basic necessities
and food. Problems with recovering documents and
providing employment are also being resolved, and such
steps or their positive aspects should not be ignored.

However, the situation in Rukban remains difficult.
The militants of the illegal armed group Maghawir
al-Thawra who control the camp subject its inhabitants
to violence on a daily basis, block the return process
and even attempt to impose their own agenda. We
believe that involving the United States in the joint
coordination meetings on Rukban organized at Russia's
initiative for representatives of Russia, Syria and
various United Nations agencies would help to solve
the Rukban problem very quickly and would represent
a genuine practical step towards normalizing the living
conditions of civilians, including those with disabilities.

The situation in Idlib remains unstable. The former
Al-Nusra militants who have metamorphosed into
the Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham group continue to attack
Government positions. They make indiscriminate
strikes, including on civilian infrastructure, and
innocent civilians are dying. The pseudo-humanitarian
White Helmets continue preparing new provocations
in order to accuse the legitimate authorities of using
toxic agents. We see what is going on, and we do not
know how long the status quo in Idlib can continue. It is
absolutely unsustainable, and it is dangerous for Syria
and the region. We continue to work with our Turkish
partners to develop a lasting solution to the problem.
Russia and Turkey's ongoing consultations include the
detailed discussion of our joint steps with regard to the
Syrian situation.

If we are to increase the sustainability of the
positive developments in Syria, we must continue
consolidated work on the political front in support of
the efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen, particularly with
respect to launching the constitutional committee as
soon as possible, and the Astana troika is doing just
that. Their twelfth meeting will be held in Nursultan
on 25 and 26 April, and the leadership of Kazakhstan
is providing organizational and other assistance for
the event. We believe that meeting will make another
significant contribution to the Syrian settlement, and we
want to point out that it has been preceded by intensive
work. The Russian representatives have held a series
of consultations with all the key stakeholders and the
Syrian Government and opposition first and foremost.
Importantly, the eighth meeting of the working group
on the release of detainees/abductees, the handover of
bodies and the identification of missing persons will
take place on the margins ofthe event. We should point
out that in the past few days, thanks to the group's
efforts, an exchange of prisoners took place between
the Syrian Government and illegal armed groups in the
area of the town of Al-Bab.

We once again urge all our colleagues to act in the
interest of Syrians and not for the sake of geopolitical
plans that have already destabilized a number of
countries in the Middle East and North Africa and
destroyed their statehood. Together we can put an end
to the destructive trends in Syria and the region as a
whole. We are ready to cooperate and open to serious,
feasible initiatives that can be achieved in practice. The
realities of the region demand that we all come together
andjoin forces.

