Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to start by congratulating you, Ambassador
Spatafora, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of December 2007. We are
certain that under your leadership we will be able to
successfully conclude of the work planned for this
month. I can pledge my delegation's full support to this
end. I would also like to acknowledge the work
accomplished by Ambassador Natalegawa and his team
and to congratulate them on the excellent manner in
which they conducted the Council's work during
November.

I would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Mr. Moreno-Ocampo,
on his detailed and precise presentation on the
investigations into the situation in Darfur and on the
level of cooperation with the Government of the Sudan
in this regard. What the Prosecutor has told us in his
report gives rise to great concern. The lack of
cooperation between the Government of the Sudan and
the Prosecutor's Office and the fact that the Sudanese
Government has not taken action in order to implement
the arrest warrants issued by the Court is of particular
concern. Additionally, one of the indictees continues to
exercise official duties within the Government and,
paradoxically, in the humanitarian sphere. In turn, the
Prosecutor has also indicated that crimes for which the
Court holds jurisdiction continue to be committed in
Darfur.

We take note of the Prosecutor's view that those
crimes are taking place with the knowledge of the
military and civil authorities of the Sudan. The
Prosecutor's evaluation of the complementarity issue
has been rigorous and he has concluded that national
jurisdiction has not launched nor is it in the process of
launching legal proceedings in respect of those
individuals sought by the Prosecutor.

The Security Council acknowledges that the
situation in Darfur constitutes a serious threat to
international peace and security, which has already
resulted in the numerous deaths of innocent people and
has endangered the lives of millions of lives of
internally displaced peoples. It was this Council that
referred the situation in Darfur to the ICC in 2005 with
the understanding that the sanctions for the serious
crimes perpetrated and the end to impunity as a
dissuasive element would serve to restore peace in this
region.
The Government of the Sudan has the legal
obligation to cooperation with the Court in accordance
with resolution 1593 (2005). As a Member State of the
United Nations, the Sudan is therefore obliged to fulfil
the provisions of the United Nations Charter, that is, to
abide by Security Council resolutions. Its quality as a
non-State party to the Rome Statute is not relevant in
this context.

Therefore, we call, once again, on the
Government of the Sudan to immediately arrest and to
transfer Ahmad Harun and Ali Kushayb to the ICC. In
turn, we are of the view that the Council must uphold
the relevance of its decisions and ensure that these
decisions are fulfilled. In view of the Prosecutor's
report, the Security Council must act in a consequent
manner in accordance with its responsibilities with
regard to the maintenance of international peace and
security and must, therefore, express the need for the
Sudanese Government to comply with resolution 1593
(2005) and to cooperate with the ICC.

Finally, Peru would like to reiterate its support of
the work accomplished by the Prosecutor of the ICC
and to congratulate him on his professionalism and
impartiality.

