Mr. Bromberg: In my 25 years with EcoPeace
Middle East, my most memorable activity was to jump
into the Jordan River, together with Israeli, Palestinian
and Jordanian mayors. Together we made a big splash
but, like today, we also made an important statement.
To get the mayors to literally jump into the river, it took
us five years of planning. We developed an education
programme called "Good Water Neighbours" - please
remember that - that worked in schools on all sides
of the Jordan River, educating young kids about their
water reality and that of their neighbours. They saw
a river with little flow and full of pollution, and, for
the first time, they began to understand the impact of
conflict on water. Quite innocently, those kids and their
parents started to ask their mayors "Why is the Jordan
River so polluted, and what must we do with the other
side to clean up the river?" Empowered by the youth
and their parents to take action for the benefit of their
communities, the mayors jumped into the river together
not as best friends, but as leaders, advocating to national
Governments on all sides that only a rehabilitated river
would bring economic opportunities to their residents.

Twentieth-century assumptions that dictated water
diplomacy led us down a path ofconflict and competition
over water. We were indeed wholly dependent on
natural water during the past century, and therefore
each side fought over every drop. That was the mindset
that led to the demise of the Jordan River and the drastic
reduction in size of the Dead Sea. That was the mindset
of how water was negotiated in the Oslo Accords in the
mid 1990s. Water was left unresolved as a final-status
issue because coming to an agreement over sharing
scarce natural water was difficult and would produce
winners and losers. But today the advancements in
water technologies this century, much of which is led
by Israeli innovation, present real opportunities. The
utilization of treated waste water for agriculture and
the development of desalination technology means that
water is under less constraints as a resource.

Today 70 per cent of the drinking water in Israel
comes from desalination, and half of the agriculture
grown is grown with treated wastewater. The
availability of large quantities of manufactured water,
complimenting natural water, makes the fair share of
naturalwaterbetweenlsraelis andPalestinians attainable
now. Because of climate change, Mediterranean
desalinated water will be pumped by Israel into the Sea
of Galilee to guarantee water quality for the lake and
fresh water supplies to Jordan, and could be part of the
rehabilitation of the Jordan River - a river holy to half
of humankind. Based on Government policies, on the
one hand, of increased desalination and, on the other,
community-led advocacy for the river, for the first time
in 50 years some fresh water flows again out of the Sea
of Galilee into the Jordan River.

In just the past five years, technological advances
in solar power is allowing our region to harness the
sun. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has been the
regional leader in that regard, investing in large-scale
solar energy, owing to its vast desert landscapes. The
combination of manufactured water coming from
the Israeli and Palestinian coast and sold to Jordan,
powered by solar electricity produced in Jordan and
sold to Israel and Palestine, is a potential geopolitical
game changer. Such an exchange can guarantee
water and energy security for all, responds to climate
insecurity and creates healthy interdependencies
between our economies and societies. Last year, with
German funding, EcoPeace led a regional delegation
of decision makers and business leaders to Europe to
advance the project. Thanks to Swedish funding, a pilot
solar project is in the planning stages in Jordan today to
sell green electricity for the first time across the border.

Moving from competition to cooperation over
critical natural resources as a means to help create
political stability is not a new idea. The post-Second
World War coal and steel agreement of continental
Europe, led by former enemies France and Germany,
laid the foundation for stability in Europe. Harnessing
the sea and the sun shared by Israelis, Palestinians and
Jordanians can be our engine for achieving peace and
stability. Nada Majdalani, Yana Abu Taleb, myself
and all of our staff in Amman, Ramallah and Tel Aviv
carry with us the voices of young students, residents
and mayors. Together we have educated ourselves and
the communities in which we work. We have done the
research, and we have shown leadership.

We have partners for peace on all sides. Our 25
years of partnership tell us that good water, and not
necessarily good fences, make good neighbours. In
the spirit of Passover, Easter and the forthcoming
celebration of Ramadan, let us set water free to give
life and hope to our region.

We call on the Security Council to urge
our three Governments - Israel, Palestine and
Jordan - to advance cooperation together on water
and the environment, including the rehabilitation of the
Jordan River and the Dead Sea, meeting Palestinian
water rights and needs, and implement a water-energy
exchange for our shared future in the face of climate
change, all in the context of a two-State solution.
We call on the Security Council to invite all the
relevant United Nations agencies and international
organizations, including the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians, to help facilitate the implementation of
those objectives.

