Mr. Ladsous: Mr. President, I wish, through you, to
thank the entire Council for a discussion that has been
very substantial and that certainly helps us all. Indeed,
many questions were asked of the three Generals and of
at least two other Force Commanders. Allow me at the
outset to make a general comment.

The meeting of the heads of military components
this year we have placed under the general theme of
what is a constant concern and theme of work for the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and that is the
issue of performance: how to cultivate it and how to
enhance it. That is true in the field of training. As the
Council is aware, and some delegations have mentioned,
we have been working intensively on manuals for a
number of specialties, and more are on the way. I thank
those Member States that are helping us in doing that
work, but certainly those basic considerations - what
an infantry battalion should look like, what a field
hospital should look like - have to be complemented
by actual training, with such training ideally being
done before the deployment, but also on the ground.

Here I very much take the point that there is a need
for very specific training, for instance in the areas of
women's issues and child-protection issues. That cannot
always be achieved before deployment. That is what we
are going to do mainly in Mali once the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) takes over from the African-led
international support mission for Mali (AFISMA).
All the main training focused on human rights issues,
women's issues and children's issues in Mali will be
handled on the ground; quality control, of course, has
to be constantly kept in mind.

We are working on - and this is curently being
debated in the Fifth Committee - the proposal for
the post of a director of evaluation of field uniformed
personnel. Once again I thank those delegations that
mentioned their support for that initiative, which I
hope will materialize and which will be an institution
attached to the Under-Secretary-General, working very
closely with all the Force Commanders to solve the
systemic issues that arise time and again.

Performance is also very much enhanced by
inter-mission cooperation. Within the limits we have all
agreed on, it cannot be a procedure used systematically
to circumvent the regular ceiling of staff, regular
funding or regular equipment. It is about addressing
surges, either surges that are well identified in advance,
such as election processes, or unexpected ones. Over the
recent period, three clusters among our operations have
appeared. One is in West Africa, where the cooperation
between our missions is exceptionally good, because it is
also anchored in cooperation between the Governments
concerned; I refer here to Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire.
There must be appropriate mechanisms and therefore
suppleness has to be introduced.

Yes, I can confirm that this same process that I am
seeing in West Africa is being used to the benefit of
MINUSMA in Mali in terms of staff and equipment. I
think that this is also an opportunity to thank the Force
Commanders for their willingness and understanding
and for their actual deliberate participation in making
it work.

The second cluster is focused mainly on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Sudan, and there it is mainly about equipment and
helicopters - attack helicopters and utility helicopters.
These, as the Council is aware, are a very scarce
commodity, and we are led regularly to exchange
rotary-wing machines among the four main missions
concerned.

The third, and not least, geographical area is that
of the Middle East missions where, especially since last
year, when we deployed the United Nations Supervision
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic, there has been
absolutely exemplary cooperation among the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force and the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization, and, let us not forget,
with the support of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus, which is more often than not a backup
to those three missions. I think that there is much to be
said, but in terms of personnel and equipment, it works
in a rather exemplary way.
Let me finish by saying a word about the new
technologies, first about the unmanned aerial vehicles
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are in
the middle of the procurement process, which, as the
Council is aware, is not a simple process, but it is
very much under way. It is my hope that before long,
probably not in July, though, those unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) will be flying in the skies above the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They will be doing
what they are intended to do, which is three things.

First, give the best information possible to the
Force Commander.

Secondly, they will give better protection to our
people on the ground and, let us not forget, to the
civilian populations, including the camps for internally
displaced persons that the General mentioned. I think
that is a major tool for enhancing the safety and security
of all those concerned.

Thirdly, but not least, they will serve to deter the
ruffians or miscreants, or whatever one might call them,
who will know that there is an eye in the sky watching
everything they are doing, with our Force Commander
and his staff being fully aware of what is happening.
That also serves a great purpose; we do know that some
of the armed groups in a particular region of the Kivus
are quite concerned that this is going to happen, and it
does, I think, fit well in the picture.

Concerning other technologies, I would perhaps
hesitate to use the term "advanced technology", because
mainly it is state of the art. UAVs are around in so many
sectors and so many professions, and many of the items
of equipment that Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz
mentioned are indeed readily available in thousands of
models. So it is about in fact bringing United Nations
peacekeeping into the twenty-first century.

I think it is a very welcome initiative that Pakistan,
as Chair of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, after having already engineered resolution
2086 (2013) earlier this year, which has served the
Council well, will convene this meeting some time in
July. I think it will be a very useful discussion because
we simply need, again in the name of performance, to
be able to use what is readily available to do the job
within the parameters that have been expressed by a
number of delegations.

I have one final remark to make with regard to
unmanned aerial vehicles in other missions. Of course,
I will want to be able to draw some initial lessons from
the first few months of using those machines in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but clearly there is
a demand in several other missions and I think there is
a need. We shall do that in an appropriate way in the
sense that we will first want to learn our lessons and
then see how we can best implement it elsewhere.

