Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important open debate on working
methods of the Security Council. Brazil has long been
supportive of improvements in working methods that
make the Council more transparent, inclusive and
accessible. As a Council member, we have remained
attentive and responsive to the needs and interests of
the wider membership.

Brazil supported and welcomed the adoption last
year of the revised presidential note 507 (S/2010/507),
in particular the intention expressed by members to
maintain regular interaction with the Peacebuilding
Commission and to enhance dialogue with troop-
contributing countries, the reference to the increasing
use of informal interactive dialogue by the Council in
recent years, and the new section on planning and
reporting for Security Council missions. Under the
chairmanship of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions has been looking into ways to
enhance the Council's transparency, accountability and
efficiency. Such efforts can greatly benefit from further
interaction and dialogue with the wider membership.

Last February, during our presidency of the
Security Council, Brazil made a conscious effort to
involve every member of the Council in its
deliberations and keep them constantly informed of
developments, so as to help build unity of purpose. We
also sought to keep in close contact with all parties
directly concerned with the issues of which the Council
was seized.

At the end of the month, Brazil organized a
briefing for non-members of the Council to exchange
views on issues covered during the month, the first of
that kind since 2005.

It is essential that non-members have the
opportunity to be heard and have their views duly
taken into account and, therefore, to legitimately
influence the decisions especially relevant to them. The
more the Security Council moves in that direction, the
more it will observe the letter and spirit of the Charter.
Enhancing the Council's outreach to non-members will
greatly contribute to strengthening its credibility and
increase the effectiveness of its decisions, especially
concerning the implementation of resolutions by all
Member States.

As suggested in the concept note (S/201l/726, annex), I would like to point out some concrete
measures designed to further improve the working
methods of the Security Council.

We fully agree that the Council should strengthen
the trend of meeting more often in public. In fact, it
should meet in public as a general rule, without
prejudice to the usefulness of consultations of the
whole in preparing Council decisions. Private meetings
should be reserved for exceptional circumstances. Even
some traditionally private meetings could be turned
into public sessions. A clear example is the annual
briefing by the President of the International Court of
Justice. As suggested by the President of the Court, the
interaction between the Council and the Court should
be more frequent. Both organs stand to benefit from a
more regular exchange of information on the work
being carried out, without prejudice to their
independence and the specific nature of each body.

On the relationship between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), more
should be done to make full use of the advisory role of
the Commission. The Chairs of the PBC country-
speciflc configurations should be invited to participate
in relevant consultations as often as possible.

We also believe that it would be useful for the
functioning of the Council and its overall legitimacy if
it adopted the practice of consulting with non-members
on a regular basis, especially members with a special
interest in the substantive matter under consideration
by the Security Council and holding frequent, timely
and qualitative briefings for non-members, even
granting non-members access to the subsidiary bodies
of the Council, including the right to participate, as
appropriate.

In regard to accountability, I would like to
highlight the importance of enhanced procedures that
could help to monitor and assess the manner in which
the resolutions adopted by the Council are interpreted
and implemented, in particular those that authorize the
use of force. Brazil raised that point during the open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
earlier this month (see S/PV.6650). When the use of
force is authorized by the Council, the Member States
or organizations entrusted with that responsibility are
accountable to the Council and to the broader
membership. We believe that an in-depth discussion on
objective parameters is needed in order to ensure such
accountability. There is a need to enhance the
Council's procedures so as to ensure that the
implementation of resolutions involving the use of
force does not raise doubts regarding the objectives of
the action to be taken. The way in which resolutions
are implemented should be a matter for consideration
by the Council itself.

In that context, reports on military operations
should be required and should include such parameters
as proportionality and the fit between the measures
taken and the goals to be achieved. We invite Member
States to further reflect on and discuss the benefit of
specific mechanisms to follow up on the
implementation of mandates, for the purposes of
monitoring and assessment and reporting to the
Security Council during the course of military action
so that the duties of accountability are fulfilled.

To conclude, Mr. President, it must be noted that
some of the shortcomings in the Security Council's
working methods cannot be entirely corrected without
real reform, including changes in the Council's current
power structure. In order for the Council to be aligned
with the current political realities, it should be enlarged
in the permanent and non-permanent categories of
membership, with increased representation of
developing countries in both. We remain convinced
that such comprehensive reform would enable the
Council to make a fresh start and would ultimately give
rise to new and improved dynamics in its daily work.

May I stress that Brazil will continue to work -
inside and outside the Security Council - towards
effective improvements in its working methods, with a
View to making the Council more transparent, inclusive
and accessible.

