Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by expressing our gratitude to Mr. Mulet and the
personnel of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for their ongoing efforts in
Haiti. The Mission continues to make an outstanding
contribution to alleviating the hardships Haiti has
suffered since the earthquake of January this year. As
we look to the Mission's immediate future, we
welcome the preparatory measures currently being
taken ahead of November's presidential and legislative
elections, noting in particular the importance of the
integrated logistics and security plan being devised by
MINUSTAH and the Haitian National Police. Haitian
involvement is, of course, central to this process; above
all, we underline the need for all Haitian parties to
continue to demonstrate their commitment to holding
free, fair and transparent elections.

The view of the United Kingdom is that the
primary focus of all United Nations peacekeeping
operations, including MINUSTAH, should remain the
provision and maintenance of a peaceful and secure
environment. As a consequence, peacekeepers and
peacekeeping missions should not make a lasting, long-
term commitment to undertaking reconstruction work.
The Security Council has adjusted the Mission's
strength to include additional engineering contingents.
This should be on the understanding that those
personnel actively pursue local capacity-building
initiatives in tandem with their recovery work.
MINUSTAH's personnel must work alongside the
Haitian people and help build their capacity to
eventually take on this reconstruction work.

We note with concern the threat that the current
hurricane season poses for the many Haitians still
living in substandard accommodation. In this regard,
MINUSTAH's disaster contingency planning is of vital
importance. We hope that this contingency planning is
developed, where possible, alongside the Haitian
authorities, and that provision is made for future
Haitian ownership, due to the unfortunate fact that
severe weather risks will be a regular threat to Haiti.

We are pleased to hear of the recent recruitment
of 900 Haitian National Police (HNP) trainees and look
forward to continuing HNP recruitment. The HNP's
current lack of capacity is having a worrying impact on
the safety and security of vulnerable Haitians,
including women and children. In this regard, we
welcome the increased capacity of the United Nations
police to focus on protecting internally displaced
persons, and the efforts of the United Nations and the
Government of Haiti in producing a comprehensive
sexual and gender-based violence operations plan. The
HNP must get to a position where MINUSTAH's
troops are no longer relied on as the main providers of
security in Haiti. MINUSTAH, for its part, must
continue to do its utmost to aid the development of
local policing capabilities.

The rehabilitation of the Haitian corrections
system has also rightly been identified as a key element
in the recovery process, and we are pleased to see that
donors have channelled some of their efforts into
making valuable contributions and progress in this
important area.

This serves to underline the continuing
importance of the role of the international donor
community in helping to re-establish Haiti's
institutions and to invigorate its economy. In this
regard, we commend the ongoing work of Prime
Minister Bellerive and former President Clinton as co-
Chairs of the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission. The
maintenance of peace and security, as carried out by
MINUSTAH's very capable peacekeeping troops, is
only one of the many strands that contribute to the
conditions necessary for successful recovery in Haiti.
Once MINUSTAH's surge period has reached its
conclusion, in the next 12 months or so, we would
envisage the longer-term reconstruction work shifting
from a military peacekeeping operation to a mainly
civilian effort. The United Kingdom will continue to
give MINUSTAH its full backing during this crucial
phase.
