Ms. Garcia Gutierrez (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you, Madam President, for
convening today's important debate.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict
and with the statement made by the representative of
Argentina on behalf of countries that signed the Safe
Schools Declaration.

We would like to thank Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Henrietta Fore,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund, for their briefings. We also thank Ms. Yenny
Londofio for her statement. We reiterate our support
and appreciation to Ms. Gamba for her arduous efforts.

Costa Rica has carefully read and studied the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/465) and shares the
view that all parties to armed conflict have a special
obligation to protect children and that that obligation
flows directly from international law. However,
regrettably, millions of children suffer as a result of
armed conflict and asymmetrical attacks perpetrated
by non-State armed groups, which have a severe impact
on children in densely populated areas in particular,
especially since such attacks are carried out in schools
or hospitals. Given their primary responsibility for the
protection of children, States must strengthen their
national capacities to protect them and keep them away
from armed conflict, violent extremism and recruitment
by non-State armed groups.

It is imperative to conduct coordinated international
efforts for prevention and early warning, as it is the
most effective way to fulfil their obligations and
ensure that the protection of children is an integral
and comprehensive part of any prevention strategy. We
recognize the urgency of ensuring that the provisions
of the Convention of the Rights of the Child and of
international humanitarian law are not dead letter.
Using children as soldiers is unacceptable. It is also
acceptable for the parties to conflict to cut off the supply
of drinking water, electricity, gas, food, medicine or
humanitarian aid for civilians, which makes them
increasingly vulnerable. States must adopt measures to
protect and ensure that schools are safe and welcoming.
In 2015, Costa Rica was one of the 38 countries that
signed the Safe Schools Declaration, which was adopted
in Oslo, and we encourage those who have not signed
it to do so.

The Organization, and in particular the Council,
must implement a uniform and consolidated monitoring
strategy. It should provide information about, and
respond more effectively to, the serious violations of
children's rights, including by granting the relevant
mandates to peacekeeping operations and to the
political missions that ensure their capacity.

We reiterate our condemnation of the sexual
exploitation and abuse of children, especially in the
context of peacekeeping missions, and call for the
necessary steps to be taken to bring those responsible
to justice. Costa Rica calls for ensuring access to child-
protection services in all detention centres and ending
impunity for those who commit these grave violations.

Finally, my country strongly calls for children
who have been recruited by non-State armed forces
to be considered victims, that they be placed in
detention centres only as a last resort and that their
protection and rights be guaranteed, including the
right to psychological and educational support after
demobilization, so as to ensure their reintegration into
society and the sustainability of peace.

