Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Meron, and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their informative briefings,
as well as for being with us today.

The United States would like to begin by
recognizing President Meron and thanking him for
his service. He has led the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals since 2012,
overseeing the assumption of responsibilities from
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). President Meron's efforts, through
his leadership of the Mechanism, have helped to ensure
that victims ofhorrific atrocities addressed by the ICTR
and the ICTY receive meaningful measures ofjustice.
We congratulate Judge Agius on his appointment as
President, commencing in January.

The International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals is a model of our staffing
expectations regarding gender parity. Fifty-six per
cent of professional staff are female, surpassing the
Secretary-General's goals. We are also happy to see the
Mechanism's commitment to strategic planning in the
process of downsizing staff and reducing operational
costs. The volume of work that the Mechanism conducts
is impressive, given its lean operations. For example,
there were 244 judicial decisions and orders issued
in this past reporting period alone, in addition to an
ongoing trial in the Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanisic and
Franko Simatovic' case, as well as the ongoing appeal
proceedings in the Prosecutor v. Radovan Karadeic',
Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladic' and Prosecutor v. Augustin
Ngirabatware cases.

The arrest and transfer to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals of five accused
Rwandan nationals during the reporting period is an
important example of the need for the Mechanism's
continued vigilance against any efforts by any party
to interfere with the integrity of its proceedings. We
commend the strong cooperation between Rwandan
authorities and the Mechanism in executing the arrest
and transfer of those individuals. It also highlights
the importance of the continued efforts made by the
Mechanism to protect the thousands of witnesses
who bravely provide testimony so that justice could
be served. The international community owes them a
debt of continued care and protection.

We would also like to recognize the work of
Prosecutor Brammertz. In particular, we commend his
progress on remaining cases, cooperation with States,
strong efforts to build capacity and national judiciaries
in Africa and the former Yugoslavia, prosecuting war
crimes and the innovative use of tribunal evidence
holdings to support the search for missing persons.
We encourage the Mechanism to consider proposals to
respond to the concerns raised by some States about
early-release regimes. We note that some individuals
who have been released early have subsequently
denied responsibility for their crimes, and we share the
concern that such denial undermines the fight against
impunity. We recognize and encourage the practice of
consulting with the States concerned about the early-
release regime.

In the former Yugoslavia, we welcome the
Prosecutor's recent announcement of a partnership
with the International Committee of the Red Cross to
support the search for missing persons. It is important
for all of us to remember that approximately 10,000
people remain missing from the conflicts in the
Balkans, as Prosecutor Brammertz has noted. We
call on countries in the region to cooperate with one
another, the Mechanism and other groups in those
efforts and commend Croatia and Serbia for their
public commitment to working together to that end.
The politicization of the issue callously disregards
the suffering of the victims and their families. We are
hopeful that the evidence collection of the ICTY may
assist in clarifying the fate and the whereabouts of
missing persons.

We again highlight that, although the ICTY closed
last December, the pursuit of justice for atrocities
related to the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia is
not over. Many hundreds of cases remain unresolved
in national jurisdictions. We welcome the work of the
Prosecutor's Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina to file
important indictments in complex cases. Discussions
between the Mechanism and the Serbian Chief War
Crimes Prosecutor are encouraging, and we remain
engaged to see whether or not they lead to the effective
implementation of Serbia's national war crimes strategy.

We look to Croatia to demonstrate a similar
commitment to national cases in the next reporting
period and to all Governments in the region to cooperate
with one another and the Mechanism to resolve the
remaining cases. The United States shares Prosecutor
Brammertz's concerns about the ongoing denial of
serious crimes and the glorification of war criminals in
the region. The Republika Srpska National Assembly's
decision to annul the 2004 report on the Srebrenica
genocide was a step backwards. We call on leaders
and countries to reject efforts to deny the facts of past
conflicts or engage in revisionist history. Ensuring that
newer generations share an accurate understanding of
the past is elemental to preventing the recurrence of
atrocities. The United States urges all States, especially
States in the Great Lakes and southern African regions,
to cooperate with the Mechanism and undertake efforts
to arrest and surrender the eight remaining fugitives
indicted by the ICTR as soon as possible. The United
States continues to offer up to $5 million for information
leading to their arrest.

The work of the Mechanism, like that of the
Rwanda and former Yugoslavia Tribunals previously,
reminds us that, in the face of terrible atrocities, we
can work together to hold accountable those responsible
and achieve a measure of justice for the victims. We
look forward to continuing to support the Mechanism
and the fight against impunity.

