Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): I should like
to thank you, Sir, for having convened this public
meeting pursuant to the issuance of the eighth report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), which we commend.

My delegation welcomes the presence here today
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. Le'onard She Okitundu. We thank him for his
statement and commend the initiative of his
Government to initiate direct, high-level negotiations
with its neighbours and its decision to prohibit the
recruitment of child soldiers and to order the
demobilization of those already recruited.

Our thanks also go to the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie
Gue'henno, for his introduction of the report and to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for
his oral briefing this morning. We entirely subscribe to
the recommendations and programme of action on
child soldiers that have been put forward.

The report before us today follows that which we
considered here only a few days ago in the wake of the
Security Council mission to the Great Lakes region. It
allows us, as did the other, to continue to entertain
optimism - cautious optimism, of course - with
regard to the Lusaka peace process. My delegation
agrees with the observations and conclusions of the
report and would like to make the following comments.

First, despite important progress made on various
aspects of the Lusaka process, we share the Secretary-
General's view that there can be no lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo without a
comprehensive settlement of the situation, particularly
that which prevails in Burundi. In that connection, we
strongly urge the continuation of bilateral summit
meetings to achieve agreements based, inter alia, on
common interests and mutual respect for the territorial
integrity, national sovereignty and security of the
States of the region.

Secondly, we are also of the view that the future
of the Lusaka process depends on the commitment and
cooperation of the parties. In that connection, we take
due note of the significant progress achieved in the
disengagement of forces and of the withdrawal and
announced withdrawal of certain foreign forces from
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We are still greatly concerned, however, over the
reluctance and manifest lack of zeal shown by the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratic and the
Front de liberation du Congo towards, respectively, the
demilitarization of Kisangani and disengagement in
Equateur Province. This situation, which is
dangerously hampering the process, should no longer
be tolerated by the Security Council. The Council's
resolutions and the instruments of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement must be implemented.

Thirdly, we subscribe to the idea of a transition to
phase III deployment of MONUC. Such a transition
should be brief and allow for the completion of
planning for all the components of phase III. In that
connection, we support the idea of a meeting in the
context of the partnership between the Political
Committee of the Lusaka Agreement and the Security
Council next September.

Fourthly, with respect to the economic and
humanitarian situation, we reiterate the appeal made to
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.

We have already welcomed the opening of the
Congo River to navigation. We support the process of
establishing a Congo River Basin commission and are
prepared to endorse the concept of opening a
humanitarian corridor to ease a situation that needs no
description, since the figures speak for themselves.

Lastly, we support the extension of the mandate
of MONUC for another 12 months and will vote in
favour of the draft resolution authorizing that
extension.

I cannot conclude without paying a vibrant to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ambassador
Kamel Morjane, and, through him, to his entire team
and to all the agencies on the ground for their efforts to
restore peace to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

