Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) (interpretation from French):
Portugal has for centuries had very strong ties to Central
America. It is therefore with particular satisfaction that my
country welcomed the signing in Guatemala City on 29
December of the final peace Agreement between the
representatives of the Government and the Unidad
Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca. We believe that
peace, national reconciliation and economic development
are now within the grasp of the Guatemalan people.

This final Agreement, in conjunction with the
agreements signed in Madrid, Mexico, Oslo and Stockholm,
will lead to the end of the domestic conflict in Guatemala,
which has been the longest in Central America.

The consequences of this Agreement are not limited to
Guatemala. They have a particular meaning in the context
of the overall process underway in Central America, and
they can become an important contribution to the cause of
peace, democracy, stability and economic development in
the region.

In recent years, the United Nations has played a very
important role in Guatemala. I would also like to pay
tribute today to the patient and constructive efforts of the
Secretary-General, the Group of Friends of the Guatemalan
Peace Process, the United Nations system as a whole, and
to all other international agencies which have supported and
continue to support the peace process.

It is our hope that democracy and respect for human
rights will continue to be consolidated in Guatemala.
Portugal is gratified by these developments and also wishes
to convey its special thanks to the men and women whom
make up the United Nations Mission for the Verification of
Human Rights and of Compliance with the Commitments
of the Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in
Guatemala (MINUGUA). Since November 1994, when the
Mission was established as part of the framework of the
peace negotiations, they have verified the respect for the
overall Agreement on Human Rights in Guatemala which
was signed by the parties, as well as some aspects of the
agreement on the identity and rights of indigenous peoples,
which is of fundamental importance.

The presence of MINUGUA was essential in putting
in place a peace process whose purpose was to put an end
to a conflict that had beset the people of Guatemala for the
past 35 years. MINUGUA has played an indispensable and
exemplary role in the restoration of law and order and
respect for human rights in this country. We hope that
henceforth all the national minorities will be able to
participate fully in building a free and democratic society
in Guatemala where social justice becomes a reality.

Portugal feels that the international community has
the duty to respond positively to the requests of the two
Guatemalan parties, by providing adequate means to
verify the ceasefire, the separation of forces and the
disarmament and demobilization of the forces of the
Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca. It is
therefore a matter of helping and encouraging the parties
to respect their commitments under the agreements they
have signed.

The adoption of the draft resolution before us, which
Portugal has co-sponsored, would be an essential
contribution to peace and to national reconciliation and
would be a follow-on to the recommendations in the
report of the Secretary-General.

One cannot overestimate the primary responsibility
and the fundamental role which either the Government or
the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca must
continue to discharge in order to honour the mutual
commitments they made to pursue the long-term
consolidation of peace, democracy and stability in the
country.

Portugal firmly believes that the peace process in
Guatemala is an example to be followed by peoples and
countries in similar situations throughout the world. We
are certain that the two parties and the people of
Guatemala will both be up to this challenge.

