Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): Ijoin previous speakers in
thanking the delegation of Bangladesh for organizing
this open debate. It is a great honour to see you, Sir, the
Foreign Minister of a truly peace-loving country,
presiding over this meeting. Let me also convey our
deepest appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive, thought-provoking and extremely
useful report.

The strength of the ideals of the United Nations
depends upon the identification of clear and feasible
means to promote them. Without concrete tools of
implementation the goals set in the Charter are empty
words.

The report that we are analysing is rich in
concrete proposals and concrete suggestions on actions
that must be taken with the fundamental purpose of this
Organization to prevent conflicts. We appreciate the
able way in which the report identifies the main
sources of concern of Member States and we hope that
it can foster a renewed commitment towards a genuine
culture of prevention.

The first merit of the report, in the view of my
delegation, is the way in which it addresses conflict
prevention as a cross-cutting issue. Indeed, the
implementation of an effective strategy of prevention
must involve the whole United Nations system, its
main organs and all other relevant non-United Nations
actors and stakeholders. Thus, improved coordination
is indeed key to ensuring that we can harness and
realize the potential for prevention that exists in
activities undertaken by the Organization in a vast
array of areas.

Conflict situations are far too complex to be dealt
with just through a traditional security approach. It is
not necessary to theorize about the distinctive nature of
today's conflicts. Suffice it to glance at the recent
involvement of the United Nations from Haiti to East
Timor, Kosovo and Sierra Leone. The deployment of
peacekeepers is only one of the tasks performed by the
United Nations in today's conflicts. In all these
regions, many United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes provide a wide range of assistance, from
short-term relief to long-term development efforts.

Success in solving one specific problem in conflict
situations depends on tackling several other intertwined
issues. To illustrate this, let me just ask a few simple
questions. Is it possible to talk about durable peace in the
midst of deprivation and extreme poverty? How can we
expect fragile peace accords to hold when perpetrators of
crimes against humanity go unpunished? What can be
done to ensure stability if peace agreements are not
followed by genuine institutional reforms to allow all
citizens to take part in the political life of a country? How
can United Nations troops help to disarm and demobilize
warring parties if there is no programme to reintegrate ex-
combatants into civil life? And if these ex-combatants are
children, can we move forward without building schools
and providing for the basic needs of families?
As we see it, conflict prevention involves not
only the best possible use of measures at the disposal
of the Security Council, but also efforts in the areas of
humanitarian assistance, rehabilitation, reconstruction,
post-conflict peace building and long-term development,
which fall within the purviews of both the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. But
when should conflict prevention start? Does it always
demand the presence of the United Nations in the form
of a peacekeeping operation?

Any empirical model for action by the United
Nations should not overlook the fact that, in the real
world, we are not faced solely with visible cases of
conflict. There are also potentially deadly situations in
what I would call the invisible or only partially visible
conflicts that we can witness throughout the world.
Paragraph 7 of the report is illuminating in alerting us
to the root causes that may remain latent for years
before a conflict breaks out. If we read it in a positive
sense, we have a perfect description of what is meant
by a "culture of prevention". Indeed, in a world where
social inequities are being reduced, tolerance is being
promoted and human rights are being defended, the
culture of prevention will be firmly grounded. We
know, however, that this ideal - which, in the end,
coincides with the very goals of the Charter - is still
distant. We should make our commitment to achieving
this culture of prevention ever stronger.

If we are to fully accept the implications of the
concept of conflict prevention, the most difficult and
sensitive challenge is to prevent conflicts where the
United Nations has not yet established a peacekeeping
presence or a mandate. The difference of approach needed
in these circumstances is enormous and should not be
overlooked. As the report recognizes, there is very little
the international community can do if, for instance, the
Government concerned denies the existence of a situation
of imminent normalcy disruption.

As the report indicates, the Security Council has a
central role in the maintenance of international peace
and security, but the shared responsibility of all actors
referred to in the report can turn out to be the very
guarantee of a successful strategy. The idea of regular
joint meetings between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council remains valid and could
prove to be an excellent tool of coordination. We are
very glad to note that President Holkeri has picked up
this proposal in the context of the exercise on the
revitalization of the General Assembly. Working
together in a cooperative manner must be the mainstay
of our strategy for preventing the outbreak, escalation
and recurrence of armed conflicts.

The United Nations has had a mixed record in its
attempts to cope with the complexity of preventing
armed conflict. Some ideas put forward in the report
may serve the purpose of enhancing our collective
performance in this field. Brazil is particularly
supportive of such proposals as those on measures to
promote coherence and coordination and on fact-
finding and confidence-building missions as useful
tools in dealing with not-so-evident pre-conflict
situations.

Today's meeting of the Security Council and the
plenary meeting of the General Assembly scheduled
for mid-July certainly show that there is political will
to address the issue of conflict prevention in a
comprehensive and realistic way. We hope that the
United Nations and all stakeholders will be able to
ensure a meaningful follow-up to the recommendations
put forward by the Secretary-General.

