Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): For more than 10 years, Spain has maintained
an unwavering commitment to Afghanistan and its
future. That commitment has been made by Spain's
Government, its institutions and its people. We have
committed to building on the principles of freedom,
security, democracy and human rights. I think that that
is a goal shared by the Council and by Afghanistan.

In upholding such principles and as part of Spain's
commitment to supporting Afghanistan, more than 100
Spaniards have lost their lives. The two most recent
fatalities occurred some 10 days ago, when Jorge

Garcia Tudela and Isidro Gabino Sanmartin Hernandez,
two police officers who were members of the security
detail of the Spanish Embassy in Kabul, were killed.
They, together with five Afghan civilians, lost their
lives in a Taliban-perpetrated attack that took place
on 11 December. I wish to dedicate the beginning of
this statement to the memory of all of those who died.
I also wish to repeat Spain's rejection of violence and
extremism in whatever form they take. They are serious
threats to regional and international peace, security
and stability. They must therefore be combated with
the determination and unity of the entire international
community.

Spain fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

I wish to thank Mr. Haysom for being with us
today and pay due tribute to the tremendous work that
he undertakes daily and that he has been doing for
almost 14 years - not just Mr. Haysom but also the
members of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, both Afghan and international staff. We
also pay tribute to the work carried out by the United
Nations programmes and agencies operating in the
country.

The year now drawing to a close is the first of the
transformation decade for Afghanistan and the first
in which the Afghan National Security Forces have
been able to take full responsibility for preserving the
security of the entire country. It has been a year full of
challenges and tests for Afghanistan but considerable
progress has also been made, such as the establishment
and consolidation of the National Unity Government,
which we very much welcome. We also wish to
congratulate the Government on the way in which it
has carried out its role and the decisive way in which
President Ghani and Chief Executive Officer Abdullah
Abdullah have rolled out a raft of reforms in the areas of
economy, governance and the fight against corruption.
They are to be commended for such efforts. We call
upon the Afghan authorities to continue to implement
reforms in order to rigorously apply measures adopted
at the policy level and thus to build on the achievements
that we have witnessed in recent years in key areas,
such as education and human rights.

Afghanistan will be able to call upon the full
support of the international community as it continues
in its task. We are sure that the ministerial conference
on Afghanistan in Brussels in October 2016 will be a
key opportunity for all of us to renew our commitment
to the development and future of Afghanistan. Until that
Brussels meeting Afghanistan will have to continue to
face ongoing challenges, including electoral reform,
security, the humanitarian situation and the migration
cr1s1s.

The economic situation in the country is one of
the major challenges that the Afghan people currently
face. We very much welcome, therefore, the measures
adopted to boost tax earnings and promotejob creation.
Such activities together with the actions that have been
taken to ensure that Afghan citizens, and especially
the young and all who, because of their education, are
able to contribute to the future of the country, stay
in the country rather than emigrating will be key to
laying the foundation for a prosperous Afghanistan.
We also welcome all that has been done regionally at
the economic level to promote cooperation. However,
economic growth requires a secure environment and,
therefore, improving the security situation is vital
and, like economic cooperation, will require regional
support. It will also have a positive regional impact.

We very much welcome the recent ministerial
conference in Islamabad, the fifth in the Heart of Asia-
Istanbul Process, which was held earlier this month.
Spain welcomed the opportunity to be able to participate
in the Process as one of the supporting countries. We
believe that the conditions will soon be met to allow
Afghanistan to resume the peace process in a decisive
way and that it will be able to further pursue the process
of national reconciliation for all Afghans. We call upon
all those who are in a position to do so to help rekindle
the national reconciliation process and dialogue. We
would like to highlight the key role being played by
Pakistan, the United States of America and the People's
Republic of China in that process.

Spain wishes to see work continue on two issues
that we deem to be important: the role of women and
the situation of children. We therefore welcome the
adoption of the first set of measures to apply resolution
1325 (2000), and we urge the Government to pursue
such efforts until the measures apply in all regions of
Afghanistan. With regard to the situation of children,
we encourage the Government to continue pursuing the
full and robust implementation of necessary measures
as part of the road map.

Spain is more than willing to cooperate and
collaborate with Afghanistan, including here in the
Security Council, to consolidate and build peace
and security in Afghanistan. We are also more than
willing to support the efforts of the Afghan people and
Government as they seek to bring about stability and
economic and social progress. There are many Afghan
citizens, Spanish citizens and others who have given
all, including their lives, to support this endeavour. We
do not wish to let them down.

