Mr. Chambas: I am grateful for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the work carried out
by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) in the implementation of its
mandate and to provide the Council with an overview
of political and security developments in Darfur since
July, when I last had the privilege of briefing the
Council (see S/PV.7010).

As highlighted in the report before the Council
(8/2013/607), the security situation in Darfur and
threats to UNAMID and humanitarian personnel
continue to be a serious concern. On 11 October, a
Zambian peacekeeper was killed in a criminal incident
a few hundred metres from the Mission's headquarters
in El Fasher. On 13 October, a Senegalese formed police
unit was ambushed near El Geneina, West Darfur, while
escorting a water convoy to our sector headquarters.
The attack led to the death of three personnel and injury
to one. I appreciate the solidarity with the mission
demonstrated by the United Nations Security Council
and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union, which issued statements condemning those
heinous crimes. On 15 October, I visited El Geneina to
pay my respects to our fallen colleagues. I will continue
to urge the Government of the Sudan to do much more
in order to bring to justice the perpetrators of those and
other attacks against UNAMID.

The situation in Darfur is further complicated by
the intertribal conflicts that continue to plague the
region. Fighting between the Southern Rezeigat and
the Ma'alia in East Darfur, the Misseriya and Salamat
in Central Darfur and the Aballa/Northern Rizeigat
and Beni Hussein in North Darfur have led to a larges
number of civilian casualties, mass displacement
and attendant humanitarian tragedy than the clashes
between forces of the Government and those of the
non-signatory movements.

As part of our efforts to mitigate the situation,
UNAMID worked closely with regional, State and local
authorities, including through the provision of logistics
and technical support, towards renewed attempts at
bringing about reconciliation between the conflicting
tribal groups. Although a number of agreements on a
cessation of hostilities have been reached, the situation
remains fragile.

UNAMID continued to facilitate the delivery of
relief assistance by humanitarian actors to affected
communities. Instances of denial of access and
restriction of movement and bureaucratic impediments
remain challenges that have a negative impact on
that common effort. At the meeting of the tripartite
coordination mechanism held on 28 September
at Headquarters in New York, representatives of
the African Union (AU) and the United Nations
underscored the importance of unhindered freedom of
movement for UNAMID. However, it must also be said
that the number of such restrictions taken in proportion
to the number of patrols and escorts carried out by the
mission, which the Council will have seen in the report,
is quite low.

Let me now update members on the status of the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. At its sixth meeting, held on 23 September
in Doha, the Implementation Follow-up Commission
expressed concern at its overall slow pace and called on
the parties to step up efforts.

Since the donor conference held in April, the
signatory parties have been concentrating on developing
institutional mechanisms for the implementation of the
Darfur Development Strategy. In September, the Darfur
Coordination Board for Recovery, Reconstruction and
Development, which has the mandate to coordinate
donor support for the Strategy, held its inaugural
meeting in Doha.

In August, public tenders were launched for the
first phase of 1,071 development projects for Darfur,
totalling 400 million Sudanese pounds - approximately
$82.5 million - in the areas of education, health and
water. The funding is to be sourced from the Darfur
Reconstruction and Development Fund.

With regard to the Darfur-based dialogue and
consultations, which are designed to complement efforts
to consolidate the peace process, I can report that a
draft concept developed by UNAMID on the conduct of
the dialogue and a communication strategy have been
shared with other facilitators of the dialogue, namely,
Qatar and the AU, and a meeting of the facilitators in
November will agree on a schedule for its convening.

There has been some progress, albeit limited, on
issues related to land ownership and the proportionate
participation of Darfuris in the civil and judicial
services. There has been no serious movement with
regard to the implementation of the provisions of the
permanent ceasefire and final security arrangements.

The realization of the agreement between the
Government of the Sudan and the faction of the
Justice and Equality Movement (J EM) formerly led by
Mohammed Bashar, signed on 6 April 2013, has yet to
gain traction. With logistic support by UNAMID, on
25 August, an advance delegation of the movement
travelled from its base in Kornoi in North Darfur to
Khartoum to commence the process. Only today, it
has been published that the President of the Sudan
has granted amnesty to members of the JEM-Bashar
movement, in conformity with the provisions of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.

I have remained engaged with the non-signatory
movements in an attempt to find common ground
for advancing the peace process in Darfur. I held
preliminary consultations with the leaders of
JEM-Gibril Ibrahim and the Minni Minawi faction of
the Sudan Liberation Army from 22 to 27 August in
Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania, with a view to
developing a common understanding and appreciation
of the situation in Darfur and discussing the practical
ways it could be improved. The movements reiterated
their commitment to peace and a negotiated political
settlement in Darfur in the context ofa holistic solution
to the Sudan's problems.

Following the consultations in Arusha, various
officials from the Government of the Sudan informed
me that, while they welcomed my engagement, any
dialogue between the Government and the movements
should be based on the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. They also indicated that they were open to the
participation of the Darfur non-signatory movements
in a national dialogue. In line with the understanding
reached in Arusha, the Joint Mediators are exploring the
possibility of holding a follow-up meeting in the near
future, in the form of a workshop or seminar focused
primarily on issues relating to a humanitarian cessation
of hostilities and efforts to reach a comprehensive
peace.

With regard to UNAMID operations, reductions
in the mission's overall troop and police strengths are
on track for completion by 31 January 2014, as part
of the outcome of the review of UNAMID uniformed
personnel. In August, a team from the Secretariat
undertook a review of UNAMID civilian staffing
requirements in line with General Assembly resolution
66/264, of 2012. The findings of the exercise will be
reflected in the report on the comprehensive review of
UNAMID requested by the Security Council.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to express
my deep appreciation to the Council for its continued
support to UNAMID.

