Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): Let me join other delegations in celebrating
the memory of President George Herbert Walker Bush
and expressing our deepest condolences to his family
and the entire American people.

At the outset, and on behalf of the President of
Burkina Faso, Mr. Roch Marc Christian Kabore', I would
like to congratulate Cote d'Ivoire on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of December
and wish it every success in that role. I commend the
Ivorian presidency for convening this high-level debate
on the important topic of post-conflict reconstruction
and peace, security and stability. Through me,
President Kabore' also wishes to express his gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for having invited him to this
debate. He regrets not being able to attend due to his
work timetable, but wishes Cote d'Ivoire every success
in steering the work of the Council.

I wish to commend China for its presidency of the
Council in November and for convening, on 15 and
20 November, respectively, a meeting on the Joint
Force ofthe Group of Five for the Sahel (see S/PV.8402)
and a briefing on peace and security in Africa (see S/PV.8407). I also like to thank the Secretary-General
and Chairperson Faki Mahamat of the African Union
Commission, for their informative briefings.

The success of post-crisis reconstruction plans
represents an important catalyst for sustaining peace,
stability and security in affected countries. The
example that Cote d'Ivoire has set in that regard is
rich in lessons learned. It has been able to secure a
definitive exit from the crisis and implement a policy of
post-crisis management. That is the result of the vision
and leadership of President Alassane Ouattara and the
Ivorian Government, which, at an early stage, identified
and implemented appropriate measures to carry out the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
and ensure national reconciliation and reconstruction.
All of those measures enabled the Security Council,
by its resolution 2284 (2016) of 28 April 2016, to end
the mandate of the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire on 30 June 2017, which stands out in the
history of United Nations missions, most of which end
up with an indefinite mandate and duration. That is
a good example for countries emerging from conflict
situations - particularly in Africa - and for the
Security Council itself.

As the Council is aware, conflicts and crises are
often multifaceted. Although not involved in an open
armed conflict, Burkina Faso experienced a political
crisis in 2014 and 2015 that deeply undermined its
institutions and greatly strained its social peace and
cohesion. During that period, the country benefited
from the mobilization and support of the Economic
Community of West African States, the African
Union and the United Nations, through the funds - in
particular the Peacebuilding Fund - that supported
security sector reform projects, national reconciliation
and the resilience of our population. After a period of
transition, the newly elected Government had to take
that situation into account in the implementation of its
2016 presidential programme towards a national plan
for economic and social development. The plan was
established in strict accordance with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063 of the
African Union.
With the structural transformation of our economy
through the reform of our institutions and the
modernization of our administration, the development
of human capital and the revitalization of the most
buoyant sectors of our economy and labour market, the
plan seeks to make Burkina Faso a country of strong
growth, sustainability, resilience and inclusivity, while
creating decent jobs, in order to consistently respond
to the many needs of our people. Our ultimate goal is
to create the conditions for inclusive and sustainable
development and thereby eradicate the root causes
of crises.

However, as Council members are aware and
as you recalled, Mr. President, since 2015 Burkina
Faso has been confronting a recurrence of terrorist
acts that have undermined peace and security in the
country, the wider Sahel and the entire West African
subregion. Aware that a military response alone is not
sufficient to defeat terrorism, in 2017 the Government
adopted an emergency plan for the Sahel that seeks
to ensure that people in the northern regions and the
Sahel 4 particularly women and young people, the
most vulnerable and susceptible to radicalism and
extremism 4 have access to basic the social services,
employment, education and infrastructure necessary
to their well-being. The emergency plan therefore
represents a holistic response to the dual socioeconomic
and security challenges faced in that part of the country.

The establishment of sustainable peace must also
and above all be articulated around the prevention
of factors for internal State fragility. Conflicts are
costly to States and the international community.
There is therefore a need to prevent such conflicts
from breaking out, persisting or deteriorating. That
requires a combination of national, subregional,
regional and international efforts, including those of
the United Nations and strategic partners, with the full
participation of women, which is indispensable.

This is the appropriate forum in which to commend
the important report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, and all of the
proposals therein (S/2018/43). The report particularly
highlights the important role played by regional and
subregional organizations in the peaceful settlement
of disputes and welcomes African peacebuilding
initiatives, such as the African Union's policy on
post-conflict reconstruction and development and the
African Solidarity Initiative.

To come back to sustaining peace at the national
level, and fully aware that it is the primary responsibility
of States themselves, the Government of Burkina Faso
maintains an ongoing inclusive dialogue with its social
partners towards a peaceful social climate. The creation
of the High Council for Social Dialogue and the High
Council for Reconciliation and National Unity, as well
as the determination of our Government to see the truth
flourish, justice prevail and reconciliation take place in
a calm atmosphere, form part of that policy.

I recall that, like other Sahel countries, Burkina
Faso faces the challenge of preserving peace as a result
of terrorist attacks, of which the use of improvised
explosive devices has become the most recent mode
of operation. It is therefore natural that our countries
play an active role in initiatives to establish security
in the Sahel, particularly through the establishment of
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). The success of the Force is imperative and a
source of hope for the affected populations. We therefore
wish to reiterate the necessity that it be placed under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. This
is also an opportunity for my delegation to reiterate its
appeal to the United Nations and all partners to ensure
the necessary funding not only for the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force, but also the Priority Investment Programme,
which was established by the Organization and will
hold its first donor and partner coordination conference
tomorrow, 6 December, in Nouakchott.

The challenges of peacebuilding and peacekeeping
reveal the intrinsic links between peace and security,
stability and development. It is therefore necessary
that we adopt a holistic approach to the issue if we are
to implement appropriate and sustainable responses.
As was the case in Cote d'Ivoire, real political will,
resolve, vision and leadership, and especially national
ownership of the crisis resolution process, as well as the
clearly defined support of partners in the international
community as a whole, are undoubtedly key to success
and will prevent post-conflict countries from falling
back into crisis.

