Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Madam President, let me first
congratulate you on your country's presidency of the
Council. I also wish to align my delegation with the
statements by Egypt and Tajikistan on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, respectively.

Israel's attack on the humanitarian freedom
flotilla and its razing of Palestinian houses in
Jerusalem are merely the latest examples in an ever-
expanding list of aggressive and illegal behaviour
towards the people of Palestine, and towards those who
wish to aid them. The world continues to be outraged,
but is unable to act.

In many parts of the world, inaction by the
United Nations - exemplified by the mild presidential
statement adopted by the Security Council on 1 June
(S/PRST/2010/9) - has sharpened the perception that
there are two sets of standards, one for Israel and
another for the rest of the world. That perception has
strengthened the feeling of helplessness of many
people in all parts of the world, leaving them open to
attempts to radicalize them. It has also given rise to the
feeling that the United Nations is unable to defend the
rights of the most marginalized, those who most
require it.

It is therefore critical for the United Nations to
take all necessary steps to restore its credibility. Of
immediate importance is the speedy establishment of a
United Nations-led investigation pursuant to the
presidential statement. While we continue to support
the Secretary-General's efforts in this regard, we are
disconcerted that 52 days after the adoption of the
presidential statement, the United Nations-led
investigation still exists in the shadows. For example,
it is still uncertain what the terms of reference of the
investigation are.

In the meantime, Israel's military investigation
has concluded. As expected, Israel has exonerated
itself. As expected, they have employed the usual tactic
of changing the facts on the ground, hoping that the
results of that illegitimate investigation into an illegal
act will be the basis of a future United Nations-led
investigation. As expected, they have taken token
ameliorative action, such as to ease the blockade
against Gaza, hoping that the world will forget their
actions.

But the world will not forget. On Malaysia's part,
the Prime Minister has written to the President of the
General Assembly requesting the re-convening of the
tenth emergency special session. The Malaysian
parliament has also adopted a motion that contains the
same idea. This idea is consistent with the position
adopted by the foreign ministers of the Arab League at
their meeting on 2 July.

Some may say that we should be patient and
prudent. We believe that patience is not inexhaustible
and that it is imprudent to continue waiting for a train
that is unlikely to come.

In addition, we believe that the emergency special
session could also focus on the causes of the situation,
of which the flotilla incident is merely a symptom,
namely, the blockade of Gaza and the lack of progress
towards a comprehensive settlement of the Middle
Eastern problem. The blockade imposed by Israel on
Gaza is a form of collective punishment forbidden by
international law. It is immoral and illegal and has
forced 1.5 million Gazans to live in abject conditions.
We urge Israel to completely lift that inhumane
blockade by opening the borders rather than to merely
allow consumer goods in.
The emergency special session would also be a
means of ensuring that Israel would be held
accountable for its intransigence.

It is also increasingly alarming that the
intransigence of Israel goes beyond the expansion of
settlements. The following are some of the unlawful
acts committed by Israel that further illuminate Israel's
malicious intent to entrench its grip on Palestinian
lands, which it has illegally occupied since 1967. The
first is the construction of the separation wall, which
snakes into Palestinian territory, thus annexing more
Palestinian lands illegally. The second is the eviction
of Palestinian families and demolition of Palestinian
homes. The third is the Israeli military order on
infiltration that went into effect in April this year,
which authorizes the Israeli occupying forces to deport
at least 25,000 Palestinian and Gazans residing in the
West Bank.

These actions clearly violate numerous United
Nations resolutions and international law and will
make it more difficult to reach a final agreement on the
basis of a two-State solution. Hence, the international
community, including the Security Council, must hold
Israel accountable for its illegal actions and put an end
to this occupation.

Resolving these issues requires the international
community to focus all its energy and efforts on
restoring comprehensive peace in the region and the
inalienable rights and dignity of the Palestinian people.
That requires, among other things, the political will of
the Council to bring into effect the Council's own
resolutions.

