Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): The Netherlands will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us. It is an
important next step in the phased deployment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUC). This draft resolution turns
MONUC into a genuine observer mission.

The undertaking that the United Nations is now
embarking upon is a gigantic one, but, as is borne out by
the draft resolution, it also has its clear limitations. We
must remind the parties that the responsibility for the
success of the Lusaka Agreement lies first and foremost
with them. They are responsible for further progress. When,
at a later stage, the Council starts its deliberations about
phase III, progress made by the parties will undoubtedly
determine the direction of our discussions.

Now and in the future, the Netherlands favours a
balanced approach to all issues surrounding the Congo
conflict. Such a balanced approach requires, among other
things, that throughout the peace process the legitimate
security concerns of all neighbouring States be taken
seriously. It also means that the human rights situation in
the entire territory will be the focus of our attention, as set
out in the eighteenth preambular paragraph and in operative
paragraph 14.

A balanced approach also means not shying away
from the difficult root causes. We welcome the fact that the
draft resolution before us addresses the issue of arms flows
in the region, as well as the exploitation of natural
resources as an incentive to keep the conflict going. The
Council expresses its intention to return to both these
interrelated issues at a later stage. On the issue of natural
resources, we look forward to the report of the Secretary-
General referred to in operative paragraph 17. My
delegation will be actively considering ways in which these
interrelated issues can be tackled in the future so that the
rich natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will fuel peace and reconstruction, not war. We
would favour the establishment of a panel of experts to
investigate these matters, again, in a balanced manner.

As we stated before, one of the key elements in this
process is the effective functioning of the Joint Military
Commission (JMC) and its structures in close coordination
with MONUC. The JMC must be turned into a permanent
structure for it to be able effectively to address issues that
arise. We understand that this matter was taken up during
the summit of the States parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement held on 23 February. We look forward to
further elaboration of this matter.

The Netherlands contribution for the JMC, in the
amount of $250,000, was received by the Organization of
African Unity by the end of last year. Other donors have
since followed suit. Clearly, the international community
is putting its money where its mouth is. Now that money
should no longer be the problem, it is up to the parties to
make the JMC work.

Finally, the Netherlands subscribes to the statement
that will later be made by the representative of Portugal
on behalf of the European Union.

