Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): After considering the
draft resolution (S/20l6/1085), our delegation decided
to abstain, without prejudice to the fact that we believe
that the current situation in South Sudan requires
urgent, decisive, coordinated and consensual action on
the part of the Security Council in order to tackle the
situation effectively and comprehensively, so as to help
to stabilize the situation and achieve a lasting peace
and to ensure the socioeconomic development of the
brotherly people of South Sudan.

However, with respect to sanctions, everyone
is aware of our delegation's principled position. In
that respect, I would like to reiterate that Venezuela
considers such measures as a tool and not as an end
in themselves. Such instruments can have a positive
impact only if they are intrinsically linked to a clearly
defined political strategy.

In the case of South Sudan, our delegation believes
that such a strategy does not exist, as was pointed out
by the Secretary-General in one of his most recent
reports. We therefore believe that not only should
we pool our efforts in order to revitalize the political
process in the country, but we must also move forward
in drawing up a clear political strategy in order to tackle
comprehensively the conflict that has ravaged the
country for the past three years, in close coordination
with the country and other organizations in the region.

We also agree with the unanimous position of the
countries of the region in their recognition of the need
to prevent the situation on the ground from escalating.
In our opinion, had we adopted this draft resolution, we
would have run the risk of, inter alia, moving in that
direction. Without a negotiating process being held, a

proposal was made to target one of the main parties
to the peace agreement, which serves as a framework
for the resolution of the crisis in South Sudan, as
was expressed by the Security Council in the press
communique issued on 18 November and in the recently
adopted resolution 2327 (2016) renewing the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan. It is very
unlikely that we would call for the full implementation
of the agreement and at the same time wish to impose
specific sanctions on one of the signatories. There is
no link between sanctions and the political strategy to
resolve the crisis.

The same applies with the attempt to impose an
arms embargo on South Sudan. Even though we concur
that there is a significant flow of illicit arms into
the country, many of those weapons have been there
since the beginning of the conflict. We believe that
we should favour, among other things, the adoption of
effective disarmament measures and the cantonment
of troops, taking into account the transitional security
provisions that are included in the peace agreement
that the Security Council has underscored should serve
as the basis for resolving the conflict in South Sudan.
Furthermore, we have serious reservations about the
overall effectiveness of an arms embargo as a tool for
putting an end to the illicit flow of weapons, bearing in
mind the experience in other conflict situations.

In reiterating today our position that we should
promote an African solution to African problems, we
endorse the unanimous position of the region on this
matter that the imposition of an arms embargo or
sanctions on South Sudan would not offer the solution
that is sought in our efforts to achieve a lasting peace
and the stability of the country. What is needed is rather
a dialogue, a reconciliation and the commitment of the
parties to implement the peace agreement with the
support of the region and the international community.

Lastly, our delegation is convinced that our African
brothers, in particular the people of South Sudan, will
understand our position. We regret the fact that the
spirit of unity, which should characterize the work of
the Security Council, once again was not able to be
achieved in this case. We hope that future discussions
will assist in achieving consensual approaches that
could truly have a positive impact on the situation on
the ground.

