Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to congratulate you, Madam, on your country's
assumption of the rotating presidency of the Security
Council for this month. China looks forward to
successful meetings of the Security Council under your
leadership. I would also like to express our appreciation
to the Ambassador of the United Kingdom and his team
for their work during their presidency of the Council
last month, and commend their efforts.

China strongly condemns yesterday's terrorist
attack in Saint Petersburg that targeted civilians. We
express our deepest sorrow about the lives lost. We
extend our sincere condolences to the bereaved families
and our best wishes to the injured. China is firmly
against terrorism in all its forms. We stand in resolute
support of Russia in combating terrorism and are ready
to enhance counter-terrorism cooperation with the rest
of the international community.

China thanks the United States of America for
convening today's meeting. We have listened attentively
to my good friend, Joint Special Representative
Mr. Mamabolo. I would like to welcome Ambassador
Mamabolo to his new capacity. China will actively
support his work.

The current situation in Darfur is gradually
improving. The Sudanese Government has announced
a unilateral ceasefire in Darfur and made vigorous
efforts to promote the peace process in an effort to
maintain stability in Darfur and start reconstruction.
China commends those efforts. The Darfur issue
involves a multiplicity of factors such as the politicals
security, development and humanitarian dimensions,
and must be resolved in a comprehensive manner.
Political settlement is both the foundation and the key.
The international community must continue to support
the mediation efforts of the African Union High Level
Implementation Panel in order to provide immediate
assistance to the Sudanese Government, the Darfur
armed groups and opposition groups in implementing
the road map agreement and resolve differences
through dialogue so as to seek a sustained and peaceful
settlement of the Darfur issue. We hope that relevant
donors can actively honour their commitments and assist
the Sudanese Government in enhancing infrastructure
development in Darfur in order to improve local
development capacity and achieve sustained economic
and social development in the region.

This year marks the tenth anniversary ofUNAMID's
deployment. In the past 10 years, UNAMID has made
tremendous efforts to promote the Darfur political
process, maintain stability in Darfur and reconcile
intercommunal differences. The United Nations, the
African Union and the Sudanese Government hosted
a joint working group meeting, which affirmed the
progress achieved in the Darfur security situation and
recommended the gradual withdrawal of UNAMID.
China hopes that, while fully listening to the views of
the Sudanese Government, the United Nations and the
African Union can, on that basis, submit to the Council
a report on a UNAMID drawdown.

The deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur is an innovative
peace and security approach in Africa that was adopted
by the two parties. It provides enlightening guidance
to the Council's approach to resolving flashpoint
issues in Africa. It is now a consistent belief that the
Security Council should support Africa in resolving
African issues, the African way, by giving full play to
the strength and role of the African Union and other
regional and subregional organizations in Africa and,
by carrying out results-based cooperation in relation to
specific situations in Africa in order form a synergy.
The United Nations peacekeeping operation must follow
the changing dynamics and the will of the host country
and adjust its mandate and size as appropriate. It will
not just improve the mission's efficiency and efficacy;
it can also concentrate limited peacekeeping resources
on countries with greater needs in order to optimize
resource allocation, in particular African countries, so
as to provide tangible assistance in promoting peace
and stability in Africa.

China has continued to support the Darfur peace
process and is one of UNAMID's founding troop-
contributing countries. The Chinese engineering unit
was the first of the mission's peacekeeping troop
contingents to arrive in Darfur to perform its duties.
Over the years, it has made a sterling contribution to
maintaining stability in Darfur and to developing the
mission. China is ready to join the rest of the international
community and continue to play a constructive role in
restoring peace, stability and development in Darfur.

