Mr. Bande (Nigeria): I thank the Bolivian
delegation for convening this important debate on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. I
also commend the briefers for their remarks
I align my delegation with the statement made
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

I wish to reaffirm Nigeria's commitment to the
ideal of a nuclear-free world. We regard the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery as a grave threat to our collective security. The
risk of non-State actors, including terrorists, acquiring,
developing, manufacturing and using nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons remains a serious threat to
global peace and security. Terrorists and their sponsors
have shown the intent and, at least in the case of
chemical weapons, some capability to develop and
acquire weapons of mass destruction and use them.

The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), 11 years
ago, signalled the determination of the Security
Council to respond robustly to the threat posed to
international peace and security by the proliferation
of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their
means of delivery. While the three main treaties on
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons address
non-proliferation, it is evident that they do not take into
account the possibility of such weapons falling into the
hands of non-State actors. Therein lies the significance
of resolution 1540 (2204) in its complementarity to the
three global treaties on weapons of mass destruction.
The emergence of extremist groups has introduced
a sense of urgency to the need for the international
community to take stock of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and close the gaps that could be
exploited by such groups to obtain and use weapons of
mass destruction.

An appraisal of the mandate of this significant
resolution shows a measure of commitment on the part of
Member States. Numerous countries have adopted laws
and regulations that comply with a substantial number
of the obligations set out in resolution 1540 (2004).
They are reference points and useful mechanisms for
confidence-building measures, including those that
could assist in addressing actions that could promote
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, such
as the menace of smuggling and money-laundering
activities in all regions. That is as a result of the need to
relentlessly address the yawning compliance gap often
encountered by Member States with limited resources
and technical capabilities.

Nigeria believes that the establishment of nuclear-
weapon-free zones across the world is a potent tool
to prevent the vertical and horizontal proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. Success in that direction
would promote transparency in non-proliferation, which
is the second pillar ofthe Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Nigeria will continue to
support efforts to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones
in parts of the world where they currently do not exist.
We recognize the right of any party to pursue a peaceful
nuclear programme. However, it must be pursued within
the ambit of the NPT and other relevant international
instruments. We stress that efforts aimed at nuclear
non-proliferation should tally with simultaneous efforts
aimed at nuclear disarmament.

Nigeria is concerned about the slow pace ofprogress
towards nuclear disarmament and the lack of progress
by the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the task of
the total elimination of their nuclear stockpiles. We call
on the nuclear-weapon States to fulfil their multilateral
legal obligations on nuclear disarmament.

We appreciate the role ofthe Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in assisting States
and international institutions in the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
by considering requests from States regarding the
provision of technical assistance in the energy and
extractive industries. That allows States and institutions
to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Nigeria wishes to stress that resolution 1540
(2004) and its effective implementation remain a key
component of the global architecture for countering
the danger posed by the threat of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. We are convinced that
the establishment of effective precautionary measures
and systems to address potential nuclear, chemical or
biological proliferation is a collective responsibility
incumbent upon all Member States, and we must all
take the lead.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Nigeria's
conviction of the validity of multilateral diplomacy in
the field of disarmament and non-proliferation. We must
remain especially vigilant to issues that may threaten
international peace and security. We shall therefore
continue to advocate for multilateralism as the core
platform for negotiations in the area of disarmament
and non-proliferation.

