Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I
congratulate you, Mr. President, on having taken the
timely initiative of organizing this public meeting on
the situation in C6te d'Ivoire.

We thank Mr. Alan Doss for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General (8/2005/186), and we
welcome Mr. Aziz Pahad, Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of South Africa, and his
delegation. We are particularly grateful to him for the
extremely useful information he has provided on recent
developments related to the African Union mediation:
a new attempt by the international community to end
the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire. We take this opportunity to
hail South Africa's efforts to restore peace to Cote
d'Ivoire.

The crisis in Cote d'Ivoire is a true tragedy. The
Secretary-General has described it in great detail in his
recent report, which Mr. Doss introduced earlier this
afternoon. As the situation continues to deteriorate, the
prospects for peace are becoming more remote, with
growing delays in the implementation of the
agreements signed by the protagonists in the Ivorian
crisis.

Thus, today's Council meeting is important. It is
our impression that the protagonists have decided to
ignore the international community's numerous appeals
and its multifaceted efforts to help them back onto the
path of peace. The political leaders of Cote d'Ivoire
must choose cooperation and dialogue rather than
violence, provocation and confrontation.

As the date of the elections approaches, great
uncertainty looms concerning the future of cote
d'Ivoire. Here, we agree with the Secretary-General's
analysis, especially when he sketches the bleak and
alarming picture that is C6te d'Ivoire today. There is
no doubt that at present the peace process is at a
critical stage with respect to the many challenges on
the path back to stability in Cote d'Ivoire.

The first and certainly the most urgent of those
challenges is to bring about the resumption of dialogue
among the Ivorian parties. Dialogue among the Ivorian
parties remains the Achilles heel of the transition
process. For that reason, we welcome with keen
interest the announcement of the forthcoming Pretoria
meeting among the key actors in the crisis. We hope
that this will mark a vigorous resumption of the peace
process. We hope too that the parties will play by the
rules and, this time, strictly respect their commitment
to restore peace in Cote d'Ivoire.

The second challenge relates to security. We are
deeply concerned both by the "irregular" recruitment
now under way, by the mobilization and arming of
militias and other illegal groups and by the looming
threat this poses to the peace and tranquillity of the
Ivorian population and to security throughout the
subregion.

The United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI) has recently achieved successes in the field,
and it is important that it continue to thwart the
activities of illegal armed groups by means of vigorous
action carried out in liaison with Licorne forces. It is
also of the greatest urgency that there be quicker
movement towards the establishment of concrete
conditions for the effective launching of the
programme of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR). Once begun, the various activities
of that programme will inevitably contribute to an
improvement of the security conditions in the country,
which is sine qua non for the establishment of a stable
and lasting basis for economic recovery.

Measures must also be planned to deal with all
individuals who might commit or encourage acts that
are in violation of human rights or who would protect
the perpetrators of crimes committed in that context.
The collapse of the country's judicial system and the
fragmented state of the national police, which promote
the reign of impunity, are, we believe, a serious
problem that must be resolved, although the solution is
hardly evident in the present conditions of a de facto
partition of the country.

The restoration of security also depends on the
cessation of the campaign of hate and Violence
orchestrated by some of the media. Here we welcome
the significant work carried out by UNOCI through its
information office and its radio station. We encourage
it to pursue its commendable action in this area.

Given the level and pace of deterioration of the
situation in the field, and given the real risks of a
conflagration and the predictable consequences for the
subregion, it is our view, and that of the Secretary-
General, that the Council should plan for the
possibility of a periodic assessment of the
implementation of resolutions 1572 (2004) and 1584
(2005) in order to take the necessary measures.

The third challenge is that of organizing the
elections. The holding of elections within the
scheduled time frame remains important for the
transition process, and the Ivorian parties must do
everything possible to overcome the vagaries observed
both in the establishment of the electoral commission
and the electoral list and in bringing election
legislation into line with the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement and Accra III.

Beyond the three major challenges, we think that
the humanitarian situation in Cote d'Ivoire, above all
in the northern regions of the country under the Forces
nouvelles, deserves particular attention. Here we would
like to back the Secretary-General's appeal to donors to
make available the resources needed to continue
international assistance to 3 million individuals in need
and for more effective action for the 5 million children
under the age of five who have been affected by the
cr1s1s.

To go back to UNOCI, we fully share the View of
Madam Louise Frechette, the United Nations Deputy
Secretary-General, on the sensitive situation of the
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire. During her recent visit to
Abidjan she rightly emphasized that the expectations of
the Ivorian parties often go beyond the means available
to the Operation to implement its mandate. In
particular, we wonder about its reaction capacities in
the context of the electoral timetable expected in the
country, which will raise the level of tension.
Therefore, there is a need not only to extend its
mandate by one year but also to provide it with a
human and logistical means requested by the
Secretary-General to enable it to effectively discharge
its expanded mandate with regard to the new
responsibilities we recently entrusted to it.

It is our conviction that beyond any and all
mediation, regardless of the means made available by
the international community to the cause of peace in
Cote d'Ivoire and regardless of the determination
demonstrated by the mediators in the crisis, it is first
and foremost up to the Ivorians themselves to take over
the peace process and ensure its success through their
daily behaviour. Benin firmly supports the programme
of action for African mediation, whose well-thought-
out sequence seem to us likely to restore hope in Cote
d'Ivoire.

To conclude, we call upon the Ivorian parties to
make good use the Pretoria meeting by renouncing
once and for all the suicidal option of an endless war in
Cote d'Ivoire. We urge them to conclude
compromises - difficult ones, perhaps, but inevitable
and necessary to move the peace process forward. It is
our sincere hope that they will succeed in doing so in
the higher interest of the people of Cote d'Ivoire.

