Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
Thank you, Sir, for this invitation to Member States to
debate protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees
and others in conflict situations.

The nature of the conflicts confronting the United
Nations and the Security Council has changed. Increasingly,
but not exclusively, they occur within State borders. They
have become more complex, with economic and
humanitarian consequences affecting entire populations.
This evolution has altered our traditional definition of what
constitutes a threat to international peace and security. A
broader concept - that of human security - is now
required.
Among the most tragic humanitarian consequences of
recent conflicts has been the dramatic increase in the
number of refugees and displaced persons. The impact of
these new conflicts is now measured in terms of tens of
millions of innocent victims. In 1960, there were some 1.4
million refugees around the world. In 1996, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees estimated that
some 26 million people fell within her competence. In
addition, at least 30 million people were displaced within
their own countries. UNHCR estimates that one person in
115 on our planet has been forced to flee his or her home.

The most effective means of avoiding such suffering
and preventing such displacements is to resolve the root
causes of emerging conflicts. The absence of the necessary
political will remains the greatest obstacle confronting the
international community. Humanitarian assistance can do no
more than address the symptoms of a crisis. Experience has
demonstrated again and again that humanitarian action,
including the protection of victims, is truly effective only
when accompanied by political measures to address the
causes of conflict.

The international community's ability to respond to
future crises is of only secondary importance to people who
are already at risk. Ensuring that they are afforded basic
protection is one of the most difficult challenges we face.
Because of this requirement for protection, military
personnel increasingly are being called upon to respond
to humanitarian crises. The refugee crisis in eastern Zaire
required the presence of military personnel. Canada has
learned a number of lessons, both from the establishment
of the Multinational Force last autumn and from other
humanitarian operations in which the military have taken
part: first, a thorough understanding of the capabilities
and roles of each of the partners is an important factor in
any response to a complex emergency. Secondly, any
confusion among political, military and humanitarian
mandates merely serves to impugn the impartiality of
humanitarian actors. Thirdly, an intervention force must
have clear military objectives and must be equipped with
the means necessary to achieve them. Finally, efforts to
disarm belligerent parties in order to separate refugees
from combatants are inherently dangerous if an
intervention force is not structured or equipped for such
a mission.

(spoke in English)

While the limited use of military personnel may,
under certain circumstances, provide an appropriate
response for the protection of refugees and the protection
of humanitarian assistance to refugees, the deployment of
soldiers does not constitute the only, or even the most
desirable, means of approaching such protection. Instead
we must consider adopting new, largely preventive,
approaches to better respond to complex emergencies and
to provide more effective assistance to their victims.

Canada continues to support United Nations efforts
to establish a rapidly deployable mobile headquarters to
improve the United Nations system's ability to respond
rapidly to complex emergencies. This was the principal
recommendation of the rapid reaction study submitted by
Canada some two years ago. We are indeed disappointed
that the rapidly deployable mobile headquarters is still not
yet operational, in spite of its having been endorsed by
both the General Assembly and the Secretariat. The faster
the United Nations can respond to a crisis, the greater the
likelihood that the dramatic and disruptive consequences
of such crises, including massive population flight, can be
contained or avoided. The need for the rapidly deployable
mobile headquarters is clear, and we urge that it be made
operational as quickly as possible.

To further increase capacity for prevention, it is
essential that coordination among the Departments of
Political Affairs, Peace-keeping Operations and

 

Humanitarian Affairs be strengthened. In addition,
humanitarian agencies - including the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which plays a
vital role in refugee protection - must be fully integrated
within the consultative and planning processes for complex
emergencies. We welcome the establishment by the
Secretary-General of the Executive Committees for
Humanitarian Affairs and for Peace and Security. These
represent an excellent start at making possible a more
coordinated and coherent system-wide response to
humanitarian crises.

Similarly, a greater focus on United Nations peace-
building efforts can serve to mitigate conflict situations
which might otherwise produce refugee flows. We in
Canada have begun to re-examine and modify the tools
available to us to enhance our ability to launch and
maintain peace-building operations in such areas as
preventive mediation and dialogue, monitoring, refugee
protection, human rights investigations, police force
training, judicial reform and demobilization. We look
forward to working closely with other countries in
exploring innovative approaches to peace-building. Last
autumn, we announced the creation of a Canadian Peace-
building Fund which will better enable us to take up the
challenge of protecting and building a durable peace in
countries experiencing recurrent conflict.

It is also essential that we expand the roles played by
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and other United
Nations agencies responsible for protecting human
freedoms. It is equally important that we integrate their
activities with those of the United Nations political and
humanitarian bodies and with its conflict-prevention,
peacekeeping and peace-building operations.

In considering the issues before us, we should also
address the precarious situation of humanitarian personnel
in the field. I take this opportunity to express Canada's
profound concern at the numerous attacks recently
perpetrated against United Nations personnel and the staffs
of other international organizations. These individuals take
huge personal risks in order to assist others. The growing
number of casualties among humanitarian workers demands
that we give urgent attention to improving security
measures for humanitarian personnel. We welcome the
presidential statement adopted on 12 March by the Council
on the protection of humanitarian and other United Nations
personnel. The Governments or authorities in the countries
in which they operate must be held responsible for the
protection of United Nations and other aid workers.

Canada condemns, in the strongest possible terms,
all attacks on humanitarian personnel. The International
Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement has paid a
particularly high price. The murder of 10 members of the
Zairian Red Cross some days ago is the most recent, but
horrible, example. A Canadian, Nancy Malloy, and five
of her Red Cross colleagues were savagely murdered in
Chechnya on 17 December 1996. We believe that no
effort must be spared to ensure that the persons
responsible for these murders are brought to justice as
quickly as possible. We wish to emphasize the great
importance that Canada attaches to thorough and rapid
investigations to uncover all the facts associated with such
events.

The establishment of international tribunals to
adjudicate violations of humanitarian law in Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia constitutes a critical step towards
eliminating impunity and improving protection for the
victims of conflict. They demonstrate that we intend to
hold individuals accountable for the atrocities they
commit or allow to be committed. That is why we need
urgently to establish an effective, permanent international
criminal court, to avoid the requirement to create tribunals
on an ad hoc basis. An international criminal court would
allow us to combat large-scale violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law as well as to provide
more effective protection to refugees and other victims of
conflicts.

We should make better use of the conflict-prevention
and conflict-mitigation tools that are now at our disposal.
We must be innovative in establishing new approaches to
confront emerging or actual conflicts. Above all, we must
demonstrate more effective collaboration and greater
cooperation in seeking innovative political, military,
humanitarian and development solutions, in order both to
prevent conflicts and to respond more quickly and
effectively when they occur.

