Ms. Rice (United States of America): We are
grateful to the Secretary-General for his report.

As much as I very much like Ambassador
Churkin, it is an honour to have you, Foreign Minister
Lavrov, in the Chair today. We thank you for
convening this important meeting of the Security
Council, and we welcome especially Russia's initiative
to craft a constructive statement by the Council
President, to be released today, which the United States
is pleased to support.

This meeting of the Council underscores the
priority that the international community places on
achieving a secure, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East. That must include a two-State solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, with Israel and
Palestine living side by side in peace and security. The
United States has already revitalized its efforts to make
real that vision of a comprehensive peace between
Israel and its Arab neighbours, and we will continue to
pursue it vigorously in the months ahead.

President Obama is personally committed to this
goal, and he continues to lead directly on this issue. As
the President noted in his recent address to the Turkish
parliament, the parties have also committed themselves
to those goals, in the Road Map and at Annapolis. Our
interest lies not in a lengthy, drawn-out process, but in
real results. We must not tarry. Lasting progress can be
made if we lift our sights and look to a future of peace:
to a Middle East in which Israel lives in peace and
security alongside its Arab neighbours; to a region in
which the fruits of peace are cherished by all.

As President Obama has noted, terrorism and
rocket fire aimed at innocent Israelis are simply
intolerable. And a future without hope and opportunity
for the Palestinians is intolerable as well. Towards that
end, my Government's distinguished and determined
Special Envoy for the Middle East, Senator George
Mitchell, recently completed his third trip to the
region. He is working intensively with our Israeli and
Arab partners, as well as our friends throughout the
international community, towards a very clear purpose:
to help create the conditions for a peaceful resolution
to the conflict and for the establishment of an
independent, viable Palestinian State.

In addition to moving forward with the parties,
his work is also designed to prevent any new outbreak
of violence, which could further destabilize the region,
hinder our collective efforts and claim more innocent
civilian lives. To further advance this cause, President
Obama will be meeting with key regional leaders over
the course of the next several weeks. We very much
look forward to those constructive talks, and we look
forward to discussing ways in which the international
community can support these efforts with our Quartet
partners and other friends and allies. The Quartet
remains the most effective instrument for advancing
the international community's engagement in the effort
to bring lasting peace to the Middle East.

As we move to create a climate for meaningful
negotiations, all parties must meet their obligations
under the Road Map. The Palestinian Authority must
combat terrorism and incitement directed at Israel. The
United States and its partners have provided funding
and training for a reformed Palestinian security force,
which has recently provided impressive demonstrations
of its professionalism and effectiveness.

For its part, Israel must halt settlement activity
and dismantle outposts erected since March 2001.
Israel must also allow the Palestinians freedom of
movement, increased security responsibilities and
access to economic opportunities.

All States in the region must now consider steps
that they can take to create an atmosphere that will
help foster successful negotiations. That is one reason
why we intend to integrate the Arab Peace Initiative
into our own approach. In this spirit we welcome the
remarks made by King Abdullah of Jordan during his
productive recent visit to Washington. As he noted, the
United States cannot be left to do all the heavy lifting
by itself, and other countries, including Jordan, should
do all that they can to shore up our common efforts.

We must also work together to support fully the
Palestinian Authority as it continues its efforts to
improve the lives of ordinary Palestinians throughout
the West Bank and Gaza. It is doing so through non-
partisan, transparent programmes. Indeed, the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund have
endorsed the Authority's budgetary and financial
controls in accounting for the $1.7 billion it received
from all donors in 2008. The international community
must continue to support the legitimate Palestinian
leadership. States in the region have a particular
responsibility.

President Abbas, Prime Minister Fayyad and the
Palestinian Authority must be able to demonstrate to
the Palestinian people that negotiations, not terrorism
and violence, are the path to an independent and viable
Palestinian State.

In this context, let me turn to the Quartet
principles: renouncing violence, recognizing Israel, and
respecting past obligations. The United States hopes
that all United Nations Members, especially Arab
States, will recognize what these principles represent.
They are the essential building blocks of a future
Palestinian State. Palestinian reconciliation on terms
that do not uphold the Quartet principles would serve
only to delay the day when the Palestinians' legitimate
aspirations for statehood become real.

My Government also values Egypt's leadership in
the region and its support for peace. All United Nations
Member States, including those in the region, must
work together to ensure the end of the illicit smuggling
of arms and ammunition into Gaza, lest Hamas restock
its arsenal and spark further conflict. We strongly
support reopening Gaza's border crossings in a
controlled, sustained and continuous manner with an
appropriate monitoring regime involving international
and Palestinian Authority participation. That can be
achieved through dialogue focused on meeting pressing
humanitarian needs. It will not happen through terrorist
intimidation and violence.
Separately, we also look forward to the upcoming
elections in Lebanon, which must be free, fair and
unmarred by Violence, intimidation and outside
influence. We need to continue to support the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1559
(2004) and 1701 (2006) in order to protect Lebanon's
hard-won sovereignty and independence. We must
continue to insist on an end to weapons-smuggling and
on the disarmament of all militias in Lebanon,
including Hezbollah.

It should be the role of all of us to help the parties
move forward in pursuit of peace and to do nothing to
hinder their efforts. We must look beyond the smoke of
war and avoid the easy temptations of recrimination
and rancour. Together we must focus on a shared vision
of peace and security. The stakes are high. Our actions
will help determine what kind of future the children of
the Middle East will inherit - whether they will be
able to look ahead to a hopeful, prosperous future, or
whether they will be forced to endure round after
dismal round of bloodshed, crisis, instability and terror.

In the past, visionary leaders such as Anwar
al-Sadat, Yitzhak Rabin and King Hussein of Jordan
bravely and selflessly devoted themselves to the cause
of peace. The question for our generation is simple and
stark: whether history will consign us to the ranks of
those who let hatred and grievance linger, or whether
history will honour us with a place in the camp of the
peacemakers. The United States has made its choice.
We ask you all to stand with us. Together, let us stand
for lasting peace.

