Mr. Danon (Israel): Once again we have gathered
to discuss the Middle East, Israel and the Palestinians.
Time and time again we meet in this Chamber for this
debate. We hear very long discussions about the nature
of the conflict and new proposals to solve it. But the
root of the conflict is not very hard to understand, and
the solution is clear.

For 67 years, Israel has been pursuing peace.
Despite decades of war and rejection, we never gave
up on that goal. Israel finally achieved peace when two
brave Arab leaders, President Sadat and King Hussein,
chose to lay down their arms. They chose the path of
cooperation and partnership over the misery of war and
conflict. That was the key to peace with Egypt in 1981.
That was the key to peace with Jordan in 1994. And it is
the key to peace with the Palestinians today.

The Palestinian people deserve peace. They deserve
a brighter, better future. Therefore, let me be clear. On
the day the Palestinian leadership rejects terror and
violence, on the day they embrace coexistence and
cooperation, that is the day there will be peace. But is
that what the Palestinian leadership really wants? Do
they really want peace? If those gathered here believe
that to be true, then they will have to explain a few
inconvenient facts.

Fact number one is that the Palestinian leadership
refuses to condemn the murder of Israeli men, women
and children. Let me ask everyone in the Chamber: do
not Israeli lives matter?

Fact number two is that the Palestinian Authority
glorifies terrorism and terrorists. They name squares
after suicide bombers and hang posters ofthem on school
walls. Tell me, when did terrorism become heroism?

Fact number three is that Mahmoud Abbas,
President of the Palestinian Authority, refuses to even
sit down with Prime Minister Netanyahu. How can we
make peace if we cannot even talk? Just recently, the
Palestinian Foreign Minister, Riyad Al-Maliki, said
loudly and clearly,

"We will never go back and sit again in a direct
Israeli-Palestinian negotiation."

We understand that members of the Council may
not have answers to those questions. What we do not
understand is why we do not demand answers.

The State of Israel and the people of Israel do not
have any more time to wait for answers. For decades
we have been facing Palestinian terrorism. In just the
last few months, Israelis have faced a wave of non-stop
daily attacks by Palestinian terrorists: over 300 separate
attacks in 176 days. That means two terror attacks
per day, every day, for half a year. That is the reality.
Thirty-four people have been killed, and hundreds
have been injured. How has the Palestinian leadership
responded? Have they stopped the daily calls for
violence that are fuelling the bloodshed? Has there been
a clear condemnation by the Palestinian leadership?
The answer is no. Instead of condemning those attacks,
they encourage them. They reward terrorists and their
families with monthly salaries. The more horrific the
attack, the more horrific the crime, the higher the
payment. In Palestinian society, terrorists are treated
like heroes.
This year, we all participated in the sixtieth
session of the Commission on the Status of Women.
On International Women's Day, official Palestinian
Authority television called Dalal Mughrabi a role
model for Palestinian women. For those who may not
know or who may not remember, Dalal Mughrabi was
a terrorist. In 1978, she hijacked an Israeli bus and
murdered 38 innocent people, including 13 children.
This is the woman the Palestinians have turned into a
national symbol.

These are facts we never seem to hear in this
Chamber. Instead, some are all too eager to offer
justification for Palestinian terror and excuses for
violence. Many find it convenient to ignore the
basic truth: the endless incitement and the ongoing
glorification of violence is directly responsible for the
murder of innocent Israelis.

For many Palestinians, incitement is a daily reality.
Children go to school and listen to tales of terrorists.
Teenagers turn on the television and see a constant
flow of images of hate and violence. Young adults go
to mosques and hear sermons demonizing Israel and
calling for its destruction, 24 hours a day, seven days
a week.

This reality has deadly consequences. On
17 January, a young Israeli mother was painting the
door of her house when she was brutally attacked by
a 16-year-old Palestinian terrorist. She was repeatedly
stabbed at the entrance to her home. Knowing her
children were inside, a few metres away, she heroically
fought the terrorist. Even as she was bleeding to death,
she stopped him from pulling the knife from her body.
With her last ounce of strength, she made sure that the
terrorist could not use the knife again to attack her
six children.

That woman's name was Dafna Meir. Dafna was a
hospital nurse from Otniel, a loving wife and a mother
of six. At her funeral, Dafna's husband, Natan, said,

"You left me six treasures, I will keep them safe for
you. My Dafna is one in a million. My Dafna, thank
you for every moment I had with you."

One of those treasures, Dafna's eldest daughter,
Renana, said,
"I didn't just lose a mother, but also my best friend.
It's hard for me to think we will not laugh together
or fight anymore, that you won't accompany me
down the aisle and to the maternity ward."
Today, Natan and Renana are here with us in the
Chamber, sitting behind me. They lost a wife and a
mother. They paid the most painful price.

We have to ask ourselves why that happened.
What drives a l6-year-old boy to stab another human
being to death? The Palestinian teenager - he was
arrested - gave us the answer in his confession. He
said that what made him want to kill a Jew, any Jew,
was a television show on Palestinian television. The
Palestinian culture of hate and constant brainwashing
is responsible for the loss of too many Israelis, and it is
directly responsible for the murder of Dafna Meir.

It is time for real answers, it is time for the truth.
Since no one else will ask the hard questions, I will.
In the name of the people of Israel, in the name of the
Israeli victims, and in the name of the family of Dafna
Meir, let me ask the Palestinian observer here with us
today. Mr. Mansour, will you condemn Palestinians
who commit terror attacks against Israelis?

