Mr. Osman (Somalia): The Federal Government of
Somalia was pleased to host the visit of Ambassador
Kairat Umarov, Chair of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, and other Committee members
to Mogadishu on 8 May. The Committee members
were briefed on some significant areas of progress
during their visit. There is no doubt that the peace and
security challenges facing Somalia remain daunting
but the Administration of President Farmajo is making
a serious attempt to address them, in line with many
of the recommendations of the Somalia and Eritrea
Monitoring Group.

Sanctions are designed as a tool to help tackle security
challenges, and we share the same aims of preventing
weapons from falling into the hands of terrorists,
cutting off funding to Al-Shabaab and ensuring that
Somalia's resources of fish stocks and charcoal cannot
be exploited for the purpose ofdestabilizing the country.
Combating terrorism is not only a military endeavour;
it must include good governance, inclusive politics,
reconciliation and the work of combating corruption.
The objectives of the Federal Government of Somalia
and those of the Sanctions Committee are aligned in
those areas. But the Somalia of today is not the Somalia

on which sanctions were first imposed. Al-Shabaab
remains a vicious threat and we must continue to
implement measures that choke off its resources and
limit its ability to attack innocent people. However,
Somalia has made considerable progress with regard to
public financial management, security-sector reform,
weapons management and accountability.

There is a long way to go, but the Committee and
the Monitoring Group should focus their efforts on
areas where the threat of instability is greatest. The
Monitoring Group has one ofthe widest mandates of all
sanctions regimes. We believe that Somalia's progress
should be reflected in the Group's mandate and focus
and that the Security Council should take into account
the Federal Government's strong commitment to
continued progress. My Administration is making
a genuine attempt to improve our system's processes
and standards. We recognize that there are those who
benefit from the status quo and seek to slow down or
reverse our progress. We therefore urge the Council to
support us by focusing on spoilers, not on the people
engaged in the challenging tasks of State-building.

We have demonstrated our commitment to
improving aspects of our compliance with the sanctions
regime through requests for the Security Council to
review and update its existing measures. For example,
paragraphs 10 (c) and 11 (a) allow weapons to go to
security institutions in Somalia that fall outside national
structures, such as undefined Somali security forces
and strategic partners of the African Union Mission in
Somalia, without prior notification or proper weapons-
and-ammunition management processes in place, which
is problematic and exacerbates arms proliferation in our
country. Our Government would appreciate a careful
review and revision of those paragraphs. The Somali
Government will continue to build on that and, as set
out in Somalia's Transition Plan, will develop standard
operating procedures to achieve a comprehensive
weapons-and-ammunition management system and
establish a management commission to counter the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons, with the
aim of ensuring safe and effective distribution, storage
and security of stocks and trained personnel at both the
Federal Government and federal member state levels.

We are committed to ensuring that Somalia's
resources are not used to finance Al-Shabaab's
operations. In February the National Security Council
endorsed an interim fisheries revenue-sharing
agreement. In April the Cabinet agreed to ban the
domestic sale of charcoal along with improving the
implementation of the charcoal ban. It is also important
to us that Somalia's precious natural resources be
retained to assist in the vital process of our economic
regeneration. That means tackling illegal fishing and
ensuring that Somalia's waters and rich fish stocks can
provide a livelihood for Somalis and help make stability
sustainable. On 5 June the National Security Council
reached an agreement on the ownership, management
and sharing of the country's natural resources, as was
stated in our agreement on natural-resource sharing.

Somalia is a country emerging from decades of
war battling brutal insurgents. We are demonstrating
a strong commitment to reforming our institutions and
meeting our obligations under the sanctions regime.
Our efforts are slowly bearing fruit, but too often we
are criticized for what we have not yet achieved rather
than recognized for our progress. Our capacity is still
in the early stages, but building it will require the
support of our partners in the Security Council and
its subsidiary bodies. We hope we can count on their
steadfast support to our continued progress.

Lastly, we should not ignore developments in
the region. I would like to take this opportunity to
again welcome the most recent developments in the
protracted conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia. We
also welcome the signing of steps to implement the Joint
Declaration of Peace and Friendship on normalizing
relations between the two brotherly countries. President
Farmajo made a State visit to Eritrea last week. Somalia
stresses the importance of ensuring that Eritrea and
Djibouti can agree as soon as possible on the means
for a peaceful settlement of all the unresolved disputes
between the two States. 1 thank the Council again and
wish it the best.

