Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
The fight against terrorism is a matter of principle in
which collective action is essential. That is why we are
especially grateful to Lithuania for having convened this
meeting on foreign terrorist fighters, thereby providing
an excellent opportunity to exchange experiences and
best practices on the implementation of resolution 2178
(2014). We also thank the United States delegation for
its work on presidential statement S/PRST/2015/11.

The position of our country on the subject
has remained unchanged, as demonstrated by the
participation of President Michelle Bachelet Jeria in
the open debate leading to the adoption of resolution
2178 (2014) (see S/PV.7272), which has called us
together today. The phenomenon of foreign fighters
is a collective threat against which the international
community has a responsibility and duty to act through
political action. That is why Chile co-sponsored
resolution 2178 (2014) and is committed to its full and
effective implementation at the global, regional and
national levels.

Resolution 2178 (2014) provides a comprehensive
framework to adequately respond to the threat of
foreign terrorist fighters by strengthening the Council's
collective action to prevent the recruitment and travel
of young people from other regions. Today, we must
focus our efforts on its effective implementation to
address the phenomenon, favouring priority actions
in the short term, as well as long-term preventive
measures to counter violent extremism. In turn, the
role of regional organizations in implementation must
be strengthened. They can provide necessary technical
and financial assistance to countries that so require
and play a key role in information-exchange at various
levels so as to strengthen border-control capacities.
My country participates in various international and
regional cooperative bodies in addressing security
matters, including INTERPOL, the Latin American
and Caribbean Community of Police Intelligence and
the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism of
the Organization of American States, the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation and the Southern Common
Market permanent working group on terrorism.

On the domestic front, national security institutions
have assumed their responsibilities by assuming new
commitments and taking necessary measures to adress
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, taking
into account the measures suggested and resolutions
adopted by the Council. Thus, existing immigration
control mechanisms and the entry and exit of persons
are regularly updated by comparing the names and
lists provided by other countries and international
organizations. Furthermore, our authorities are willing
to share and exchange information with the specialized
organizations and agencies of other States, given the
value of international cooperation in countering the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.

The Council has repeatedly expressed its concern
about the importance of analysing the underlying causes
of the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, in
particular the relationship between the marginalization
to which young alienated people are subject and the
persuasive recruitment mechanisms employed by
entities, including Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
As another way to implement resolution 2178 (2014),
we believe it is essential to promote strengthened
democracy aimed at eliminating inequality, promoting
the greater inclusion of young people in political and
economic processes, and providing opportunities
to older youths. Chile considers the promotion of
inclusive development to be an ethical imperative and
an effective tool for overcoming various manifestations
of extremism, as well as a prerequisite of political
stability and peace.

In conclusion, Chile reiterates its commitment
to further strengthening the principles and values
necessary for improved understanding, tolerance
and understanding among cultures and civilizations.
Political will is critical to united, collective efforts
to minimizing the capacities of those that seek to use
societal differences to destroy the dignity and rights of
individuals and communities. We are confident that the
implementation of resolution 2178 (2014) can help to
generate early warning and preventive measures that
will ultimately lead to the stability and social harmony
that form the foundation of international peace and
security.

