Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I join previous speakers
in thanking our briefers today, and you, Sir, for
convening this timely debate.

In the last few months, civilians have been under
attack in several parts of the world. Civilians continue
to represent the majority of the victims of conflict.
They are not only affected by conflicts, but very
frequently are deliberately targeted by the different
parties. Women are too often subjected to sexual
violence used as a tactic of war. Children are too often
killed or maimed or used in armed conflict.
Widespread violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in times of war
contribute to fuelling instability, violence and conflict.

Portugal condemns all attacks directed against
civilians in Libya; in Cote d'Ivoire; in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where the Lord's Resistance
Army regularly carries out attacks against villages; in
Afghanistan or Iraq, where weapons and explosive
devices cause so much civilian suffering; or in Syria,
where intense violence has resulted in over 500 people
killed and thousands of others injured.

Learning from past situations such as Rwanda or
Srebrenica, it is clear that the Security Council must
pay persistent attention to the plight of civilians in
crisis and that it must act promptly when
indiscriminate attacks against the civilian population
take place. When civilians are under threat, the United
Nations, and the Security Council in particular, must
respond.

We should recognize that the overall attention of
the Security Council to issues related to the protection
of civilians has been increasing. The Council has the
necessary normative framework and tools at hand to
guide its action in this area in an effective and
accountable manner. A number of peacekeeping
missions have been established with strong protection
mandates. Specific training courses have been
deployed by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to enhance the understanding of the concept
of the protection of civilians. Local strategies and
improved engagement with the communities have been
devised, and all these tools have had a significant
impact on enhancing the protection of civilian
populations.

In his report to the Council last November
(S/2010/579), the Secretary-General referred to the
need to identify new and innovative ways to address
specific situations that are not on the agenda. We fully
agree. When the protection of civilians has been at
stake, we have found creative ways to bring the issue
to the attention of this body and to take action.
Resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011) are perhaps
the most striking examples of swift action by the
Council to respond to a situation that was not formally
on its agenda but where civilians were targeted. But
more can be done - and more consistently - to
convey effective political signals using existing tools at
the disposal of the Council, such as press statements,
presidential statements, resolutions, briefings and
consultations.

Indeed, we need to be realistic. The prevention of
conflict is always the most effective way to protect
civilians. That explains why reliable early-warning
information on threats to civilians is crucial.

Preventive measures are core elements of resolution
1894 (2009) and important pillars of the responsibility
to protect. In this regard, we would like to underline
the value of practical but very effective preventive
measures that are now in place in a number of
peacekeeping missions to ensure timely action, for
instance telephone hotlines. But other measures can be
devised, including to support the efforts of civilian
populations to protect themselves, through education
and training programmes, while engaging State
authorities, who retain the primary responsibility for
protection.

Another aspect that is crucial - and that was
rightly examined in the Secretary-General's report -
is the need to enhance accountability for violations of
humanitarian and human rights law. Countering
impunity, either by the action of international
institutions such as the International Criminal Court or
by the actions of national institutions, has a deterrent
effect at the national, regional and international level,
and is a fundamental tool to prevent further violations.
In this respect, Portugal would like to underline once
again the important role of the International Criminal
Court in fighting impunity for the most serious crimes
and encourages all efforts to promote the
universalization of the Rome Statute.

We would also highlight the crucial role that the
Human Rights Council is playing in the fight against
impunity. Two international commissions of inquiry, on
Cote d'Ivoire and on Libya, have recently been
dispatched to investigate human rights violations, to
establish the facts and circumstances of those
violations and, where possible, to identify those
responsible so as to make recommendations, in
particular on accountability measures. Another fact-
finding mission will soon be sent to Syria for the same
purposes. The Council will certainly benefit from the
work of those missions, which hopefully will
contribute not only to enhancing accountability but
also to promoting peaceful solutions to existing crises.

In conclusion, I wish to underline that a Council
that is better informed is also better prepared to take
effective action; hence the need for real-time
information regarding threats to civilians. With
sufficient credible and early information the Council
will be more able to use preventive diplomacy to
influence parties to conflict to comply with
international law and to make specific commitments
regarding civilian populations. It is now up to us to

seek such information and to ensure that the Security
Council acts consistently and with resolve to send a
political signal in demanding immediate compliance
with international humanitarian law to protect all
civilians - women, men and children - who are
directly targeted or are accidental victims of conflict.

