Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I deliver
this speech today on behalf of Kuwait and Sweden.

At the outset I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting at the request
of the delegations of Kuwait and Sweden, pursuant to
resolution 2401 (2018). I also thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for his presence here today and for
his briefing about the implementation ofthis resolution.

Fifteen days have passed since the Security
Council's unanimous adoption of resolution 2401
(2018), which demands that all parties implement a
30-day ceasefire throughout Syria without delay in
order to deliver humanitarian assistance to those in
need and to end the siege of residential areas. It is
with great regret that we continue to witness a clear
failure to implement the resolution's provisions while
military operations across Syria continue to prevent
humanitarian and medical assistance, particularly in
eastern Ghouta and specifically on the part of the Syrian
authorities. This has prevented United Nations teams
and their humanitarian partners from safely providing
humanitarian assistance to eastern Ghouta, which has
been a primary locus among Syrian areas in need of
assistance ever since its siege began in 2013, and which
is home to about 400,000 people. In this regard, we
would like to make a number of observations, as follows.

First, we have followed with deep concern the
inability of the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners to enter the besieged areas, and the obstacles
and impediments that they have faced during their
operations in some areas. In that regard, we would refer
to events in Douma, eastern Ghouta, on 5 March, which
proved to be the deadliest day since the adoption of
resolution 2401 (2018), with at least 100 people having
been killed on that day alone. On that day, the hopes of
civilians hinged on receiving lifesaving humanitarian
aid, and we looked forward to that first positive
initiative reaching 90,000 people in need of assistance
in eastern Ghouta.

However, what happened was that the number of
beneficiaries dropped to less than half due to the Syrian
authorities having removed necessary medical supplies
from the convoy's load without clear justification,
despite the fact that they had been given prior
notification, based on standard operating procedures, of
the entirety of the humanitarian convoy's content. It is
also a matter of deep concern that convoys administered
by the United Nations and its partners were compelled
to cease their operations before completely unloading
their cargo due to continued aerial bombardment on
Douma. We demand that the Syrian authorities give
immediate permission for two convoys per week to
eastern Ghouta and other destinations, at the request
of the United Nations. We call on all parties to provide
appropriate security guarantees for these convoys and to
permit United Nations staff to accompany the convoys.

In this regard, we reaffirm the need for all parties,
in particular the Syrian authorities, to assume their
responsibilities to protect all humanitarian workers,
including United Nations agencies and their relevant
partners. We welcome the entry of the remaining
humanitarian convoys provided by the Red Cross and
the World Food Program into Douma on 9 March to
deliver the remaining food assistance. This was the
second time such convoys had been allowed to enter
Douma in one week. There is a need to build on this so
as to increase the number of weekly convoys to eastern
Ghouta in a sustainable manner.

Secondly, we reiterate the Council's demand for
immediate unconditional medical evacuations based on
medical need, starting this week, and we call on the
Syrian authorities to give permission and work with
the United Nations and its implementing partners to
that end.

Thirdly, the continued fighting in eastern Ghouta,
particularly the incessant air strikes, prompts us to
again call specifically on the Syrian authorities to
comply with the provisions of the resolution and of
international law in order to facilitate humanitarian
assistance to reach those in need. We believe that a daily
five-hour truce in eastern Ghouta does not support the
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018).

Fourthly, the United Nations has confirmed that
the number of combatants associated with terrorist
groups designated by the Security Council in eastern
Ghouta does not exceed 350. We cannot accept
continued military operations under the pretext of
combating terrorism when they effectively prevent
the delivery of humanitarian assistance, contrary to
the requirements of the resolution. Resolution 2401
(2018), which was adopted unanimously, took effect
immediately and is applicable to all parties. In that
regard, we note the willingness of certain opposition
groups in eastern Ghouta to abide by the provisions of
the resolution and to expel terrorist groups designated
by the Security Council. We express our support for the
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to operationalize this matter
without delay.

Fifthly, listening to the Secretary-General's briefing
today on the status of the implementation of resolution
2401 (2018) constitutes one of the monitoring tools
included in the resolution. But the main mechanisms
remain the existing ceasefire agreements between the
parties to the conflict, most notably the Astana accord
with Russia, Turkey and Iran as its guarantors, and
the agreement supervised by the United States and the
Russian Federation that emanated from the International
Syria Support Group. The resolution stresses the need
to activate those agreements in order to reach a 30-
day ceasefire aimed at allowing sustainable access to
humanitarian assistance in all regions in Syria. We call
again on the parties to those agreements to redouble
their efforts in order to implement the provisions of
resolution 2401 (2018).

The unanimous position that the Security Council
conveyed to the Syrian people and to the world by
adopting resolution 2401 (2018) on 24 February must
be built on in a speedy and effective manner, especially
as the resolution is primarily of a humanitarian nature.
There is a collective responsibility on us as members
of the Security Council, specifically on influential
parties, to maintain our credibility before the world and
work to implement the provisions of resolution 2401
(2018). We would like here to stress that the provisions
of the resolution are valid even after 30 days from the
date of its adoption.

We affirm our full commitment to continue to
closely follow the status of the implementation of the
resolution in the Council monthly reports. We will
spare no effort to make progress on its implementation.
This month marks the beginning of the eighth year
of the conflict in Syria. Sadly, there is still a need
for the violence to cease, for sustained humanitarian
access through weekly cross-line convoys, for medical
evacuations, for the protection of civilians and hospitals
and for lifting the siege. We cannot let the Syrian people
down, and we will continue to strive to implement the
joint demands that we have set out.

Finally, we recall that the lack of a political
settlement to the conflict in Syria based on resolution
2254 (2015) will lead to further deterioration of the
humanitarian situation.

