Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I too wish to thank the Russian presidency for convening meetings of the Security Council in their usual place. I also thank Christoph Heusgen and Germany for beginning this journey. I want to welcome the Ambassador of Mali. I also want to congratulate the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) for the major work it has accomplished. We wish to convey our most sincere appreciation to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif for his comprehensive and timely briefing on the situation in Mali. At the outset, we pay tribute to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for the efforts under way at this critical time. Indeed, Mali stands at a critical juncture. It has sunk further and further into a political abyss following the events of August, which seriously impacted its democracy and was firmly condemned by the international community, including the Dominican Republic. We are deeply concerned about the long-lasting impact that the events of August on the whole gamut of issues affecting Mali, which seriously undermine constitutional order and create a political vacuum, which risks further slowing the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and the reform agenda, eroding the gains made and fragmenting the country's social fabric. Against this sobering backdrop, at the outset we must also recognize the strategic and crucial mediation efforts undertaken by ECOWAS since the beginning of this crisis. In the context of Mali's delicate political and social reality, ECOWAS voiced its strong condemnation and demanded an expeditious civilian-led political transition back to constitutional order. The news regarding the lifting of sanctions imposed on Mali by the Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS is positive and reveals that there is an understanding on the actions to be taken on issues critical to a speedy and successful transition. We are delighted by the decision taken by the authorities to free all the civil servants detained during the coup d'etat, as it did yesterday. The current state of affairs in Mali requires a new set of priorities to be established and an evolution to guarantee the speediest possible return to constitutional order. However, we should in parallel continue to focus on, demand and support - arguably with greater dynamism - the implementation of the peace agreement as the most viable framework to address the most pressing issues for peace and security. That can be achieved only through the concerted empowerment of all Malian society. The fight against terrorism, violent extremism and asymmetric attacks, together with national, regional and international partners, must remain a priority together with addressing the deteriorating security, humanitarian and human rights situation in the centre and north of Mali and strengthening State authority in those areas. To that end, it is important to press on with the redeployment of the reconstituted Malian defence and security forces and to generate economic opportunities to protect the livelihoods of the Malian people. Despite the fact that we are focusing in the immediate term on the transition, we must also stay focused on addressing the root causes of conflict in Mali and the Sahel and recognize the enormous challenges posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. At the same time, we must ensure the full effective and meaningful participation of women and young people at all levels and in all spheres, including with the implementation of the peace agreement. In addition, we must support mechanisms designed to deter, through sanctions, individuals who undermine or impede the implementation of the peace agreement, as established in resolution 2374 (2017), on Mali. We also wish to highlight the work of MINUSMA in raising awareness of the obligations relating to sanctions, and we encourage regional partners to continue strengthening cooperation together with the United Nations. I wish to encourage donor countries to increase their support for official development assistance and innovative debt relief and financial programmes for countries most severely affected by the pandemic and the devastation it has sown. We call for the vaccine and other health technologies required to face COVID-19 to be made equitably accessible and for its distribution to be guaranteed to all human beings on the planet. To that end, the role of the World Health Organization, donor countries and the private sector are essential to achieving this objective on the basis of cooperation, solidarity and justice.
