Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank Special
Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed for his briefing.
We greatly appreciate his service and tireless efforts to
bring about a diplomatic solution to the Yemeni crisis.
He was entrusted with a very difficult, complex and
challenging task. I would add that we believe that he
did his utmost to discharge his responsibilities with
courage and commitment. We also thank Director John
Ging for his briefing, and we reiterate our appreciation
to the United Nations and its humanitarian partners for
their dedicated and selfless service to provide aid under
the extremely difficult circumstances in Yemen. We
appreciate the update that we received.

The multifaceted crisis in Yemen continues to
be a source of grave concern. After three years of
devastating war, it is deeply worrying that, as a State,
Yemen has all but ceased to exist, as the Panel ofExperts
on Yemen stated in its final report (see S/2018/68). That
is something that one finds very painful and that leaves
one numb - a State virtually disappearing when it
would have been possible to prevent it. Perhaps it is
not too late, and we believe that it is not. The claim
that the State has all but ceased to exist may be a
slight exaggeration.

All the same, the escalation of military activities
continues unabated, claiming the lives of civilians and
resulting in the destruction of civilian facilities. The
territorial integrity of Yemen is yet to have an effective
custodian. Furthermore, it is deeply disturbing that
there is not any progress towards a peaceful political
settlement of the conflict. Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
have not hesitated to exploit the crisis, continuing their
attacks, including the most recent suicide bomb attacks
on Saturday, with the ultimate goal of acquiring and
governing territory.

We are concerned that that is threatening the
security of the region and beyond, including the Horn
of Africa. The deep-rooted and multifaceted crisis in
Yemen demands an urgent and comprehensive political
solution that addresses both the suffering of Yemenis
as well as the concerns of the countries of the region.
Given the catastrophic situation in Yemen and its
spillover effects in the region and beyond, we stress
the primacy of diplomacy in order to find durable
political solutions, while respecting the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Yemen. We therefore reiterate
our position that the Yemeni crisis can be resolved only
through a comprehensive political solution. We support
the diplomatic efforts of the United Nations, and we urge
the parties to cease hostilities and resume political talks
under the auspices of the United Nations. In that regard,
we welcome the appointment of Mr. Martin Griffiths as
the new Special Envoy. We call on all parties to seize
this opportunity to engage with the newly appointed
Special Envoy to reinvigorate the political process.

As Director Ging stated, we are also deeply
concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian crisis.
The country is on the verge of famine. The devastating
conflict has turned Yemen into the worst humanitarian
crisis of our time wherein we have witnessed one of the
worst cholera outbreaks in recent times. The economic
crisis is worsening with the likelihood of the collapse
of the Yemeni banking and financial system. Public
services, including the health and educational systems,
are collapsing. In addition, access to the effective
delivery of humanitarian and commercial supplies
remains a major challenge.

It is not necessary to say more concerning the
painful challenge than what Director Ging has
already said, for which we are grateful to him. The
international community should continue to support
the humanitarian work of the United Nations and its
partners in a coordinated manner. In that regard, we
encourage donors to extend their generous support
in financing the 2018 Yemen humanitarian response
plan, which requires $2.96 billion. Accordingly, we
hope that the 2018 pledging conference to be held in
Geneva in April will be successful. Furthermore, to
provide life-saving aid to all Yemenis who are facing
unprecedented needs, regular, safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access is critical. The protection of
civilians and civilian facilities also remains imperative.

Lastly, we hope that the Council will reach a
consensus on the draft Yemeni presidential statement,
which, we believe, would send a unified message in
support for the people of Yemen at this very critical
time, but this is a man-made humanitarian tragedy,
as has already been said. A quick resolution will be
possible if there is a political will on the part of all. We
are hopeful that the latter will be forthcoming before
all is lost.

