The President (spoke in Arabic): I warmly
welcome the Heads of State and Government, the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. Their
presence is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter to be addressed.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document 8/2011/552, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on preventive diplomacy. I also wish
to draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2011/570, containing a letter dated 12 September
2011 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
President of the Republic of Lebanon.

First, I would like to welcome the Heads of State
and Government and Ministers who accepted
Lebanon's invitation to participate in this high-level
meeting, thereby affirming the importance of our
discussion on the subject of preventive diplomacy.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for the report he has prepared to enrich our discussion.
He has placed preventive diplomacy, which he
considers to be one of the smartest investments we can
make, among the top priorities of his second term. He
is right to have done so, since investing in preventive
diplomacy costs far less than conflicts and their
2
repercussions, not to mention the heavy humanitarian
consequences they entail.

When addressing preventive diplomacy, we
cannot but refer to the man who authored and
developed this vision, the late Secretary-General Dag
Hammarskj old, who was the first to work to integrate it
into the United Nations system. The concept of
preventive diplomacy has since evolved and is no
longer restricted to simply pre-empting disputes before
they erupt, but also aims at preventing conflicts from
escalating or spreading, as described in the peace plan
prepared by former Secretary-General Boutros
Boutros-Ghali. This concept is still evolving, and now
extends to consolidating the pillars of peace after
conflicts end and preventing the recurrence of those
conflicts.

We firmly believe that wars and conflicts are not
inevitable; rather, the course of events can be
influenced to prevent their eruption and escalation.
However, this requires political will, mobilizing the
necessary resources, and adopting a clear preventive
approach that reinforces local capacities, including
building national systems capable of mediating,
facilitating dialogue and containing tension.

In this context, after adopting its national entente
document in 1991, Lebanon has been keen to
consolidate the pact and spirit of concord in its
approach to major national issues, and has resorted to
national dialogue conferences and committees to
promote an atmosphere of calm, moderation and
stability.

In general, the particular circumstances of every
conflict or crisis requires carefully selected preventive
diplomacy instruments, including early warning, fact-
finding, mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
These are all instruments to be developed and
promoted within the United Nations system.

Active prevention cannot be limited to State
institutions, but should also extend to civil society
bodies, particularly women's and youth organizations,
media, universities and research centres, which can all
play an important role in promoting a culture of
prevention. Moreover, we must also ensure the
coordination of prevention efforts among relevant
United Nations entities.

We recall the Arab Peace Initiative to resolve the
Arab-Israeli conflict in a just and comprehensive
11-50916
manner that rejects any permanent refugee status for
Palestinians in the Arab countries.

It is well known that peacekeeping operations
constitute one of the tools of preventive diplomacy.
Although they are conducted after a conflict erupts,
they are highly important in containing the conflict and
preventing it from spreading. This has been our own
experience. The United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon has, since its establishment in 1978, helped
the Lebanese State to extend its sovereignty throughout
its territory.

Similarly, the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006),
to which Lebanon is committed, was necessary to put
an end to the destructive war Israel waged against
Lebanon in 2006. The international community, in
keeping with the requirements and objectives of
preventive diplomacy, should strive to compel Israel to
implement the resolution's provisions by fully
withdrawing from all Lebanese territories and ceasing
its threats and daily violations of Lebanon's
sovereignty by land, sea and air.

Indeed, the conflict between Lebanon and Israel
would not have escalated since 19 March 1978, the
date resolution 425 (1978) was adopted, nor would the
resistance have emerged and confronted the Israeli
occupation, had the international community
compelled Israel to fully implement that resolution,
which clearly called for the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of its armed forces from all
Lebanese territories. We need practical measures to
guarantee that binding Security Council resolutions are
implemented.

Preventive diplomacy cannot be fully successful
unless we address the root causes of problems. The
roots of terrorism must be addressed. We reiterate our
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and reaffirm
our commitment to fighting that scourge. Conflict
prevention also calls for economic and social justice,
as well as the establishment of a fairer and more
equitable international economic and financial order
that is better aligned with moral values and based less
on speculation.

Finally, during its presidency of the Security
Council last May, Lebanon pointed to dialogue among
civilizations as a tool of preventive diplomacy. In this
context, we emphasize that dialogue, communication
and openness to others are the most important weapons
against fanaticism, extremism, prejudice and hatred.
11-50916

It is therefore clear that promoting a culture of
peace will contribute to conflict prevention. The
Preamble to the Constitution of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
states that it is in the minds of men that the defences of
peace must be constructed. Undoubtedly, the culture of
peace cannot be separated from the culture of justice,
without which no real or permanent peace can be
achieved.

Talking about preventive diplomacy is much
easier than implementing it. Furthermore, history
records and at times even glorifies the wars and
tragedies waged and caused by leaders more than those
they manage to avert. Let us unite our efforts to create
a world governed by the values of equality, justice and
respect for others.

I shall now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I invite the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor.

