The Secretary-General: Mr. President, thank
you for initiating today's special debate. Bosnia and
Herzegovina's own transition is considerable. Your
country has rapidly moved from recipient of
international assistance in a conflict and post-conflict
environment to contributor to international peace and
security as a member of the Security Council. I
applaud your readiness to create a platform to share
experiences in institution-building and to strengthen
our common efforts.

Building effective and legitimate institutions is a
difficult task, even under the most favourable
conditions. It presents even greater challenges in post-
conflict situations. Unfortunately, the track record of
international support to institution-building is mixed.
We can do better.

Institutions can be critical in sustaining peace and
reducing the risk of relapse into Violence. Building
legitimate and effective institutions that respect and
promote human rights therefore must be a central
element of the overall peacebuilding effort.

This open debate offers an important opportunity
to review the Council's own role in this area and the
lessons we have learned. Experience suggests that there
are three major lessons we need to apply to our
collective efforts.

First, we need to reinforce national ownership
and leadership and build on existing institutions. I
speak not only of national Governments or core State
institutions, but also of local governments, affiliated
bodies, communities, the private sector, women's
groups and other civil society actors.

Responsive and inclusive institutions can be built
only by national actors, using their knowledge of the
context, the institutions that do exist and the root
causes of conflicts. International assistance has to build
on what is already there and can help by identifying,
protecting and nurturing latent national capacities. The
ongoing review of international civilian capacity is
guided by this principle. International capacity
assistance should mentor national capacities, never
substitute for them.

More nimble and agile systems are also required,
including stronger partnerships that can provide the
most appropriate civilian capacity, particularly from
ll-21268
developing countries and among women. Access to
reliable, early and flexible funding will also advance
this goal.

Secondly, we must avoid one-size-fits-all
solutions. Attempts to impose an outside model on a
post-conflict country can do more harm than good.
Each country's institutions develop on their own
trajectory and at their own pace. They should be
allowed to develop incrementally and with a certain
level of experimentation to learn and change. Similarly,
institutional change should not be approached as a
technical exercise. Rather, it should be Viewed and
pursued within the broader context of a country's
political processes, development and social change.

In Guinea-Bissau, we have found that weak
institutions at multiple levels remain one of the main
causes of political instability and the lack of
socio-economic development.

Institutions are not just bricks and mortar. They
are also about informal norms and values, trust and
social cohesion. Public confidence in the police, for
example, is required for reformed police forces to be
effective and to regain authority. Shared norms are
necessary to enable legal systems to apply the law
equally to all, including different ethnic groups,
minorities and women. Respect for international
standards, including human rights law, will support
public trust in institutions.

Building these intangible qualities and capacities
and addressing public perceptions are particularly
important in post-conflict societies. International
assistance can sometimes facilitate such change, but
only if it is highly sensitive to political and social
dynamics and how they evolve over time.

Thirdly, institution-building should start early and
be sustained not only for years, but decades. In the
short term, early and tangible progress needs to be
made in a few priority areas to restore confidence and
increase the legitimacy of national institutions. Such
gains could include providing security in key areas of
the country, increasing access to justice systems or
expanding health and education services. Quick and
focused capacity development can enable key
institutions to begin functioning again. Peacekeepers,
development and humanitarian actors can play an
important role in this regard.
11-2l268

At the same time, premature reform efforts can be
risky, particularly if they are taking place under a short-
term transitional Government and before a first post-
conflict electoral process. Striking the right balance
between short- and long-term efforts is critical - and
so, too, is the linkage between the two. International
efforts have often failed to recognize that building
effective institutions is a long-term effort, even in
relatively stable conditions. Some progress can be made
in three to five years, but expectations need to be
realistic. This, of course, has implications for the
Council and the missions it mandates.

In recent years, we have seen a marked increased
in institution-building mandates from the Council for
peacekeeping operations and political missions. Where
missions are mandated to support institution-building,
including rule of law and security institutions, we must
do more to ensure, right from the start, a strong
engagement with other international actors. This
requires stronger partnerships and coordination among
the Council, the Secretariat, United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, international financial
institutions, regional organizations and others.

As the Council reviews its mandates and plans for
transitions, it could engage these partners more
frequently and directly so as to ensure a smooth
transition to other actors when our missions leave. In
this regard, the Peacebuilding Commission provides an
important political platform for countries on its agenda,
which can help to focus attention on long-term
institution-building priorities and mobilize resources
for them, share lessons learned and sustain engagement
by the international community.

There is much that we can do to improve our
efforts, reduce fragmentation and promote a coherent
approach. We can better reflect institution-building in
assessments, identify what existing institutions are
present and can be developed, and ensure better
predictability and accountability for delivery by the
United Nations system.

Many of the steps we are taking as part of our
peacebuilding and integration agendas are
strengthening coherence within the United Nations
system, including integrated strategic frameworks that
now bring together the missions and United Nations
country teams around shared strategic objectives. But
we can achieve greater coherence only with the active
support of Member States. For example, we need
3
greater consistency across mandating authorities to
facilitate more effective cooperation and smooth
transitions. Greater coherence and coordination among
donors are equally important, and need to start from
the earliest stages.

The Council, for its part, should provide clear and
achievable mandates and carefully consider the role of
a range of actors within and beyond the United Nations
system. The Council and the missions it mandates play
a crucial role in building some of the most important
institutions in post-conflict countries.

Our success will depend on whether we can
deploy the right expertise and resources at the right
time, how well we work with our national and
international partners, and whether we actually apply
the lessons we have learned. Once again, I thank you,
Sir, for your commitment to and focus on this vital
issue, for your initiative and for sharing your country's
example.

