Mr. Fulci (Italy): Since this is the first time that I
have spoken in the Council under your presidency, Sir,
allow me first to congratulate you warmly on your
assumption of such an important duty, which we are sure
you will be able to discharge with your usual, well-known
efficiency and effectiveness, and also with your good sense
of humour.

I think this is also an excellent occasion for me to
express once again my delegation's heartfelt thanks to our
distinguished and very good friend, Ambassador
Li Zhaoxing of China, for the exemplary way he presided
during last month over the work and activities of the
Council, and also the way in which he represented us in
Haiti on 31 March.

After a long and difficult negotiation, the five nuclear-
weapon States parties to the Treaty on the N on-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) have agreed on a document on
security assurances, which is now before the Security
Council. The Italian delegation is pleased to note that, for
the first time in history, the five nuclear-weapon countries
are acting jointly on this issue, and are giving a positive
response to the aspirations and requests of a great many
non-nuclear-weapon States.

Italy very much hopes that the process that bore these
first positive fruits, on the eve of the Review and Extension
Conference of the NPT, can continue and expand in the
future. We are convinced that a further strengthening of the
security assurances will contribute positively to international
peace and security, to the benefit especially of all the
countries that have signed, and are fully complying with,
the NPT.

May I also underline the political implications of the
fact that, for the very first time, positive and negative
security assurances are both contained in the same
document, moving in the direction of the expectations and
requests of numerous members of the international
community.

Even if the specific unilateral commitments of the
five have not been harmonized - which would have been
preferable, of course - we have duly noted the national
declarations on security assurances made public in recent
days. We deem it significant that they were announced
concurrently and simultaneously.

The draft resolution before us contains new,
progressive elements on the type of assistance to be
provided in cases of the use, or threat of use, of nuclear
weapons. We welcome this development.
The draft resolution also adds to the progress made
in Geneva, with regard to both the comprehensive
banning of nuclear testing and the prohibition of the
production of fissile material for military purposes.

My Government believes that this initiative will help
create the premises needed to make a decision on
extending, indefinitely and unconditionally, the NPT at
the upcoming New York Conference. Moreover, this new
step moves in the same direction as the achievements of
recent years in the field of nuclear disarmament, of which
START I and START II are the main, but not the only,
examples.

