The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

I will now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Malaysia.

In convening today's wrap-up session, Malaysia
is seeking to introduce some new elements that could
inject added value into our exchanges - namely,
reflections on the Council's work over a slightly longer
time frame, both looking back and looking ahead. That
said, I intend first to highlight certain key aspects of
Malaysia's presidency of the Council this month.

During its presidency, Malaysia has sought to
focus on three key issues: peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and children and armed conflict. In pursuing these
priorities, Malaysia is grateful for the strong and
constructive support and cooperation extended by all
Council members throughout the month.

With regard to peacekeeping and peacebuilding, the
principal idea was to initiate preliminary discussions
by the Council, taking into account its expected role
in following up on the ongoing review processes of
peace operations, the peacebuilding architecture and
resolution 1325 (2000).

On children and armed conflict, taking into
account the alarming upward trend in the employment
of abduction as a tactic in violent conflicts, especially
by terrorist groups and their affiliates, Malaysia has
sought to further strengthen international protection
norms for children in armed conflict, in particular by
including abduction as an additional trigger for listing
in the Secretary-General's annual reports on children
and armed conflict. As Chair of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, we are grateful for
the overwhelming support demonstrated by Council
members and United Nations Member States during the
open debate held on 18 June (see S/PV.7466) and for
resolution 2225 (2015).

By way of statistics, the Council has held a total of
26 meetings, out of which 22 were public. Additionally,
three Arria Formula meetings have been held in June
concerning the situations in Darfur, Syria and - just
this morning - on climate change and its implications
for international peace and security, reflecting, in
our view, healthy use of other meeting formats by
Council members. With regard to outcomes in June, the
Council has adopted a total of 22 products, including 6
resolutions and 2 presidential statements, and issued 15
press statements. It is disconcerting that a large number
of the press statements have been in relation to terrorist
attacks.

Today marks six months since Malaysia joined the
Council. In our View, the Council's work in 2015 has
thus far been largely positive. For example, a number
of important norm-setting initiatives on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict - including journalists,
women, girls and children - were adopted between
January and June. However, over the same period the
Council has also seen a deterioration in a number of
situations, most notably in Burundi, the Sudan, South
Sudan, Syria, Ukraine and Yemen. At the same time,
the Council has also proven its dynamism in rising to
new challenges, as demonstrated by its engagement on
the issue of migrants at sea, both in the Mediterranean
and in South-East Asian waters.

As stated earlier, the challenge to international
peace and security posed by the twin scourges of
terrorism and violent extremism has continued to loom
large on the Council's agenda. Malaysia believes that,
over the past six months, the Council has demonstrated
a strengthened resolve to tackle and address these
scourges, and particularly the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters, including through follow-up decisions
and initiatives. In that connection, we welcome the
initiative of Lithuania and Spain to organize the
extraordinary meeting of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), scheduled to be held
in Madrid next month.

Just last Friday, the United Nations commemorated
its seventieth anniversary. Since its inception, the
United Nations and the Security Council have been at
the forefront in maintaining international order, peace
and stability. There have been numerous successes
in that regard. However, there also remain a number
of seemingly intractable challenges that continue to
impinge on the credibility of the Council and the United
Nations as a whole.

The top of that list must include Palestine, which
has been in conflict and crisis for almost as long as
the United Nations has been in existence. On this, we
believe, the Council has been ineffective for far too long.
We reiterate that it is neither tenable nor acceptable for
Palestine to remain in the status quo. The systematic
decimation and subjugation of an entire people are an
affront to everything which the United Nations and the
Council stand for. It is time for all parties to recommit to
peaceful negotiations, including on final status issues,
and for the Council to step up to its responsibility in
facilitating a peaceful political resolution to the long-
standing conflict.

Against the backdrop of raging conflicts in the
Middle East, including in Syria, Yemen and, to a
lesser extent, Iraq, as well as the conflicts in Africa,
particularly in Mali and Libya - exacerbated by the
activities of groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, the Al-Nusra Front, Boko Haram and
Al-Qaida, among others - Malaysia believes that there
is an increasing need for the Council to take a more
strategic approach, including by looking at the future
implications of such conflicts at the regional and global
levels. Without being prescriptive, the following issues
lie ahead, on which, in our view, the Council should
have initial conversations or discussion.

First are the implications for regional and
subregional security and stability, for example in the
Middle East, in view of the significant stresses on the
countries of the region forced to cope with refugees and
displaced persons fleeing the conflict in Syria. Similarly,
the possible future implications of the various conflicts
in Africa include the security implications of massive
movements of those fleeing such conflicts, including
through North Africa. While noting that the United
Nations does have regional-level conflict-prevention
capacities - for example, through the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia - no
comparable capacity exists for the Middle East, which
could arguably benefit from such a mechanism.

As highlighted during the recent meeting of
the Council's Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, the possibility
of election-related violence flaring up and rapidly
deteriorating into possible threats to international peace
and security must also be on our radar, as must the need
to work with the General Assembly in moving forward
on the issue of selecting the next Secretary-General. In
that regard, we note the proposals that have been put
forward on this issue, and look forward to discussing
them further with Council members and interested
partners and stakeholders,

In concluding, Malaysia reaffirms its support for
meetings such as this, which provide the necessary
space for continuing a regular collective assessment of
the Council's performance, as well as the opportunity
for us to cast an eye on the challenges and opportunities
that lie on the horizon in our collective endeavour of
maintaining international peace and security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the other members of the Council.

