Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): At the outset, Madam,
allow me to offer you my sincere congratulations on
the assumption of Jamaica to the presidency. Having
worked closely with you in the Council before, I am
fully confident in your ability and that of your Council
team to shoulder the heavy responsibilities that have
been entrusted to you during this very challenging
month of November. I should also like to commend
your predecessor, Ambassador Richard Ryan of
Ireland, for the outstanding manner in which he guided
the work of the Council in the month of October.

My delegation expresses its appreciation to the
Council for convening this open meeting to discuss the
important situation in Afghanistan at this critical
juncture, when the people of Afghanistan are facing,
yet again, another sad chapter in the tragic history of
their country. Through no fault of theirs, they are now
facing the daily bombing of their country in the
aftermath of the terrorist attacks on the United States
on 11 September 2001. They have fled their homes and
villages in order to get out of harm's way as the mighty
bombs continue to rain down on their land. Over a
million of them are now refugees in neighbouring
countries. Many more have become internally
displaced persons, finding refuge in the inhospitable
mountains. They now face the prospect of enduring a
long, cold winter, which is fast approaching, uncertain
whether they will survive through it all. Once again,
the hapless people of Afghanistan will have to endure
the bitter fruit of conflict, this time between the Taliban
Government that they did not elect and a mighty super-
Power, with its overwhelming military might.

Malaysia fully understands the anger of the
Government and people of the United States over the
horrific terrorist attacks on the United States on 11
September. We have strongly condemned these heinous
attacks and shared the grief and anguish of the
American people over the senseless deaths of
thousands of innocent people. We express once again
our most profound condolences to the Government and
people of the United States and other countries that lost
nationals in the attack.

Malaysia, too, lost a number of its own in that
tragedy. As an Islamic State, we are very concerned
that a group of misguided people who claim to share
our religion unleashed these senseless terrorist attacks
in the name of our sacred faith. These people cynically
distorted the principles of our religion and sought to
equate its sacred tenets with their creed of terrorism,
exploiting the frustrations of the Muslim community,
or ummah, for their own narrow and self-serving
purposes.

While we understand the deep anger and natural
desire to bring retribution on those responsible, we do
not believe that the use of military force is a wise or
the best course of action to root out the terrorist
menace. Yes, the use of military force is a legitimate
course of action as an act of self-defence, but it is not
the only course of action, the most effective or
politically wise. It is unfortunate that, in the move to
punish a group of people who are believed to be behind
the terrorist attacks and their protectors, the poor, long-
suffering people of Afghanistan have to suffer. They
are not the enemies that are being sought out, yet they
bear the brunt of the consequences of the military
action and are now fighting for survival in the cold
winter. While the airdrop of foodstuffs for the refugees
and displaced persons is indeed a humane gesture, it is
not enough nor will it compensate for the hardships and
traumas they have to endure while the bombings
continue unabated.

After two decades of civil war, Afghanistan is
virtually a failed State. Its ethnic, tribal, linguistic and
ideological divisions are as intense as they are
intractable. Internal ethnic conflicts have for years
been compounded by external factors that have
polarized the fractious Afghan people even further,
making reconciliation an even more difficult task.

Avoiding civilian casualties should not only be a
matter of tactical concern; it should also be a moral
one. As in all such bombings, we are seriously
concerned at the so-called collateral damage, in spite of
the much-touted precision bombings which are
supposed to have taken place. We are concerned at the
rather high margin of targeting error in the current
military campaign, which has led to the reportedly high
death toll among civilians. We therefore appeal for an
end to the bombing so as to spare the long-suffering
people of Afghanistan further hardship and travail and
to allow them to return to their villages and homes for
the fast-approaching winter season and Ramadan. Yes,
Muslim countries have been known to wage war with
one another even during the month of Ramadan, but we
should not lose sight of the fact that this war is not
between Muslim countries. That perception is
important to bear in mind as we, members of the
international community, work out a global strategy to
fight terrorism. It is important not to lose a war on
account of a battle.

That the protracted military engagement in
Afghanistan will lead to political and humanitarian
disaster in Afghanistan is almost a certainty. The
Afghan people cannot endure yet another humanitarian
crisis that is likely to result from the attacks. According
to concerned humanitarian aid officials and workers,
thousands of civilians could starve and impassable
roads will compromise the severely constrained relief
efforts. Under the best of conditions, the extension of
aid under the Taliban has been a monumental
challenge. Under the currently more arduous operating
environment, it is doubtful that humanitarian supplies
can be delivered in the right quantities, to the right
locations and at the right time. In the dire situation that
the Afghan population is currently experiencing, we
insist that the United Nations humanitarian objectives
take precedence over the more ambiguous military
goals.

The war against the scourge of terrorism is a
global one involving all States Members of this
Organization. Every Member State, including my own,
is prepared and anxious to join in the effort, although
not necessarily in the military sphere. It is a multi-
pronged effort on many fronts: political/diplomatic,
security/intelligence, legal and financial, among others.
Combating terrorism requires looking beyond any one
terrorist incident and necessitates the consideration of
the broader political, social and economic contexts
from which terrorism emerges. What is needed is a
preventive strategy that would scrutinize its roots. Only
a well-formulated strategy, coupled with concerted
action, would ensure the destruction of the fertile
breeding grounds of international terrorism.

Many United Nations Members, including
Malaysia, have called for the convening of an
international conference on terrorism, not only to
consider the menace in all its aspects, but also to deal
with such important issues as definition and practical
steps that can be taken to combat this evil. Agreement
on a definition is essential in order to ensure the
broadest possible support from the international
community. The conference will also be able to
galvanize international action in support of a
comprehensive convention on terrorism that is now
being deliberated in the Sixth Committee. Only an
international conference at the highest level would be
able to find a cure for the disease, rather than merely
treating the symptoms, as the current military action
will do.

Perhaps the greatest challenge confronting the
international community in Afghanistan today is the
establishment of a post-Taliban Government in a
country wracked by deep inter-ethnic rivalries.
Removing the Taliban and replacing it with a new
regime might resolve the immediate problem of
sanctuary for Osama bin Laden and Al Qaeda. It may
not, however, end the civil war in Afghanistan, the
ethnic and religious divisions among the population or
the fierce independence of the warlords.

The avowed objective of the political process is
to facilitate

"a negotiated political settlement aimed at the
establishment of a broad-based, multi-ethnic and
fully representative Government acceptable to all
Afghans" (S/PRST/1999/29).

Yet, progress towards establishing a multi-ethnic
Government that is acceptable to the majority of
Afghans and to its neighbours has been almost non-
existent. The likely result and danger is the possibility
of a power vacuum as the Taliban Government retreats
or collapses, with no responsible group ready to fill the
vacuum. In designing a strategy for Afghanistan, it is
important to ensure that there be no return to the chaos
and lawlessness ofthe pre-Taliban period.

Since past regional initiatives have failed to
secure reconciliation and since no ethnic group holds
an overwhelming majority, it is imperative that the
United Nations lead efforts to bring about a broad-
based multi-ethnic Government. Although previously
frustrated by the intransigence of all parties concerned,
Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi, recently re-appointed as
the Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Afghanistan, remains our best hope for a negotiated
solution. He should be supported by all Powers keen on
realizing a stable Afghanistan, a viable State that can
turn into a beacon for regional security and stability.
The major powers, including Afghanistan's neighbours,
need to come together, under the auspices ofthe United
Nations, to devise a long-term comprehensive plan for
the country's political and economic well-being. For
once, let the interest of the long-suffering people come
first. The worse thing the international community
could do, after the conclusion of the military phase,
would be once again to abandon the Afghans, leaving
them to resolve their political differences. We know
where that path has led us.

What is needed is nothing less than a kind of
"Marshall Plan" for Afghanistan. However,
reconstruction efforts must be initiated early and
should be backed by sustained international economic
and political support. The stabilization of the country
will require some form of peacekeeping presence to
prevent the return of internal conflict, as well as the
formation of a transitional government that will
represent the interests of the various factions.

Stabilizing an impoverished Afghanistan after the
Taliban are gone will not be an easy mission, given the
internal divisions and the lack of international
consensus on the future governance of the country.
Nonetheless, the United Nations should stand ready to
help establish democratic institutions in the country
and prepare its people for future elections with the
support of the transitional government.

It is obvious that an inclusive and participatory
approach should be pursued in any political
reconciliation of the country. The United Nations must
not shy away from assuming a leading role, with
renewed support from the international community, in
striving towards the establishment of a stable and
viable Afghan State - not an impossible task,
provided the requisite political will exists. For the sake
of the Afghans, we must not fail.

