Mr. Gorelik (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian delegation notes with satisfaction
that there has been some improvement in the situation in
Haiti in terms of security and prospects for establishing
conditions for freedom and tolerance. However, the
situation remains unstable, which is cause for concern.

We believe that the United Nations Support Mission
in Haiti, which played a significant role in strengthening the
foundations of constitutional democracy, fully acquitted
itself of the task the Security Council entrusted to it in
resolution 1063 (1996). We are convinced, as emphasized
in the draft resolution before the Security Council, that the
people of Haiti bear primary responsibility for national
reconciliation and the reconstruction of their country.

Russia's position on Haiti is well known. In itself, the
situation in that country has not posed and does not pose a
threat to regional peace and security. This is a typical
situation for many developing countries: a complicated
transition to democracy, which unfortunately does not have
strong roots in Haitian society. The situation is, moreover,
exacerbated by the protracted social and economic crisis.
We are convinced that the sustainable development of Haiti
requires a considered, purposeful effort at reform on the
part of the Haitian Government. At the same time,
external assistance is important as well. The international
community must continue to provide technical, economic
and financial assistance to support political stability,
balanced development, the establishment of democratic
institutions and respect for human rights.

We are not opposed to maintaining a United Nations
presence in Haiti, but it must be commensurate with the
real requirements of the hour. We are therefore prepared
to support the Secretary-General's recommendation that
a new United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti
(UNTMIH) be established; it would cooperate closely
with specialized agencies of the United Nations and with
other international institutions and would focus primarily
on continuing to help strengthen the Haitian National
Police. The Russian delegation sees no compelling reason
for retaining a United Nations military presence in Haiti,
but we have acceded to the wishes of our partners - and
here we would like to make special mention of the
constructive position of Canada - bearing in mind the
appeal of President Preval, the recommendations of the
Secretary-General, and the views of the group of "Friends
of the Secretary-General for Haiti" and contributors to the
civilian police element. We have done this on the
understanding that, as stipulated in the draft resolution
before us, the Transition Mission will have a clearly
defined, single four-month mandate.

Unfortunately, problems - particularly in the area
of internal security - will inevitably persist following the
withdrawal of the new mission; these will have to be
resolved not by a United Nations peacekeeping operation
but by non-United Nations machinery. We shall look
forward to the Secretary-General's specific
recommendations in this regard.

I wish to stress in conclusion that work on this draft
resolution demonstrated once again that a constructive
approach and due consideration for the positions and
interests of all parties can enable the Security Council to
find solutions acceptable to all. We are grateful to the
sponsors of the draft resolution for taking account of all
our proposals.

The Russian delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution.

