Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The following
States associated with the Union have expressed their
intention to associate themselves with this statement:
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malta, Poland, Romania and Slovakia.

After the appalling bombings in Israel, which killed
and injured so many innocent Victims and which aimed
through blind violence to undermine the peace process, the
European Union reaffirms its solidarity with and support for
all efforts to establish a durable peace in the region.

Safeguarding the security of the Israeli and Palestinian
populations is a fundamental element in implementing the
peace process. In condemning the barbaric terrorist acts in
Israel, we acknowledge the need to assure the safety of the
Israeli population and to prevent further terrorist acts. We
urge the Israeli and Palestinian authorities to cooperate
closely to detain and punish those responsible.

The European Union recognizes the hardship imposed
on the Palestinian population as a result of the closure by
Israel, for security reasons, of all land and sea borders with
Gaza and the West Bank. We wish to recall the essential
role of the reconstruction assistance provided by the
international community, in building up support for a peace
process in the Palestinian entity almost half of which comes
from the European Union.

The closure of the borders, which must be completely
ended as soon as possible, is already threatening this
essential interdependent work and causing suffering through
lack of food supplies to the Palestinian population. We
therefore call on Israel to allow humanitarian assistance and
materials for the internationally financed reconstruction
programmes to go through, under appropriate security
safeguards but without undue delay, and to cease the
imposition of collective punishment.

The peace process must be made irreversible. We
urge all the parties to pursue its implementation with
determination. We look to the continued implementation
of the agreement concluded by the parties concerned,
including the agreed timetable.

