The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
briefing by the High Representative for the
implementation of the General Framework
Agreement on Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the annexes thereto (collectively the Peace Agreement, S/l995/999, annex) on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and commends his
efforts in implementing this agreement.

"The Security Council encourages further
regional political and economic cooperation, in
compliance with the principles of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity and the inviolability of the
borders of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the other
States ofthe region.

"The Security Council welcomes the new
State-level and entity-level governments formed
after the general elections of ll November 2000
and calls on them to take active measures to make
further progress on the return of refugees,
consolidation of the State institutions, and
economic reform. It welcomes the progress on
creating a State Level Defence Identity in full
compliance with the relevant provisions of the
Peace Agreement and encourages the Presidency
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to finalize the
unresolved details without delay.

"The Security Council welcomes the
establishment of Constitutional Commissions to
protect the vital interest of the constituent peoples
to facilitate the implementation of the
'Constituent Peoples decision' of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
of 1 July 2000, and calls upon the entity
parliaments to engage in the debate about the
the

necessary amendments to their respective
constitutions in the light of proposals examined
by the Constitutional Commissions.

"The Security Council notes the recent
conclusion of the Agreement on a Special
Relationship between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Republika Srpska and urges
the High Representative to monitor its
implementation and any amendments to it, in
order to ensure that it remains consistent with the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a whole and with the Peace
Agreement.

"The Security Council condemns recent
unilateral moves by the so-called Croat National
Congress to establish Croat self-rule in open
contradiction of the provisions of the Peace
Agreement, and calls on all parties to work within
the legal institutions and constitutional
framework of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
entities. It expresses its support for the High
Representative in taking actions against persons
holding public office who are found to be in
Violation of legal commitments made under the
Peace Agreement or the terms for its
implementation.

"The Security Council welcomes the
progress made on the return of refugees and
property law implementation in the year 2000,
but remains concerned at the slow pace of refugee
return, particularly in urban areas. The Council
insists on the responsibility of the local
authorities to accelerate the rate of return and
property law implementation.

"The Security Council urges all political
parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina and their
respective leaders to engage constructively within
the legal institutions of that country in order to
implement fully the Peace Agreement."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2001/ll.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.40pm.
