Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to express my sincere appreciation to the
Kazakhstan presidency for its timely initiative to
convene today's debate. I believe the significantly
high level of participation clearly demonstrates the
importance that the international community attaches
to these meetings. We fully share the views set forth
in the presidency's concept note for today's debate
(S/2018/7, annex) that building regional partnership
and cooperation, not only in Afghanistan and Central
Asia but in all regions of the world, serves as the most
appropriate model to reinforce the inextricable nexus
between security and development.

More than a decade after being invaded,
Afghanistan, the region and the world are not any safer
than they were before the invasion. That is a fact. But it
has also been the case for all of the invasions that have
occurred in our region. Afghanistan should become an
exemplar for regional and international cooperation,
rather than for competition. The world should regard the
situation in Afghanistan as an opportunity to establish
peace, security and stability through development and
to find a win-win approach 4 not just for Afghanistan
but for its neighbours, including the States of Central
Asia and for the international community in general.

Investing in long-term cooperation with
Afghanistan, enhancing economic interaction and
connectivity and expanding regional infrastructure,
trade and investment and transit and transportation
projects cannot only bring about security and political
and economic benefits for Afghanistan, but also for all
its partners in the region and the world. That partnership
also helps reduce the breeding ground for terrorist and
extremist groups.

Security and development are interrelated and
mutually reinforcing factors that transcend the national
boundaries ofa single State in today's world, and often
require a comprehensive and all-inclusive regional
approach. Iran is indeed very eager to see a peaceful
and prosperous Afghanistan as its neighbour. Security
and development in Afghanistan directly and indirectly
affect security at our borders and in the region.

Our support for the Afghan National Unity
Government is unrelenting. We welcome any
achievement along the path leading towards an Afghan-
owned and Afghan-led peace process resulting in
lasting and comprehensive peace in Afghanistan. It
is in that context that Iran welcomed, and continues
to participate in, the Kabul Process and any other
similar processes to help foster peace and security in
Afghanistan. Strengthening our regional cooperation
with Afghanistan is a priority and a major pathway
to consolidating peace, stability and economic
development in our neighbouring country. In that
regard, the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran
has spared no effort to promote its brotherly relations
with the Afghan people. Over a decade's time, Iran has
funded altogether more than 300 development projects,
including reconstruction and building infrastructure
for a total of $500 million, including major projects
such as the Chabahar port facilities, established
through a trilateral agreement made by Iran, India and
Afghanistan, and the Khaf-Herat railway.

We have also funded and implemented many
projects in the area of technology transfers, know-
how and training with Afghan work forces in various
area to help them reconstruct their own country. Those
projects have the capacity to change regional economic
perspectives and can help foster prosperity and stability
in Afghanistan.

In addition to those projects, for more than three
decades Iran has hosted millions of Afghan refugees.
We continue to share our much-needed subsidized
goods and services, including basic commodities,
public health and public education. This year alone,
our schools are providing education to nearly 400,000
undocumented Afghan students.
The challenges facing Afghanistan are complex
and interconnected. The nexus linking security and
development is deep-rooted; it cannot be addressed
solely through military build-up and strategies. For
example, the 87 per cent increase in opium production
is not only a clear indication of underdevelopment,
low-income and lack of economic opportunities, it
is also alarming when we note the fact that narcotics
provide a major source of income for terrorist groups.
Furthermore, poverty provides immense and abundant
opportunities for recruitment by terrorist groups
and drug trafficking networks. The United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan is playing a crucial
role at this critical moment for Afghanistan. It definitely
needs more support from the international community.

Let me conclude by expressing my best wishes to
the fraternal people and the Government of Afghanistan
and to reassure them of Iran's full support in their
endeavour to bring about peace and prosperity in
their country.

