Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I, too,
should like to thank Ambassadors Wittig and Gasana
for their comprehensive briefings.

At the outset, I would like to underline that fact
that Bosnia and Herzegovina considers the
Peacebuilding Commission to be one of the most
important components of the security architecture of
the United Nations. Over the past few months, several
important debates and initiatives have been undertaken
with the aim of enhancing the coherence and
effectiveness of United Nations engagement in
peacebuilding activities. Consequently, the evolving
nature of the Peacebuilding Commission has continued
to focus the attention of the international community
on the countries on its agenda.

We further believe that, in order to improve the
Commission's impact on the ground, a common vision
for engagement in a given country is essential. It is
equally important to build and strengthen partnerships
with key peacebuilding actors, international financial
institutions and regional and subregional institutions.
In that process, the focus should be on building upon
existing national strategies and priorities so as to
reinforce national ownership and capacity. Another
important issue is identifying critical funding and
policy gaps and leveraging the resources of multilateral
and bilateral donors to address those gaps in a timely,
flexible and predictable manner. The division of roles
and responsibilities is necessary to bridge short-term
activities in the aftermath of conflict and long-term
visions that lead to sustainable peace and development.

In that regard, measuring the impact of
peacebuilding activities in the field is crucial. Reviews
of the Strategic Frameworks for Peacebuilding and
efforts to harmonize them with the views expressed in
the poverty reduction strategy papers can be important
activities leading to better planning and greater
delivery of results on the ground.

We are also of the view that greater synergy is
needed between the Commission's country
configurations and the International Dialogue on
Peacebuilding and Statebuilding in order to ensure that
collective efforts are coherent and mutually
reinforcing. In particular, that process involves
reinforcing shared accountability between the countries
concerned and international partners, strengthening
coherent planning for peacebuilding strategies,
financing for peacebuilding and leveraging capacities
and expertise. We emphasize that planning for
peacebuilding must not be a supply-driven process. On
the contrary, it has to be focused and centred on the
needs of the host country.

We consider that the cooperation between the
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) needs
to be maximized through enhanced consultations and
dialogue in order to provide sustained support for the
countries on the Commission's agenda and to align the
Commission's engagement with the plans of the Fund.

With regard to country configurations, the
Commission has continued to increase its engagement
by supporting the electoral process in Burundi and
activities related to the peacebuilding elements of the
Agenda for Change of the Government of Sierra
Leone, including good governance, the rule of law and
youth employment. We welcome the efforts of the
Commission that fostered integration of the political
mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone with the
development mandates of the United Nations agencies,
making the Agenda a central peace and development
framework for the international community.
We are of the View that engagement in Guinea-
Bissau will help in building democratic governance
and effectively addressing the key challenges facing
the country, including enhancing the civilian
institutions of the security sector. As for the Central
African Republic, it will boost support for
peacebuilding priorities identified by the Commission,
the Government and civil society.

The constructive work of the Commission
contributed to adding two new members to the
Commission's agenda, Liberia and Guinea-Bissau. We
believe that a new instrument of engagement, the
statement of mutual commitment, will contribute to
better identifying the main risks and challenges facing
the peacebuilding process and therefore expedite the
engagement process. However, enhancing national
ownership and building national capacities will lay the
foundations for economic growth, peace consolidation
and sustainable development.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the practice of
inviting the Chairs of the country configurations to
brief the Council. This is important not only for the
Commission's role in highlighting the correlation
between security and development, but also for
confirming the Commission's tangible results in a
specific country.

In light of the PBC 2010 review, it is necessary to
develop a practical mechanism to track progress in the
work of the Commission with regard to creating a
single planning document for a specific country,
intensifying resource mobilization efforts, development
aspects of peacebuilding or activities with the PBF.

Finally, while we emphasize that much has been
achieved in the past, we believe that the Commission
should perform better analysis, provide important
advice to the principal organs of the United Nations,
and improve its working methods and the linkage
between work at Headquarters and in the field in order
to achieve better results. Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains fully committed to supporting its work.

