Mr. Kay: I am grateful to you, Sir, for giving me
the floor. I am delighted to be here with His Excellency

Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, Prime Minister
of Somalia, whose constant support for the United
Nations is deeply appreciated.

As I shall end my assignment at the end of the year,
I wish to take this, my final opportunity, to thank the
Council for its unstinting support over the past two
and a half years. Without it, Somalia would not have
progressed as it has. In 2013, there was hope in the air,
but also anxiety. The mountain to climb was steep. As
Somalia inches towards 2016, I believe that we should
recognize what is going well, reflect on why it is
working and what we should learn, and set out clearly
the challenges ahead.

Somalia is well advanced in its political and
security transformation from failed to recovering
State. When the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia started in 2013, the Federal Government was
corralled in Mogadishu. Across the rest of the country
was a patchwork of different local power-holding
arrangements, with no tangible link to Mogadishu,
little in the way of governance institutions, and with
many entire districts under the control of Al-Shabaab.

Today a new Somalia with a new political map
is emerging. Three new federal member states will
shortly join Puntland as foundation stones of the new
Federal Somalia. The fifth will be formed from Hiraan
and Shabelle Dhexe and, while recognizing important
recent progress, I urge swift conclusion of that
process. I also urge continued progress on the national
consultations leading to an electoral process in 2016
that will be conducted on time and be more inclusive
than in 2012.

We should never forget that political progress has
been made possible only by the sacrifices of the Somali
National Army and the forces of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). The Somali National
Army faces huge challenges and needs to improve its
capabilities and its organization, but the Council's
support for it and for AMISOM. has been vital. Since
2013, 14 districts, including strategically important
ports, have been recovered from A1-Shabaab. Today,
there is intense interchange between Mogadishu and
the regions on political, economic and technical issues.
Almost daily, we help Somali delegations fly across
that largely roadless country the size of France. In
each of the emerging Federal member states, there is
a Government, an assembly and an agreed charter.
Increasingly, Somalis see Government closer to them,
more able to deliver for the people and be held to account
by them. There is still a long way to go in terms of
service delivery, the rule of law and inclusive politics.
But I shall never tire of saying that, at last, Somalia is
facing the problems of a country coming together rather
than falling apart.

I believe we should recognize some other significant
achievements; each is a collective achievement by
Somalis and the international community. It is now
more than three years since pirates seized a major
commercial ship off the coast of Somalia. The United
Nations Development Programme has helped State
institutions to start delivering a range of services and,
with the World Bank, is establishing a professional
civil service. In 2014, early warning by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
led to early action, and Somalia avoided repeating
the devastating famine of 2011. In 2015, for the first
time in a quarter of a century, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
began a programme to assist thousands of refugees to
return voluntarily to Somalia. Last month, two years
after polio erupted again in Somalia, the World Health
Organization (WHO) declared Somalia polio-free. In
2014, Somalia exported a record number of livestock;
it is no coincidence that the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations vaccinated a record
number of animals the same year. Schools across
Somalia are reopening, and teachers are being trained
and paid through a UNICEF-backed programme.
Enormous challenges remain. Social and economic
progress so far is a drop in the ocean, but it is progress.

Why are things progressing and what should we
learn? This is not the moment for detailed analysis,
but let me highlight five key elements in Somalia's
success. First and foremost is the common agreement to
put political State-building at the heart of everything,
Somali-owned and Somali-led. Secondly, creative
approaches and partnerships have been key, not only
as enshrined in the New Deal Compact, but also in the
unique parnership among the UnitedNations, the African
Union, the European Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. The third factor is the
courage and commitment ofthe African Union forces in
AMISOM. And the fourth element is a truly integrated
United Nations that is delivering as one. Finally, there
is the unity and willingness of the Security Council to
innovate and to trust, for which I thank members.

While thanking partners and the Council for what
they have done, it may not be surprising to members
ifI also ask for more. Somalia has to compete for
attention and resources in an ever more troubled world.
But scaling back now will crush the hopes of millions
of Somalis, endanger peace and security in the Horn
of Africa and East Africa, bolster violent extremism
globally and risk a renewed exodus of refugees.
Reducing effort should not be an option. Collectively
we need absolutely to do more and better on three
things: undertaking local community recovery and
development in areas recovered from Al-Shabaab;
supporting economic recovery nationwide to help the
seven out of every 10 Somalis under the age of 35 to
find jobs; and putting in place a more comprehensive
approach to Al-Shabaab to engage those who truly
wish to join a Somali-led political State-building
project. Those are the future actions that will lock in
the political and security success to date. The Council's
decision today to establish an enhanced United Nations
support office is vital for the next phase.

While rightly looking back and forward, we should
be somberly realistic about the present. The plight of
millions of Somalis is a calamity and an indictment.
The vast majority continue to suffer abject poverty,
displacement, insecurity and predatory corruption, with
little rule of law or respect for human rights. Somali
resilience is legendary, but even the most resilient may
buckle in the end. In all conscience, Somalia's leaders
and international partners need to do more rather than
less.

Delivering humanitarian and development progress
in the short term, especially given the impact of the
El Nifio effect, will be hard. OCHA is working flat-
out to ensure the right response. The year 2016 will
be one of heightened political tension - a bumpy,
adrenaline-fuelled ride. Al-Shabaab will do everything
it can to disrupt federalism and the electoral process.
Somalia's leaders need to reconcile competing demands
and strive to place national interests above personal or
community interests. International partners need to stay
the course, be united and respect Somali ownership, but
be crystal-clear on their expectation that Somalis need
to agree the rules for the 2016 electoral process and
then stick to them.

My final words are ones of thanks, not only to the
Security Council and the Secretary-General for giving
me the honour to serve in Somalia, and to my team, who
work tirelessly in austere and dangerous conditions, but
also to the President, the Prime Minister and the people
of Somalia for their hospitality and patience. I thank
the African Union for its constant partnership, and I
welcome the new Special Representative ofthe Chair of
the African Union, Ambassador Madeira.

My final thoughts are with the family and friends
of the seven United Nations colleagues murdered in the
line of duty in Somalia since 2013. The most fitting
tribute we can pay to them is to redouble our work for
peace. I salute and thank the whole United Nations
family in Somalia for its service, comradeship and
courage.

