The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.

We would first echo those delegations that spoke
before us in paying tribute to the late Ambassador
Vitaly Churkin on the second anniversary of his death.

I should like at the outset to convey our usual
thanks for the excellent work that Special Coordinator
Mladenov and his team are doing in the Middle East.
His briefing today, as on previous occasions, depicts
the reality of the lives of Israelis and Palestinians. We
also welcome and commend the clear-sighted briefing
by Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator.

We are meeting today once again, as we do monthly,
to address the Palestinian question, which for 71 years
has been debated at the United Nations. If that is a long
time for those of us sitting here today, it must seem
like an eternity for those who suffer and have suffered
through it. That is what causes hopelessness and despair
and generates frustration among the Palestinians to the
point of rioting against Israel, which always responds
disproportionately, although we also recognize that it
has a right to legitimate self-defence. This prevailing
trend dynamic has caused and continues to cause
tremendous damage to the parties and to sow hatred in
several places in the region.

A few weeks ago, we expressed our concern about
the unilateral decision of the Israeli Government not
to renew agreement on the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron (TIPH), based on the Oslo Accords
signed between the Israelis and the Palestinians. The
TIPH has engaged for over two decades in monitoring
and making the necessary efforts to maintain normal
living conditions in the city of Hebron, which gave a
sense of security to its Palestinian inhabitants. We hope
that the Israeli decision will be accompanied by further
measures to reassure the Council and the international
community about the living conditions of the residents
of Hebron and the entire West Bank, who have a right
to an atmosphere of respect, calm and tranquillity, in
accordance with international humanitarian law.

On the situation in Gaza, my delegation welcomes
the continued efforts of Mr. Mladenov's team, donors
and all partners who have been supporting various
initiatives on the ground to improve the life of that
Palestinian enclave. According to a series of reports,
the people lack jobs and have very limited access to
adequate services such as health care, education, water
and electricity, which has wreaked havoc on the lives
of almost 2 million of its inhabitants. In that regard,
we associate ourselves with the words of Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres, who spoke to the United
Nations Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People on 15 February in
Addis Ababa, where he urged Israel

"to lift restrictions on the movement of people and
goods, which also hamper the efforts of the United
Nations and other humanitarian agencies".

Similarly, we call on Palestinian groups, such as
Hamas and other extremist groups, to refrain from all
attacks and provocations, which contribute only to the
escalation of the conflict.

However, the main Palestinian factions must
understand the importance of their collaboration in
the management of the Gaza Strip, which in current
conditions will always pose a problem for the security
of Israel. To that end, we have called for the presence
of the Palestinian National Authority, which must do a
better job of safeguarding the socioeconomic situation
and strive to ensure a secure environment. It is therefore
necessary to fulfil the agreements and commitments
already made by Fatah and Hamas in October 2017.

The tension between Israelis and Palestinians,
apart from hindering the reopening of the stalled
negotiations between the parties, has also affected the
good relations that should exist between the countries of
the region, given the prevalence of other, related issues
that jeopardize regional stability. In that connection
and in view of the damage caused by this conflict, we
cannot doubt the threat that the Palestinian question
poses to international peace and security. Its potential
harm cannot be underestimated. The various activities
recently carried out by the parties, as mentioned by
Mr. Mladenov and Ms. Mueller, are precisely those
that the parties must refrain from carrying out as they
only exacerbate an already explosive situation. We
also ask countries with influence in the area to bring
pressure to bear so as to find ajust solution to this long-
standing problem.

Finally, I reiterate the position of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea in support of any initiative that
respects the resolutions of the United Nations and other
instruments in force that allude to the creation of two
States, based on the pre-l967 borders.

I new resume my functions as President of
the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on my list.

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at 11.15 am.
