Mr. Galaydh (Somalia): I should very much like
to thank the members of the Council and the other
representatives, who have been very generous and
warm in welcoming me and my delegation to this open
debate on Somalia. The very kind words and the ideas
on how best to help in bringing about lasting peace in
Somalia have been very uplifting. Now we know that
just about everyone in the Council is a friend of
Somalia, so if all of its members are going to be
reconstituted as friends of Somalia, I think that would
be most welcome.

I should like to address three or four points that
really have been central to the discussion. The first one
is the issue of the post-conflict peace-building mission.
We know that Somalia suffers from what is called the
Somali syndrome. It goes back to 1993. The people
who authored those events are the very same people
who are still the warlords, who are outside the Arta
process. They are the very same people whom we are
being urged to engage in dialogue. We would like to,
but we would very much like the Council to be aware
that what happened in October 1993 was not the doing
of the Somali people. It was not the doing of the
Transitional National Government or of anyone
associated with the Transitional National Government.
It was the work of the warlords. They are the ones who
are still hampering peace in Somalia. From what I have
heard today, people want to hear their ideas. If they had
any ideas about peace and reconciliation in this
country, they would have been forthcoming some time
in the last decade or more.

We are caught up in a vicious circle, because if,
supposedly, the security arrangements in Somalia and
Mogadishu are not sufficient and not adequate to allow
for the sending of United Nations personnel, then there
will be no chance of promoting peace, security and
stability in Somalia, because the donors will stay away.
There will not be any meaningful assistance for
reconstruction and development, and therefore we are
caught up in this Vicious circle.

I would like to submit to those who are a bit
nervous about the safety and security of United Nations
personnel - and we agree with them 100 per cent -
that we have to strike a balance between the safety and
security of a few United Nations personnel, important
as their lives are, and the destiny of a whole country.
Let me add that Somalia should not be judged any
differently from the way other countries have been, and
are being, judged.

Somalia, despite the Somali syndrome, is a
Member of the United Nations. It has been a member
of all of the regional and subregional organizations,
and all we ask is to be treated like the other countries
that have these post-conflict problems. The United
Nations has not abstained or shied away from sending
peace-building missions or peacekeeping missions to
Sierra Leone, to Liberia, to East Timor, to Kosovo, to
Bosnia - why, then, is Somalia being singled out for
the very stringent, all-embracing criteria of total safety
and security? This mystifies us.
What a good number of Council members have
suggested broadly, as a way around this impasse, is the
dispatch of a fact-finding mission to Mogadishu and to
Somalia. It is an important issue not only for us, the
Somali people, but also for the region and for
international peace and security. As the French
Ambassador said, it is not only a question of one
mission being sent at some stage; there is a need for a
frequent assessment of the security situation. Only then
will the Council be informed adequately.

I should like to comment briefly on the issue of
national reconciliation in Somalia. The Arta peace
process was the brainchild of President Ismail Omar
Guelleh. It has succeeded for one reason: because it
was different from the 12 others that preceded it. The
12 others were mainly tailor-made for the warlords, for
self-appointed characters who really did not have the
mandate to speak on behalf of the Somali people, or
their clans or sub-clans.

The Arta process was successful because it was a
Somali process. It was centred on the deliberations of
Somali civil society. There is no alternative to that.

I want to be very clear about this: there is no
other game in town. If anybody has any other ideas, we
would like to listen to them. It will not help to say, "We
are going to have an open-door policy. Every Somali is
entitled to be asked for his or her opinion". That is all
well and good, but Somalia has gone through 10 long
years, and the international community has been trying
desperately to impose a solution on us. It will not work -
period. There is no alternative. I suggest that members
of this Council accept the facts on the ground: no
warlord or group of warlords can bring peace and
stability to Somalia. No couple of clan elders, or
people with fancy resumes, can bring about peace and
reconciliation in Somalia. The Somali people have
spoken. They gathered in Arta 4 they spent six months
there. That is the only game in town.

If there are those who think they can impose a
solution on Somalia, they had better think twice,
because that would be a futile exercise. If there are
those who think that, because they have long borders
with Somalia, a long, troubled history with Somalia or
Vital national interests in Somalia, they are guaranteed
an entry into the Somali story and a role in determining
its outcome, they can take their show elsewhere. That
will not work in Somalia.

We welcome the friends of Somalia. We welcome
the help of the international community, because we
have been unable to measure up to this historic task.
We have inflicted deep wounds on ourselves. We lost
almost two generations, and we have no guarantee that
we can even save the generation or two to come. We
welcome the friends of Somalia. We welcome any
positive, constructive suggestions to help us. You, Mr.
President, have afforded us this opportunity to share
with you our ideas, concerns and apprehensions. We
feel that this Council should be treated more
respectfully in terms of being given supposed facts
produced by so-called experts.

In a great example of guilt by association, the
representative of a Member of the United Nations, our
neighbour Ethiopia, said that we knew that Al Qaeda
had operated in Somalia and, on top of that, that there
were even components of the TNG that were extremist -
that is, they were in bed with Al Qaeda. Those are very
serious allegations. Does Ethiopia have the facts? We
heard all of these innuendoes. We heard all the self-
serving assertions. We would like to see the facts. We
will not shy away from discharging our responsibilities
to our own people and to the international community.
We heard of ships being sent from landlocked
Afghanistan to Somali ports bringing arms and the Al
Qaeda leadership. Those are preposterous assertions.
They do not help our case.

I do not want to engage in mud-slinging in this
Council; I feel that that would not be appropriate. But I
would be less than responsible ifI did not respond to
the assertions that the TNG is in bed with Al Qaeda
and fundamentalists. We would like to do everything
possible to shoulder our responsibility in accordance
with resolution 1373 (2001). We want to do it, not to
help anybody else, but in our own self-defence - we
are not doing anybody a favour. And if we have to do it
with our bare hands, we will do so. But we would like
the international community to be better informed.
Those who are pretending to be in the know - the
supposed cognoscenti - are not offering a way out of
this difficulty, this global menace. And pointing fingers
at Member States for self-serving purposes will not
help anybody. It will not help this Council.

The call for humanitarian assistance to the
blighted Somalis is most welcome. The best foreign aid
for Somalis would be rainfall, but that has not been
forthcoming for almost two or three seasons. We are
not exaggerating; the situation is very difficult.
Coupled with that is the fact that the great majority of
the Somali people are pastoralists and rely on
livestock, and we cannot export the livestock because
of the fear of Rift Valley fever. This combination of
drought and the inability to export livestock has been
very damaging to the entire livelihood of a large
percentage of the Somali people.

I would like to say one or two words about the
issue of economic and humanitarian assistance, and
what has been given to Somalia. According to the
General Assembly's humanitarian assistance report,
Somalia has supposedly received about $100 million in
the past 12 months. More than $50 million has
supposedly been provided by United Nations agencies.
Security is the most important issue for the country and
for the Somali people, yet we are told that less than $1
million has been provided for security - for police
training, for salaries or even for food for the police and
security forces. We find that a little baffling, because if
security is the key to bringing about peace and stability
to Somalia, and if the international community has given
$100 million, we would have thought that at least a good
part of it would have been expended on security - on
the police force, or on information-gathering, for
example, to combat international terrorism. That is
what has been done in the past 12 months.

In all honesty, we do not expect much to come
from that source. We have been pushing for that, and in
all of our discussions with donors and with the United
Nations we have always said that the best way to help
us is to help establish the police and security forces.
Yet we have not received much, as indicated in the
report to which I referred earlier.

How we can shoulder our responsibility in
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001)? I have had
some discussions with the Ambassadors of the United
Kingdom, France and Russia. We would like to have
bilateral discussions. If the European Union, or
countries acting bilaterally, or the United Nations can
help us with that, that is where our first priority lies.

Our second priority is in the area of national
reconciliation. Yes, the people we are dealing with are
warlords. We are dealing with people who have no idea
what is to be done for Somalia and who have no vision
for Somalia. Nonetheless, we would like to sit down
with them, but nobody can impose a solution on us.

As for what we have received in the form of
assistance from a neighbour, there are, despite the
allegations, no arms coming by ship or by air; the only
arms that are coming to Somalia are coming by truck,
and they are coming from one source. It is not only
small arms, unfortunately. It hurts me to say this:
landmines are being planted in urban areas. If that is
the gift; the signature, of a friend, it might be an
oxymoron. If friends are for that, it hurts. Those
weapons kill indiscriminately, mostly civilians.
I would like to conclude by thanking you very
much, Mr. President, for affording us this opportunity.
This has enabled us to know who has good will for
Somalia, who are the friends of Somalia and who are
not the friends of Somalia.

