Mr. De Aguiar Patriota: I wish to highlight some
specific elements from the report that I believe deserve
the particular attention of the Security Council.

First, the Commission's work over the past
year has once again confirmed that its potential as a
platform leveraging the political weight of its members
in support of peace consolidation should be further
utilized. An example of how the Commission can
increasingly use its political strength was the collective
and determined position it took in the early stages of
the Ebola outbreak. The Commission helped spur the
international community and other parts of the United
Nations system to focus on the risk posed by the crisis
to the peacebuilding gains in the three most affected
countries. The terms of reference of the United Nations-
led Ebola-recovery initiatives have therefore included
areas identified by the Commission that deserve special
attention in the overall recovery strategies and support
programmes.

Secondly, the Commission is uniquely placed
to promote greater harmony among the subregional,
regional and international dimensions of post-conflict
response. One of the Commission's key priority areas
in 2014 was therefore to actively engage with its
African members and to establish deep and dynamic
partnerships with Africa's regional and subregional
organizations. Our experience from Guinea-Bissau to
Burundi and the Central African Republic confirms
that greater regional and subregional coherence is a key
factor in support of peacebuilding-related efforts. As
we continue to integrate the regional and subregional
perspectives into the work of the Commission, we
will further strengthen the relevance and weight of its
country-specific engagement.

Thirdly, in 2014 the Peacebuilding Commission
convened its first-ever annual session with a View to
exploring where broader intergovernmental policy
development is necessary to help countries reduce the
risk of conflict.

As the Commission continued to explore various
avenues for predictable financing for peacebuilding, its
focus on domestic resource mobilization and the fight
against illicit financial flows was a critical step towards
identifying possible policy areas requiring Member
States' individual and collective action. The challenge
posed by illicit financial flows and similar systemic
gaps in intergovernmental policy related to financing
for peacebuilding highlights the interdependence
among security, institutional and socioeconomic
initiatives in the promotion of peace.

This was a common point made during the second
annual session, which took place two days ago and
focused on the challenges for securing predictable
financing for peacebuilding. We thank the Swedish
Foreign Minister for her presence at the closing
ceremony of that session. The Commission will
continue to position itself to promote further coherence
and synergy among policies and actions across the
political, security and developmental dimensions of
peace consolidation.

Fourthly, the gender dimension of peacebuilding
deserves our continuing attention and unwavering
commitment. While women endure the tragic
consequences of violent conflicts, they are also key
agents for societal transformation in post-conflict
societies. The special event that the Commission hosted
in collaboration with UN-Women in September 2014
shed light on local peacebuilding initiatives led by
women in diverse contexts. This year, the Commission
will further explore practical ways of mainstreaming
the gender dimension into its country-specific
engagements.
Fifthly, defining and improving the nature and
scope of its advisory function to the Security Council
and the General Assembly continued to be the
Commission's main objective in 2014. The Commission
is uniquely positioned to complement their work by
ensuring that inclusive socioeconomic development
contributes to peace and security and reduces the risk
of the emergence of violent conflict or relapse into
it. The advisory function for both principal organs
should help to strengthen the integrated and long-
term commitment of the United Nations and other
international and regional actors to countries emerging
from conflict, something that I stressed in several
statements I made on behalf of the Commission at
various Security Council briefings and debates in 2014.
In that connection, I believe the Council can draw more
practically and systematically on the Commission's
advice, particularly when mandates of missions are
being revisited in the context of changing priorities or
of drawdown and transition. That crucial aspect of the
Commission's advisory role deserves to be discussed
during the informal interactive dialogue to be held later
this afternoon under your guidance, Mr. President.

The members of the Commission that are also
members of the Security Council, such as Malaysia
and Chile, as well as the five permanent members
that are also permanent members of the Peacebuilding
Commission, are in a unique position to provide
leadership, guidance and sustained commitment in
order to further deepen and strengthen this advisory
function.

Sixthly and finally, the section of the report on the
conclusions and forward agenda charts the course of
action for the Commission in 2015. The forward agenda
reflects the Commission's determination to follow up
on key thematic and country-specific approaches that
were initiated in 2014, thus ensuring continuity in focus
and consistency in approach.

Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 65/7 and

Security Council resolution 1947 (2010), the Commission
has capitalized on the experience accumulated from its
mandated annual reporting to the General Assembly
and the Security Council on progress made in taking
forward relevant recommendations from the 2010
review of the peacebuilding architecture and initiated
advance preparation for the second five-year review,
called for by both principal organs, to be conducted
this year.

The purpose of the advance preparation was to
foster broader ownership of the review among Member
States through inclusive and extensive consultations
on the objectives, scope, methodology and modalities
for conducting the review. The advance preparation
reflected agreement among Member States that the
challenges facing the countries emerging from conflict
should be central to the 2015 review and thus proposed
that the review be grounded in specific country studies.

A commitment to help States avoid relapse into
conflict was the motivation for the creation in 2005
of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the Peacebuilding Fund. Member
States agreed that the 2015 review needed to take that
original motivation as its point of departure. The terms
of reference for the review were initially developed by
and consulted within the Commission and subsequently
endorsed by the General Assembly and the Security
Council. They should help identify areas of progress
and remaining gaps in international assistance to
countries emerging from conflict.

The two-stage design of the review, by which
an advisory group of experts would undertake
country studies and propose actionable and practical
recommendations for consideration by the General
Assembly and the Security Council, would hopefully
ensure that the two principal organs are able to take an
informed decision on the future of the United Nations
broader peacebuilding architecture. That architecture
includes the three components established in 2005, as
well as other relevant United Nations operational entities
that contribute to building lasting and sustainable
peace through a variety of political and programmatic
tools. We are looking forward to the imminent release
of the report of the advisory group of experts, under
the able chairmanship of former Ambassador Gert
Rosenthal of Guatemala, and to the initiation of the
intergovernmental stage of the review.

I wish to conclude this briefing by acknowledging
the role of the Peacebuilding Support Office, of
Assistant Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-
Taranco and his predecessor, Judy Cheng-Hopkins,
and their team in support of the Commission's work
and activities in 2014. We will continue to count
on the Office's support as we seek to pursue the
Commission's objectives, as well as on its competent
management of the Peacebuilding Fund. Through the
work undertaken by the Commission and the Fund, the
synergy and complementarity between the political and
programmatic dimensions of peacebuilding can bring
greater effectiveness to our investment in the country
concerned.

The path to healing the scars caused by war and
rebuilding the institutions that deliver security, justice,
basic services and economic opportunity and that protect
fundamental rights is long and fraught with enormous
challenges. I am convinced that the efforts of the United
Nations in that area should remain people-centred. We
must listen actively to the voices of the people who are
the most affected by Violent conflicts. We must learn
from and be guided by their experiences and needs. I
believe that in 2015, under the stewardship of Sweden
and with the unwavering commitment of its member
States, the Peacebuilding Commission can be the locus
of such partnerships. I also hope that the ongoing
review will generate practical recommendations and
the requisite political momentum to adapt and orient
the Commission to that end.

