Mr. Nguyen Thanh Chau (Viet Nam): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity
to speak, for the first time before the Council, about the
deplorable violent outbreaks that have taken place in
the Middle East.

First of all, I should like to extend my warm
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I am
confident that, given your diplomatic skills and
wisdom, the work of the Council will be brought to a
productive conclusion. I also wish to extend my
appreciation to your predecessor, the Ambassador of
Mali, for all the efforts he made during his presidency
during the month of September. I also wish to
congratulate all the other members of the Council.

We are deeply shocked and horrified by the
unjustified killings of innocent people by the Israeli
troops, which ushered in a new cycle of violence and
excessive use of force in the eastern part of Jerusalem.
Those tragic events posed a serious threat to the fragile
peace, tirelessly worked out in the Middle East, and
further testified to the need for more painstaking
efforts to be made by all the parties concerned, so that
talks can again get under way and the peace process be
restarted.

We extend our heartfelt condolences to the
families of those who died or were wounded in the
recent violence. We urge all parties to act with utmost
responsibility and restraint and to refrain from any acts
of a provocative nature, which would surely complicate
the already volatile situation.

Our position on the Middle East is clear: we have
consistently expressed our strong support for the
peaceful settlement of the Palestinian question. We
wish to reiterate our unreserved and unswerving
support for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including the right to establish an independent
State with Jerusalem as its capital, and the right of the
Palestinian refugees to return to their homeland, as set
out in the Hanoi Declaration adopted by the United
Nations conference on the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, held in Hanoi, Viet Nam, in March
2000.

We call on both parties to the conflict to make all
efforts to overcome the current obstacles and persevere
in their pursuit of a just and lasting solution to the
conflict. We firmly believe that the only possible way
to restore peace in the region is through a solution
based on Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, on the principle of land for peace and on
various international agreements signed by the parties
concerned.

We welcome the continuing efforts of all the
parties concerned, inside and outside the Middle East,
to restore the peace process. We strongly believe that
efforts for peace will prevail and that the Palestinian
people will soon have the opportunity to live in
peace - a peace that they deserve and for which they
have courageously fought for so long.

