Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Since this is Ukraine's
first statement in the Chamber after we completed our
two-year term as an elected member of the Security
Council, I would like to take this opportunity to extend
sincere congratulations to the six new members of the
Council on a successful start to their work.

I would also like to congratulate you, Sir, and
wish you good luck in your presidency. We thank you
for convening today's debate on such an important
subject - the Council's working methods. The last
time that the United Nations membership had a chance
to engage in such a discussion was in July 2016 (see S/PV.7740). We are also grateful to Mr. Martin for his
outstanding briefing today.

I would like to pay tribute to the dedication and
hard work of the Japanese delegation, which steered
negotiations on updating presidential note S/2010/507
and on drafting presidential note S/2016/619, regarding
the selection of Chairs of the Security Council's
subsidiary bodies. The new document S/2017/507 is a
significant achievement, aimed at further streamlining
the Council's practices. We are also pleased that several
okaraine's priorities are reflected in it, including those
on making the Council's field visits more transparent.
What is required now is meaningful follow-up, in
particular the proper implementation of the relevant
provisions for the organization of visits, as well as due
preparation of reports following their conclusion.

Ukraine has always been among the proponents of
a more transparent Council. Over the past two years,
we did our best to contribute to further opening up this
body's activities to the outside world and to enhancing
the role of elected members. We conducted our
presidency exactly one year ago in that spirit of openness
to dialogue and accessibility for all United Nations
Member States. We clearly supported convening open
Council meetings whenever possible. We underscored
that closed consultations should be the exception rather
than the rule. We proceeded from the understanding
that if consultations are held, the outside world deserves
to know what was discussed. We therefore endeavoured
to summarize the respective discussions for further
presentation at the media stakeout. It is encouraging
to see that that trend of greater openness is receiving
increasing support among Council members.

We approached our duties as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013), concerning the Central African Republic, and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, in the same way.
We invited civil society representatives to informal
briefings. We convened Committee meetings with
the participation of regional States. My delegation
also initiated joint informal consultations with other
committees to ensure a holistic approach to addressing
issues such as the cross-border spread of armed groups
and illegal arms transfers.

We also remain staunch supporters of the practice
of formal monthly wrap-up sessions, which we see as
an important element of the proper implementation
of presidential note 507. We therefore introduced the
practice of seeking the input ofMember States on issues
which they would like Council members to consider.
In the same vein, we are convinced that the timely
issuance of monthly assessments is not something to
be overlooked, since such assessments constitute a
valuable source for preparing annual reports.

All of this means that the working methods of
the Council are what Council members do every day.
Nothing is set in stone and positive change is possible
and is taking place, even if at a slower rate than desired.

We all have seen the Council's successful political
intervention in the post-conflict electoral crisis in The
Gambia. That achievement testifies to the Council's
potential in the area of conflict prevention. We hope
that preventive diplomacy will gradually become one
of standard marks of the Council's work.

Currently, the question of the use of the veto remains
one of the most divisive issues. Ukraine belongs to the
group of States that support both the code of conduct
regarding Security Council action in response to
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes and
the French-Mexican initiative on suspending the use of
the veto in cases of mass atrocities.

While we are fully aware that a Council without the
veto is, unfortunately, a distant and uncertain reality, we
believe that responsible members of the international
community should be able to pledge not to resort to the
veto when considering cases that have all the hallmarks
of crimes against humanity and mass atrocities. Yet the
past few years will be recorded in history as the time
when repeated vetoes, primarily by Russia, stained the
Council's reputation to a point almost beyond repair.

However, it is never too late to stop abusing the
veto right. Fully aware of the value of short statements,
I will conclude with a remark that any effort to increase
the openness and transparency of the Council will be
warmly welcomed and strongly supported by the wider
United Nations membership, including Ukraine.

