Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to welcome
Minister Eamon Gilmore of Ireland to the Security
Council. I congratulate him on his assumption of the
functions of Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
thank him for the very informative briefing outlining
the Irish priorities for the OSCE in 2012.

At the outset, let me assure the Minister that
Portugal fully supports his efforts to promote the
OSCE agenda and acquis in order to achieve the
further strengthening of its legacy of a common,
comprehensive, cooperative and indivisible concept of
security. In fact, the outcome of the Vilnius Ministerial
Council showed us that the OSCE's greatest strength
and achievement - its comprehensive concept of
security - cannot be taken for granted. It has to be
defended and further developed.

That legacy is based on the understanding that
global and regional security encompasses a large range
of issues, which the OSCE has traditionally grouped
into three dimensions, namely, the political-military,
economic-environmental and human dimensions. We
therefore welcome the Chairperson-in-Office's
intention to promote progress across all areas of OSCE
activities in a balanced manner, thus further expanding
the excellent work done by his predecessor, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania.

As an OSCE participant, Portugal attaches special
importance to the advancement of close cooperation
between the OSCE and other international
organizations, in particular the valuable partnership
being developed with the United Nations in addressing
security challenges. In that context, I will refer briefly
to the Irish programme of work for the OSCE, which is
also relevant to further cooperation between our two
organizations.

First, concerning the human dimension - a
crucial component of the OSCE's comprehensive
concept of security - we welcome the Chairperson-in-
Office's aim to prioritize such issues, in particular
when international commitments are not being met,
working to achieve full respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, democratic institutions and the
rule of law.
The Council has recently been confronted with
situations where human rights and fundamental
freedoms were systematically being violated, be it in
Libya or, more recently, Syria, where the regime in
Damascus is pursuing, unabated, the violent repression
ofits own people.

We also agree that freedom of expression and
freedom of the media apply to all forms and means
through which those rights are exercised, specifically
where the Internet or other digital vehicles are
concerned. We support the proposal of the
Chairperson-in-Office to focus on racism,
discrimination and intolerance, in particular in the
context of sports events, bearing in mind this year's
European championships in Poland and Ukraine and
Olympic Games in the United Kingdom.

Secondly, Portugal believes that it is of particular
importance to take stock of where we stand in terms of
collective efforts to enhance arms control, prevent and
resolve conflicts, and ensure stability and security at
the regional and global levels. We commend the OSCE
on updating the Vienna Document last year, and
sincerely hope that the impasse in the field of
conventional forces in Europe will be solved in the
near future.

Under that political-military dimension, we
consider it crucial to also address transnational threats,
such as terrorism, the trafficking in persons, drugs,
organized crime and cyber threats, including
cybercrime, as outlined in the Chairperson-in-Office's
programme.

Thirdly, Portugal is very concerned about the
threat to security that protracted and unresolved
conflicts in the OSCE area continue to present. That is
an area with great potential for further cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE. We
welcome the substantial decision taken in Vilnius last
December on the conflict cycle, aimed at enhancing the
OSCE capacity to prevent and to respond to conflicts.
We are encouraged by the nomination of two Special
Representatives of the Chairperson-in-Office to
Transdniestria and the South Caucasus.

Finally, I would like to reaffirm Portugal's
confidence in the Irish leadership and reiterate our full
support to the OSCE's Chairperson-in-Office in its
efforts to fulfil the extremely demanding tasks that lay
ahead, namely, in upholding and promoting the
OSCE'S wide acquis.
