Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset, on behalf of Lebanon, to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your friendly country on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. Let me also express our sincerest appreciation
to the delegation of the Russian Federation for its
presidency of the Council last month.

We meet today to discuss the tenth report of the
International Independent Investigation Commission on
the crime of the assassination of former Prime Minister
Rafiq Hariri and his companions. Since the last report
of the Commission, two new crimes have been
perpetrated, the first targeting General Francois al-Hajj
and the second, Major Wissam Eid. They were both
martyred, along with a new number of civilian victims.

Thus the number of crimes for which the
International Commission is providing technical
assistance to the Lebanese authorities in their
investigation has reached 20. They are all acts of
terrorism aimed at destabilizing Lebanon through the
targeting of free thinkers and politicians, as well as
leaders of both the military and security
establishments. On top of this, many innocent people
in the safe havens of their homes and places of work
have been targeted.

That series of cowardly, terrorist attacks has
resulted in the deaths of 61 people and the wounding of
no less than 494 others. We must also recall here that
the cowardly hand of terrorism has also reached out
targeted elements of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon in southern Lebanon, as well as members
of the diplomatic corps accredited to Lebanon.

Lebanon is making many sacrifices for its
freedom. They are only matched by our determination

and by the Council's determination, through the
International Commission, to find out the truth, to find
out who plotted, participated in and perpetrated such
crimes. There are many sacrifices that Lebanon is
making for its freedom. They are only matched by our
insistence, and the Council's, on setting up the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon with an international character to
ensure that there will be no impunity for the
perpetrators.

Our search for truth has never been for the sake
of revenge. We have sought the truth in order to help
our people heal the wounds caused by this series of
terrorist attacks. We are on a path that you,
Mr. President, know more than any other, as your great
country, South Africa, has had a leading experience,
together with Bishop Desmond Tutu, in stressing the
importance of truth in overcoming the pains that your
people have suffered. As truth, as former President
Nelson Mandela said, helped your country to find
common understanding of its path, we also hope that
truth will help us reach a common understanding of
this chapter in the history of our country.

Our seeking to set up the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon, a tribunal with an international character, has
always sought justice in order to deter terrorists from
perpetrating their crimes in order to restore stability
and security to our country and to restore a sense of
civility and safety to our people.

I have listened very carefully to the statement
made by Commissioner Daniel Bellemare. On behalf of
the Government of Lebanon, I should like to reiterate
our congratulations to him on his assumption of office.
Allow me also to express our sincere appreciation of
his sense of leadership and the great professionalism he
has demonstrated since taking over the Commission at
the beginning of this year. I should also like to convey
our most heartfelt thanks to all of those working in the
Commission for their excellent work. With regard to
the substance of Mr. Bellemare's statement and the
Commission's tenth report, which has now been
transmitted to the Council, I should like to make the
following observations on behalf of my delegation.

First, we pay tribute to the Commission, in the
person of its Commissioner and members, for carrying
out their work in difficult security conditions and for
the success they have achieved in more than
doubling - from 123 to 256 - the number of the
Commission's requests for assistance to Lebanon and
5
other States. We also welcome the Commission's
flexibility with regard to those requests for assistance,
as well as for seeking assistance from the largest
number of international forensic laboratories in order
to achieve results as soon as possible.

Secondly, we welcome the concrete results
achieved by the Commission on the basis of the
evidence it continues to collect, in particular as that has
enabled the Commission to ascertain that the
assassination of former Prime Minister Hariri was
carried out by a criminal network, that some parts of
that network are linked to a number of other crimes
covered by the Commission's mandate, that that
network was in place prior to Prime Minister Hariri's
assassination and that elements of the network are still
in place and continue to operate.

Thirdiy, we would like to draw the Council's
attention to the fact that the Commission is continuing
to cooperate with Lebanese judicial authorities ~
whether with regard to exchanges of information, the
holding of meetings, evaluating evidence or preparing
for future stages of the current investigation. We would
also like to reiterate the commitment of the
Government of Lebanon to ensuring full protection for
the headquarters and members of the Commission.

Fourthly, having read last year's report of the
Secretary-General to the Security Council
(8/2007/525) on the important progress made in the
steps to establish the Special Tribunal for Lebanon -
including the signing of the headquarters agreement,
the selection of judges, the appointment of the
Registrar, the establishment of the administration and
the collection of a large number of necessary financial
contributions - we would like to welcome the
reference in Mr. Bellemare's report regarding the
completion of the necessary steps for the transitional
period prior to the establishment of the Tribunal and
for the transfer of evidence and other judicial matters.
The delegation of Lebanon takes note of
Mr. Bellemare's request that the Commission's mandate
be renewed. Let me assure the Council that my
Government will look most favourably on the matter.

