Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): 1 thank you very much,
Mr. President, for the initiative of organizing this open
debate on youth, peace and security today to further
discuss the positive role that young people can play in
conflict and post-conflict settings and how the Security
Council can help young people build safer and more
peaceful societies. I would like to especially commend
you, Sir, for your leadership during this month. It is
obviously no coincidence that, shortly after last week's
open debate on women and peace and security relating
to sexual exploitation and abuse (see S/PV.8234), we are
today focusing on an issue that is of no less importance,
namely, the role of youth. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, as well as the others who briefed the
Council and enriched its deliberations this morning on
this important issue.

I cannot agree more with my colleague from
Pakistan, who just spoke before me, when she said that
the youth are agents of change. I would add too that
we should also view them as ambassadors of change,
or drivers of change, who really deserve our close
attention, including in the area of peace and security.

In that context, I recall resolution 2250 (2015), of
9 December 2015, which is a milestone document in
our efforts to focus our attention increasingly on the
issue of youth, peace and security. It was the first to
recognize the important and positive role that young
women and men play in the maintenance and promotion
of international peace and security, countering violent
extremism and supporting peacebuilding efforts. Steps
that have been undertaken based on resolution 2250
(2015) aim at strengthening youth-centred approaches
and promoting the involvement of young people in
preventing violence, countering violent extremism,
transitioning from conflicts and building peace in
their communities.

Young people under the age of 25 today make up the
majority of the population in many fragile and conflict-
affected societies. They represent over one third of
populations displaced by conflicts and disasters, and
that is why we all have to work together to promote
the full implementation of resolution 2250 (2015). In
that regard, my delegation welcomes and supports the
commitment of the Security Council to intensifying its
focus on issues relevant to the topic of young people,
peace and security within the broader context of
sustaining peace and preventing conflict.

Resolution 2250 (2015) also requested that
the Secretary-General carry out a progress study
on young people's positive contributions to peace
processes and conflict resolution. We believe that the
recommendations set out in the implementation report
presented to the Council today (see S/2018/86) are
an important contribution to an evolving framework
for action within which Member States, the United
Nations, civil society and other relevant stakeholders
could work even closer together with young people
towards achieving peaceful and inclusive societies. My
delegation encourages the Security Council to further
consider the critical issues and areas for intervention
recommended by the study, which fall within the scope
of its responsibility to bolster concrete and specific
actions for a greater role for young people to play in
strengthening peace and security.

Too often, public grievances and violence are driven
by the politics of exclusion, which can result from an
unrepresentative or abusive security sector - or by the
latter's failure to protect citizens from security threats
and human rights abuses. Exposure to such destabilizing
factors and insecurity can have a profound effect on
the future of young people and their relationship with
justice and the rule of law. I am highlighting the issue
of security sector reform because, in only a few minutes
from now, at 3 p.m., South Africa and Slovakia, as
co-Chairs of the Group of Friends of Security Sector
Reform, will host a high-level round table focused on
the issue of security sector reform and sustaining piece,
which is a contribution to this week's ongoing efforts
related to peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We will
certainly also focus our attention on the role of youth
in the context of the security sector and in the wider
context of sustaining peace.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the need
to raise greater awareness and understanding among
young people of the security sector and its work and
responsibilities, as well as the key challenges and threats
that security services may face, not least because young
people often are also at the core of security sector
personnel and those who serve the security sector and
the rest of the population. Young people must assume
an active role in the restoration of justice and security
as a priority in post-conflict peacebuilding. Creating
an enabling environment and opportunities for young
people throughout those processes in a participatory
and engaging manner in public life and facilitating their
access to education and employment remain the best
strategy to decrease the risk of violence and increase
human security in the long run.

