Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, allow me at the outset to
congratulate your friendly country for chairing the
work of the Security Council this month. We also
would like to express our deep gratitude for the efforts
of the Permanent Representative of Panama and the
members of his delegation last month. I also wish to
express my deep pleasure at seeing the Secretary-
General participating with us in the meeting this
morning.

The United Nations can no longer deal with the
Arab-Israeli conflict and the Palestinian question on a
3
business-as-usual basis. The Security Council's
inability to carry out its obligations cannot be allowed
to lead to catastrophic results for our region and its
peoples. The United Nations must therefore ensure the
implementation of the resolutions it has adopted since
its inception, denouncing Israel's occupation of Arab
territories, violations of human rights and inhumane
practices in contravention of international humanitarian
law and the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention.

No preventive diplomacy can succeed unless it
addresses the core issues of our region - the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories in Palestine, the Golan
and southern Lebanon - thereby allowing a just and
comprehensive solution based on the resolutions of
international legitimacy, specifically resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), and the Arab peace initiative to
be reached. The direct or indirect support of some
parties for the ongoing Israeli occupation of Arab
territories contravenes the principles and foundations
of international law at the expense of the interests of
Arabs and Palestinians. It sends the wrong message to
Israel that its tactics of occupation, aggression,
provocative settlement activities and the forcible
annexation of territories enjoy the backing of its
supporters. Those parties would do better to urge Israel
to fulfil the requirements of peace, which is in the
interests of all parties, including those who offer blind
support to Israel. The absence of stability in the
Middle East and the ensuing continued aggression and
escalation will inevitably harm the interests of those
parties.

Israeli actions in the occupied Arab territories -
including killing, oppression, arrests, deportation, the
demolition of homes and the expropriation of
territories - can only be described as war crimes,
genocide and a holocaust against the Palestinian
people. Israel continues to engage in targeted killings,
collective punishment and daily massacres of the
Palestinian people, especially in the Gaza Strip. The
victims, including women and children, number in the
thousands. Israel continues to close the border
crossings and to make the Gaza Strip the world's
largest prison. It continues to deprive the inhabitants of
that territory of the basic necessities and to prevent
humanitarian assistance, including United Nations aid,
from reaching them. Indeed, Israel is exercising its
right of self-defence against electricity, water,
medicine and food.
All such practices constitute collective
punishment and grave violations of international
humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva Convention.
They reaffirm once again the fact that Israel is an
outlaw State that blatantly flouts international norms,
seeks to make the situation explosive, and obstructs
any fair, comprehensive and just settlement of the
conflict.

The situation in the West Bank is no better than
that in Gaza, as reaffirmed by many senior
international observers, including Alvaro de Soto, Jean
Ziegler, John Dugard and, most recently, the United
Nations Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. John Holmes, during his briefing to the
Council last month, in which he noted Israel's ongoing
construction of the separation wall in the face of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
and its continued expansion of settlements, arrests and
other actions that are well known to all and have made
the lives of Palestinians into a living hell and increased
their suffering. The Security Council's inability in
recent weeks to adopt a resolution calling for an end to
those crimes and Israeli violations is destroying
whatever remains of its credibility.

Despite the passage of 40 years since the Israeli
occupation of the Syrian Golan began, Israel continues
to refuse to return the occupied territory to its
motherland, Syria, and to implement the resolutions of
international legitimacy, especially resolution 497
(1981). Israel's practices have violated all legal and
moral norms in the occupied Syrian Golan, where it
pursues a policy of terrorizing and oppressing Syrian
citizens and sending them to prisons and detention
centres, where some have remained for over 30 years
under no legal basis and in potentially lethal
circumstances as the occupying authorities continue to
ignore their medical needs. In that regard we make
specific note of our citizen Bishr al-Maqt. Our
Government has pleaded with the Secretary-General
and the International Committee of the Red Cross to
save his life. In that context, we ask the United Nations
and the Security Council to pressure Israel to release
those prisoners, including the Syrian journalist Ata
Farahat, who was arrested by Israel because of his
nationalist journalistic work.

Israel, the occupying Power, continues to prevent
the residents of the Syrian Golan from visiting their
families and relatives in Syria, their homeland. Israel's
policies extend to the very livelihoods of our children
in the Golan, making life even more difficult for them.
That is quite evident in its policy of uprooting fruit
trees, including not least the uprooting of 370 trees of
our citizen Majed Fadel-Allah Abou-Awad on
23 February 2008. We informed the members of the
Security Council of the details of that most recent
Israeli aggression in our letter of 6 March.

There is no doubt that Israel's escalation against
the Palestinian people, its forthcoming manoeuvres in
the occupied Syrian Golan, its troops massing along
the Lebanese border, its intensified settlement activities
in occupied Jerusalem, its ongoing construction of the
separation wall and assassinations of Palestinians will
make the situation in the Middle East, the Arab-Israeli
conflict and the question of Palestine priorities on the
agenda of the Arab summit shortly to be held in
Damascus. The Israeli escalation is intended to have
negative repercussions for the summit and to poison
the regional atmosphere. Instead of reaching out for the
Arab hand extended in peace, Israel has already begun
to provoke the capitals of the area, just as it did during
the Beirut summit of 2002, when it carried out the
Jenin massacre only a few hours after the adoption of
the Arab peace initiative.

The upcoming summit meeting to be held in
Damascus therefore takes on added significance. The
meeting will be an opportunity for Arab leaders to
discuss and coordinate their positions. It will be a
summit meeting of Arab solidarity to unify Arab
perspectives and positions in the face of those Israeli
challenges. It will therefore be an especially
responsible summit meeting.

Syria has made a strategic choice for a just and
comprehensive peace based on the well-known terms
of reference for peace and decisions of international
legitimacy. That means the return of all occupied Arab
territories, including occupied Syrian Golan, to the 4
June 1967 lines, as well as the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its
capital. The ongoing occupation is a contradiction of
peace, which by definition requires mobilizing all the
necessary means to end the occupation. The question
still before us is this: if the Arab hand that has been
extended in peace is not met with a hand extended in
peace from the other side, what reason can there be for
continuing to extend that Arab hand?
Documenting the terrorism carried out by Israel
would require an archive and an entire museum

specializing in shedding light on Israel's war crimes
and acts of annihilation and ethnic cleansing during its
bloody history against Palestinians, Syrians, Lebanese,
Egyptians, Jordanians and others. It is astonishing that
those who talk about their suffering in the Nazi
Holocaust also publicly state their desire to inflict a
new holocaust on the Palestinian people - this time,
one of Israel's making.

We are not the only ones to say that the Israeli
State commits war crimes and crimes of annihilation
against Palestinians. Well-known Western officials also
share that opinion, including senior international
officials of the United Nations itself. Many of them
have testified before the Security Council. Former
United States President Jimmy Carter has not been the
only one to say that Israel practices racial segregation
against Palestinians. Before him, Bishop Desmond
Tutu, who personally experienced racism, and Special
Rapporteurs Jean Ziegler and John Dugard made
similar statements.

Israel has the darkest record of violations and
attacks against international peacekeeping forces in our
region. Its aggression and attacks have been described
in the Security Council as deliberate by former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan. Israel is the only
country in the world with a policy of targeted killing.
Moreover, in the budget adopted annually by the
Knesset, Israel dedicates funds for a policy that has
been internationally condemned. Since its
establishment in 1948, Israel has kept that item secret.
However, since 2000 Israel has made those
appropriations public.

Over time, Israel has violated every border and
carried out terrorist operations outside its own
territory - beginning in Tunisia and then moving on to
Beirut, Cyprus, Iraq and every European capital. The
statement by the Israeli representative, which included
accusations against my country, was truly ironic, for he
completely overlooked his country's official policy of
terrorism. Israel introduced that policy to the region
even before it was established in Palestine in 1948.
Everyone is aware that terrorist groups such as the
Stern Gang, the Irgun and the Hagganah killed tens of
thousands of Palestinians and forced the displacement
of millions from their land. They were also responsible
for the assassination in Jerusalem of United Nations
envoy Count Bernadette because his conscience drove
him to request a review of the resolution dividing
Palestine into two States.

Israel carried out the first act of air piracy in
modern history, when it hijacked a Syrian civilian
airliner in 1954. In Beirut in 1968, Israel carried out
political assassinations of unarmed civilian Palestinian
intellectuals. In the 1980s Israel placed bombs in the
cars of Palestinian mayors. Israel's aggressive
behaviour in the region has led to the establishment of
no fewer than five peacekeeping operations. Israel
cooperated with the racist apartheid system in South
Africa due to the similarities between that regime's
doctrine and Israel's policy of ethnic cleansing and
racial segregation in occupied Arab territories. Yet
more surprising and strange is the fact that Israel
bombed the United States spy vessel Liberty during the
1967 war, because it was certain that the ship was
monitoring orders for the mass execution of Egyptian
prisoners in the Sinai. We would also remind the
Council that Israel destroyed a Libyan civilian airliner
in 1971.

Finally, the statement by the representative of the
United States suggesting that my country is interfering
in the internal affairs of Lebanon is puzzling, given the
blatant round-the-clock interference by the United
States in Lebanon's affairs, which is taking place very
publicly and openly and without any diplomatic or
political constraints. That American interference has
resulted in displeasure among large segments of the
populations of Lebanon and the region.

Foreign interference in Lebanese affairs cannot
serve the cause of Lebanon's stability, security and
civil peace. Lebanon very much needs support and
encouragement for its national unity, stability, civil
peace and political independence, free from external
influence or hegemony. Those who care about Lebanon
must deal with that country while taking into account
the will of the Lebanese people and ensuring
Lebanon's integration into its natural Arab
environment. They must not jeopardize Lebanon's
stability by sending warships to its coasts.

