The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Japan.

First, I wish to express my gratitude to Mr. Jean
Arnault, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing. I commend Mr. Arnault and
his staff in the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their remarkable dedication
and contributions to promoting and consolidating peace
in Afghanistan.

As the Bonn process approaches its final and
most delicate stage, we are encouraged that
preparations are on track for the elections scheduled
for 18 September. Japan has contributed a substantial
amount to date for the elections, including emergency
assistance totalling $8 million. However, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has pointed
out, there still exists a significant funding gap for the
elections. We urge the international community to be
generous in meeting that shortage without delay.

Despite the overall encouraging progress in the
political process in Afghanistan, the security situation
remains extremely volatile. It is even deteriorating in
some parts of the country. The report of the Secretary-
General (S/2005/525) pointed out a worrisome
development: insurgency attacks are growing and
becoming more sophisticated, deadlier and better
organized and funded. That development is a matter of
serious concern for the Afghan Government and the
international community.

The International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) is being reinforced by NATO countries and
other troop contributors to enable its deployment in an
expanded area. We commend those countries for their
efforts. The international community's presence should
be maintained at the same level beyond the elections.
The Security Council should begin discussions, at the
earliest possible opportunity, on extending the mandate
of ISAF.

As the lead nation in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration efforts in Afghanistan, Japan is pleased
to announce that the disarmament phase of the
programme has been completed; a ceremony was held
in July to commemorate the completion. We remain
strongly committed to supporting the efforts of
Afghanistan to achieve the remaining objectives,
namely, the completion of the reintegration of Afghan
military forces by the end of next June and the
disbandment of illegal armed groups.

In addition to the serious challenges in the
security sector, Afghanistan must confront other
enormous and multifaceted challenges, including
fighting the production and trafficking of narcotics,
institution-building and economic and social
development - in other words, the full gamut of
challenges that a country can face in post-conflict
peacebuilding.

After so much investment and so many sacrifices
made for peace by Afghans themselves and by the
international community, we must not fail Afghanistan.
It is clear that the continued role of the United Nations
in the consolidation of peace in Afghanistan - which
we fully support - is essential for the post-election
agenda. We must accelerate the discussion on a
framework for maintaining diverse cooperation after
the Bonn process ends with the September elections.
We welcome and encourage the Secretary-General's
intention to initiate a process of consultation with the
Government of Afghanistan and all concerned
international actors to determine the post-electoral
agenda and to present specific proposals to the Security
Council prior to the expiration of UNAMA's mandate.

In that connection, we would like to recall that, in
a statement in June, the Foreign Ministers of the Group
of Eight stated that they looked forward to working
with the Government of Afghanistan and the United
Nations in renewing the partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community for the
period following the parliamentary elections. For its
part, Japan will spare no effort to work together with
the international community - which will certainly
endeavour to maintain the high level of commitment
that it has shown over the past three and a half years -
in helping to achieve the consolidation of peace and
sustainable economic and social development in
Afghanistan.

1 now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

As a measure to optimize the use of our time in
order to allow as many delegations to take the floor as
possible, I will not individually invite speakers to take
seats at the table or invite them to resume their seats at
the side of the Council Chamber. When a speaker is
taking the floor, the Conference Officer will meet the
next speaker on the list at the table. I thank participants
for their understanding and cooperation.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Afghanistan, to whom I give the
floor.

