Mr. Matirtua (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to convey the greetings of the Government of Peru
and to congratulate you, Sir, and the Argentine
delegation on the efficient manner in which you have
presided over the Security Council this month. I should
also like to thank you for your initiative of convening
an open debate on small arms, a most significant issue
for the international community and one that is directly
related to the primary responsibility of the Council, the
maintenance of international peace and security.

We also wish to thank Ms. Hannelore Hoppe,
Officer-in-Charge of the Department for Disarmament
Affairs, for her very valuable briefing on this most
important matter.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made later by the representative of Guyana on
behalf of the Rio Group.

The fact that I, as Peru's Minister for Foreign
Affairs, am present at this debate reflects the great
importance that my country attaches to its
responsibility as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council Peru shares the vision expressed by
the heads of State or Government at the September

2005 World Summit that development, peace, security
and human rights are interrelated and that they
reinforce one another.

Peru's general position in this important body is
based on an integral and preventive conception of
international peace and security, in accordance with
international law and the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. That involves not only
the absence of war and dealing with traditional threats;
we must also consolidate policies aimed at confronting
the new threats and challenges facing humanity.
Poverty and hunger, corruption, terrorism,
transnational organized crime, climate change and
many other issues are directly linked to the viability of
our States and to the daily lives of their citizens, who
must be the focus of our attention.

From our perspective, the gravity of the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons is based on its
impact on international security, including, of course,
public safety. That in turn affects the consolidation of
the principles that sustain international law and the
structure of the modern State, including the defence of
democratic institutions, the rule of law and the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
But those are not the only concerns. No less serious is
the risk represented by these weapons when they are
linked to problems such as drug trafficking, organized
crime and terrorism.

Today, no one can deny the disastrous
consequences of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. Its proliferation in the various regions of the
world helps to destabilize entire countries, to increase
the intensity and duration of armed conflicts and to
undermine the provision of humanitarian assistance.

The horrifying statistics related to this issue are
known by everyone. The Graduate Institute of
International Studies in Geneva indicates that small
arms and light weapons are responsible for more than
half a million deaths each year. Of those, 300,000 are
attributable to armed conflicts, and their consequences
in terms of human lives have been more lethal than
those of nuclear weapons. In the 1990s alone, small
arms and light weapons played a leading role in 47 out
of the 49 main armed conflicts.

Here, I must point out that the harmful effects of
small arms and light weapons are found not only in
zones of armed conflict, but also in many cities. The
availability of small arms in large cities causes no
fewer than 200,000 deaths a year and strengthens
organized crime. In economic terms, the authorized
trade is estimated at $4 billion annually. The illicit
trade, for its part, amounts to 25 per cent of that figure.
Moreover, it is estimated that more than 640 million
small arms and light weapons are currently in
circulation and that 8 million new arms enter the
market each year. Although some of those weapons are
exported legally, they end up on the black market and
become a source of income for armed gangs and
terrorists.

In December 2005, the General Assembly
adopted the International Instrument to Enable States
to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons. That was a
positive step that Peru wishes to highlight. However, I
must reiterate that, because of its implications and
importance, Peru fought hard to ensure that the
Instrument would have legally binding status. We hope
that that will happen, and we will work to that end.

In general, we will work tirelessly to ensure the
success of the next review conference. We hope that it
will make substantive progress in a number of areas for
which the 2001 Action Plan opened the way. The vice-
chairmanship to be held by Peru, representing the Latin
American and Caribbean region, is proof of our
commitment.

With regard to armed conflicts, the Security
Council must continue its efforts to achieve effective
control over the embargo regimes and to strengthen the
process of disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating
former combatants in conflict and post-conflict
situations. The problem of the lack of effective control
over embargo regimes is due to the fact that many
States lack the capacity to control their territories,
particularly their border areas. If a State does not
control its territory, the conditions are such that
embargoes cannot be intensified. In that connection,
the work of the Security Council must focus on
strengthening the State, with the support of
peacekeeping missions, to ensure efficient control of
its borders and throughout the country in general.

Concerning the process of disarming,
demobilizing and reintegrating former combatants in
post-conflict situations, the Security Council must bear
in mind that States cannot carry out such actions
without adequate financial resources. Many States are
unable to pay their armed forces and police, which is

why their demobilization and reintegration is very
difficult. The Council must find ways to increase, by
means of donor countries, the financial resources
necessary to support these activities within the
framework of peacekeeping operations.

In the context of the international efforts to
combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, Peru took an important step by ratifying the
Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.

We have also promulgated the amnesty and
regularization law, which encourages citizens to
surrender their legal or illegal weapons to the relevant
authorities. With the support of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean, we
are continuing the process of mass destruction of
firearms and holding seminars aimed at the country's
political, legal and academic authorities. In addition,
new legislation is being elaborated to incorporate the
commitments undertaken by Peru through international
instruments. We hope to establish in the near future a
national commission responsible for coordinating
actions and centralizing all national efforts in that area.

In that context, the Government of Peru has
reinforced the public security system. Through Law
28397, on amnesty and regularization of the possession
of firearms and ammunition, we have been able to
eliminate approximately 7,000 weapons in the past few
years. On 10 January 2006 alone, approximately 2,500
weapons were destroyed. Moreover, within the
framework of this law, on 13 March 2006 a total of
approximately 10,000 weapons were surrendered or
regularized in accordance with the control norms.

In that connection, I reiterate today, at the highest
political level and in the context of this important

debate - which brings together not only Security
Council members but also all United Nations Member
States - the firm commitment of the Government of

Peru to the fight against this grave scourge, which
threatens public safety and helps to strengthen drug
trafficking and terrorism. That aspect constitutes an
integral part of our domestic strategy aimed at reaching
higher levels of political, economic, social and cultural
development that will be sustainable in the long run.

Lastly, allow me to say that my country believes

that the Council must strengthen its position on this

issue through the adoption of a resolution reflecting its

concern and requiring States to adopt concrete

measures involving the full observance of arms

embargoes as a basis for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

