The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Uganda.

We thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. We also welcome the
representatives of Israel and Palestine to this debate.

We welcome the relative calm during the period
under review, despite a few incidents. It is clear from
the briefing that not much progress has been achieved
on the implementation of key elements of resolution
1860 (2009). We welcome the efforts undertaken by
different parties within and outside the region towards
the reinvigoration of the peace process. We are
encouraged by the affirmation by the Quartet,
following its recent meeting held in Trieste on 26 June,
in which its members reiterated their determination to
actively seek a comprehensive resolution of the Middle
East conflict. We welcome and support the convening
of the international conference on the Middle East in
Moscow later this year.

Uganda calls for an early resumption and
conclusion of negotiations between the parties towards
a lasting and comprehensive peace in the region
premised on a two-State solution and independent,
democratic and viable Palestinian State living side by
side with Israel in peace and security.

We welcome the recent removal of checkpoints
and roadblocks in the West Bank by Israel. We also
commend the recent steps taken to boost the
Palestinian economy in the West Bank. We
nevertheless reiterate our concern over the continued
blockade of Gaza. It is clear that this blockade
continues to have a negative impact on the fabric of
civilian life, and we call for its immediate end. We also
call for an end to arms smuggling into Gaza.

My delegation also reiterates its concern over the
significant rise in settler activities in both the West
Bank and East Jerusalem, which have continued to take
their toll on the population. We call for a freeze on all
settlement activity, including natural growth.

Uganda appreciates the efforts of the Palestinian
Authority to implement its obligations under the sector
reforms of the Road Map. We note the budgetary
constraints it is facing. We call on development
partners to fulfil their pledges in order to enable the
Palestinian Authority to meet its obligations, including
the payment of salaries to civil servants.

We are also concerned that divisions among
Palestinian groups persist, with a detrimental effect on
the overall negotiations related to the Middle East
question. The divisions have adversely affected the
reconstruction and development of Gaza. We reiterate
our call on the Palestinians to peacefully resolve their
differences. In this regard, we commend Egypt for its
role in promoting Palestinian unity and Palestinian
reconciliation. My delegation urges all parties to fully
comply with all Council resolutions.

With regard to Lebanon, we are deeply concerned
about the explosions that occurred on 14 July in the
area of Khirbat Salim and the subsequent injuries to a
number of troops serving with the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon. We call on all parties to
fully implement resolution 1701 (2006) and to avoid
engaging in any acts that may aggravate the situation in
Lebanon.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.

