Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Azerbaijani presidency for organizing this
debate on the working methods of the Security Council.

Efforts have been made since 2010 to improve the
Council's working methods. The periodic revision ofthe
note ofthe President to the Security Council (S/2010/507)
has provided useful codification and clarification for
our way of working, enabling it to evolve towards
greater transparency and better information flow. In
that regard, I would like to thank the successive Chairs
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, who have promoted
those efforts. The recent adoption under Argentina's
chairmanship of two notes concerning the dialogue
with troop-contributing countries and interaction
with non-Council member States is testament to that
(S/2013/515 and S/2013/630).

Among the measures taken recently that have
subsequently become part of the Organization's
practices we should mention the immediate
dissemination of the Council's programme of work to
the Secretariat, the President of the General Assembly
and the general membership of the United Nations, and
the opening up of Council meetings, with some of them
wholly or partly open to the wider membership. France
shares the opinion that debates on matters of general
interest should be open.

While codifying its way of working by
implementing note 507, the Council has also shown that
it is able to adapt to new demands. The Council meets
more often for thematic debates that enable it to refine
its approach to issues related to peace and international
security, while seeking the expertise of regional
organizations, specialized international agencies and
non-governmental organizations. The use of video-
teleconferencing to interact with various United Nations
missions has also enabled it to streamline information
and react faster to realities on the ground. Regular
exchanges between the Council and the Department of
Political Affairs, as well as the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General, enable it to better anticipate
crises and therefore react more effectively.

Finally, creating a website has enabled the
Council to quickly and ubiquitously disseminate all its
communiques, reports and other working documents.
In that regard, the multilingual nature of the Council's
activities should be observed by ensuring that
documents posted on the site are reproduced in every
official language. We must continue our efforts within
the Informal Working Group, which will be taking into
account the proposals made in this open debate. We base
our preparation of the Working Group's programme
every year on consideration of the suggestions made
here.

The Syrian crisis has highlighted the impasse that
the Security Council has come up against in dealing
with the use of the right of veto. A few weeks ago, the
President of France spoke in the General Assembly on
the importance of creating a code of conduct for the
permanent members that would establish guidelines for
the use of the right of veto. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs also spoke on the subject. What would be
involved would be for the five permanent members of
the Security Council to collectively and voluntarily
suspend their right of veto when a situation involving
crime on a massive scale is considered to have occurred.

Clearly, the criteria for such self-management must
still be defined by the Council's permanent members
themselves. A voluntary step such as this would not
entail revising the Charter of the United Nations. But we
can work together on a series of questions. First, we have
to agree on a definition of mass crime; the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1)
and numerous international conventions, including the
1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide and the Rome Statute, can guide
us. An alert mechanism or mechanisms that can trigger
such self-management would also have to be defined.
France is considering, for example, the possibility of a
central role for the Secretary-General, in the spirit of
Article 99 of the Charter.

Finally, France has proposed that 50 Member States
could challenge the Security Council when they believe
that a crime on a massive scale has occurred. That
would give us the opportunity to consider the terms
whereby the five permanent members could initiate and
implement the code of conduct on the use of the veto.

France's proposals - and they are only

proposals - should enable us to begin to debate. To
do that, my country would involve all the possible
stakeholders, particularly research institutions,
universities and non-governmental organizations
that are working on this issue and could share their
thinking with us. The Security Council should take
this opportunity to thoroughly review its working
methods in order to meet the challenges of the twenty-
first century. The world is changing and the threats
have changed. Let us be the actors who are willing to
deal with that change and show that we are capable of
innovating in order to be more effective but also more
just.

