Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Our
thanks to colleagues for the way they have received our
comments and for the questions they have posed. Upon
reflection, I think that a number of answers to the
questions will be found in the text that we have
circulated. I will, however, provide some quick
comments on some of the points.

As far as the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board is concerned, I said in my initial
statement that an agreement was reached with the
Coalition Provisional Authority on 7 February on
future work, which should now lead to quite a lot of
early progress.

Regarding the development fund, that is fully
covered in the annex and on the Coalition Provisional
Authority web site. I therefore recommend the web site
to those who want to go into any detail on that issue.

As for the points raised on the security
agreements, I believe it is fair to say that, as things
stand at the moment, Security Council resolution 1511
(2003) provides complete clarity.

The transitional administrative law and its
negotiation are really the responsibility of the Iraqi
Governing Council. The text is under detailed
consideration and a lot of work is taking place. The
expectation is that the negotiations will produce an
outcome in the near future.

Another point raised referred to whether the
United Nations can facilitate that process, or indeed
facilitate anything else. To the extent that it is able to
do so, I think we would welcome very much the United
Nations role where it can bring an added value to the
process.

In terms of whether we have ideas about the
transitional Government, it is quite clear that early
elections are ruled out and the caucus arrangements
have been ruled out by the report. To now speculate on
what the desirable outcome would be unwise, given
that in this, as in many other areas, it is a question of
whether the Iraqis themselves are content with what
emerges. That, I believe, is the test we ought to apply
in particular here.

In terms of criteria for the transitional
Government, I believe it fair to say that, whatever the
final process is, it should demonstrate a continuity of
effort. It should show very clearly that things have
changed materially on 30 June and that the outcome we
hope for is a solution that is increasingly representative
of the different parts in Iraq.

I drew much encouragement from what I perceive
to be the wish of the Council to be united in its
response to the situation in Iraq. There is agreement on
maintaining the 30 June deadline for the transfer of
sovereignty and agreement that elections are desirable
as soon as they can be arranged and that we should
start work on preparing for them as soon as possible.
But the solutions that emerge are primarily for the
Iraqis. Of course, if there is anything that the United
Nations or the rest of us can do to facilitate that, so
much the better.

Many of us have been talking about an increased
role for the United Nations. That seems welcome, as
does the report issued yesterday by the Secretary-
General on the Brahimi mission (S/2004/ 140). Indeed,
work on that will have to continue. I hope that the people
of Iraq draw a lot of encouragement from this debate.

