Mr. Lasso Mendoza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
The Government of Ecuador has strongly condemned the
disproportionate military operations of the Israeli army
against the civilian population of the Gaza Strip, which
have caused several hundred casualties - men, women
and children, all of whom were innocent - without to
date seeing any clear evidence ofa halt to the violence.
Given such facts, the Government of Ecuador has
demanded and urges the immediate suspension of the
aggression against the Palestinian civilian population
and calls on the State of Israel to exercise maximum
restraint and to act in accordance with international
law and international humanitarian law. The defence
of a country and its right to defend itself under no
circumstances justifies subjecting thousands of
innocent civilians to pain and suffering or flouting
what we know as international law.

We must start by acknowledging what this very
body, the United Nations, has historically prescribed,
namely, that the two-State solution is the only way to
permanently end such unlawful subjugation as a result
of Israel's illegal occupation of Palestine. At the same
time, the blockade of the Gaza Strip, the settlement
policy, the wall and the arbitrary arrest of Palestinian
civilians must also cease.

Ecuador firmly believes in the just cause of the
Palestinian people to exercise their right to self-
determination and independence. My country therefore
fully recognizes the State of Palestine within the pre-
1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
My delegation wishes to recall that, two years ago, the
General Assembly welcomed the State of Palestine as
an observer member of the United Nations. That vast
majority of States is now waiting to see the State of
Palestine soon become a fully fledged member of the
General Assembly. That has not been possible to date
owing to the obvious action of one of the members of
the Security Council.

In the light of the foregoing, it is essential that we
recall the crucial obligation of the United Nations to
maintain international peace and security. The Security
Council has the main responsibility for fulfilling
that task. As has been demanded by Palestine, the
Arab countries and the countries of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, we too demand that the
members of the Security Council act more forcefully
and not give more time to the aggressor to conclude at
whatever cost strategic tasks that are not necessarily
our own.

We demand more boldness and determination in
the face of a situation of abuse and disproportionate
violence by Israel against Palestine, which also have
negative repercussions on the stability of the entire
Middle East region. The Security Council should
always act without gross biases in any situation that it
is called upon to address.

