Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
The representative of Italy, who will speak later on
behalf of the European Union, will remind the Council
of the energetic action being taken by the Union and its
member States to combat terrorism, and I would like in
advance to associate myself fully with that statement. I
would also like, however, to make a few comments in
my national capacity.

First of all, my delegation is gratified by the
continuing work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), and in particular of its experts, to whom I
would like to pay a well-deserved tribute for their work
in evaluating the national reports submitted by States
in compliance with resolution 1373 (2001). The
number of reports received has already been mentioned
and, as you rightly said, Mr. President, the evaluation
of these reports is impressive and unprecedented.

We must not, however, speak only in terms of
quantity. The content of the evaluation letters must be
more closely adjusted to the situation in a given
country in terms of the measures taken in
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). For those
States that have already enacted legislation or set up
administrative structures to combat terrorism, the
evaluation will apply to the effectiveness of the
measures that they have adopted.

Secondly, France fully supports the importance
attached by the CTC to the matter of cooperation with
international and regional organizations with
competence in the field of combating terrorism. It is,
indeed, important - along the lines of the meeting that
took place on 6 March - to intensify that cooperation
by taking concrete measures that are better adapted to
the competences and capacities of the relevant
organizations and in keeping with the priorities
established by the Counter-Terrorism Committee.

In this regard, my delegation welcomes the fact
that the Committee has sent letters in this respect to
some of those organizations. We hope in particular that
the cooperation thereby established will enable our
Committee and its experts to benefit from the
evaluations that the organizations have already carried
out or plan to carry out within their area of
competence - both in material and geographical
terms - in the field of combating terrorism.

The second meeting between the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and regional and international
organizations, which is to be held in Washington on 7
October under the aegis of the Organization of
American States, will usefully enable us to pursue and
broaden this interesting dialogue in the interest of an
expanded and more effective fight against terrorism.
We believe it is extremely important for there to be an
initial assessment of the cooperation that has been
initiated between the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and international and regional organizations.

Thirdly, France would like to reiterate the
essential nature of technical assistance to countries
needing help in the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). As the Chairman's report points out, efforts
already made by the Counter-Terrorism Committee to
facilitate technical assistance must he stepped up - in
particular through the register of available sources and
the matrix. My delegation therefore supports the idea
of giving a more active role to the Committee's experts
in this field. We will participate actively in the
discussions on this matter in the Committee.

As the representative of the country that currently
chairs the G-8, I would also like to say a few words
about the establishment of the G-8's Counter-Terrorism
Action Group. The Group, which was set up last June
during the G-8 summit at Evian, met in Paris for the
first time on 2 July. That meeting included the
participation of representatives of the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. In close cooperation
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Action
Group is entrusted with evaluating the needs and
priorities of States vis-a-vis technical assistance to
combat terrorism and with improving coordination in
the activities of its members in this field. The Action
Group, which is designed to strengthen global capacity
to combat terrorism, Will hold its second meeting next
October.

Finally, France is pleased that, based on recent
country reports, the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee will inform the Security Council in his next
report of the main difficulties encountered by States in
implementing resolution 1373 (2001). Such
information, which my Government called for in the
Security Council several months ago, will be useful in
enabling the Council to better evaluate the follow-up to
resolution 1373 (2001) almost two years after its
adoption.

