Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
thank Mr. Annabi, and I welcome Deputy Prime
Minister Covie to the Council and thank him for his
presentation to us.

We too applaud the success of the people of
Kosovo and their political leaders on the formation of a
new Government. Special Representative Steiner
deserves a special word of appreciation for his
important role in helping to broker that agreement.

We encourage President Rugova and Prime
Minister Rexhepi and Assembly President Thaci to
address the many difficult issues that the Government
will now have to face. Their initial statements
expressing the new Government's commitment to the
rule of law, economic reform, enhanced security and,
very importantly, to the rights of minorities are
encouraging. We need to see results, and we urge them
to follow through.

We are deeply pleased to welcome yesterday's
transfer from Serbia to Kosovo of Kosovo Albanian
detainees. This is very good news. We commend
Deputy Prime Minister Covic', Special Representative
Steiner and all those who helped make this important
step forward possible. It is our hope that this long-
awaited action will promote further improvement in the
atmosphere for ethnic relations in Kosovo and help
foster consensus on other critical issues facing all
Kosovars, such as economic reform.

In that regard, we, like others, are disappointed
that Kosovo Serbs have so far resisted participation in
the Government. It is profoundly in the interests of all
Kosovar Serbs to engage. A central challenge for the
new Government will be to create an atmosphere of
trust and confidence that will reassure Serbs and other
minorities, encouraging returns and reconciliation. It
seems we all agree that this should be an objective of
this process, and a visible Government role for the
Serbs is necessary to accomplish this. We strongly
support Special Representative Steiner's efforts to
encourage constructive engagement by Kosovar Serbs
in governing institutions. I want to strongly encourage
the Deputy Prime Minister to continue constructive
efforts to encourage that participation as well, and to
discourage thinking about parallel Serb institutions.

My Government continues to believe that
privatization and other economic priorities are now key
to accelerating the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. Economic growth and investment
are ultimately the best basis for rebuilding a
democratic, multi-ethnic Kosovo and for laying the
ground for the future.

We welcome the appointment of the new United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) Police Commissioner, Mr. Feller, and we
support his efforts to strengthen the Kosovo Police
Service and to continue the fight against organized
crime. I want strongly to second Ambassador Eldon's
comments with regard to crime and terrorism.

There is certainly a great deal still to be done, but
I have to say that we are encouraged by the progress
that Special Representative Steiner and UNMIK have
been able to make over the last month. We have seen
some important steps forward. The Special
Representative has our full support. We look forward to
hearing from him personally in the near future.

