Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Pakistan welcomes
the opportunity to review progress in enhancing the
working methods of the Security Council. We appreciate
the concept paper (S/2013/6l3, annex) prepared by
your delegation, Sir, to facilitate the discussion. Let
me also thank Ambassador Maria Cristina Perceval of
Argentina for her effective leadership of the Council's
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.

The debate has generated considerable attention
because the work of the Council is of interest to the
Council's members and non-members alike. Enhancing
the efficiency, effectiveness and transparency of the
Council's work and inclusive decision-making are
important issues for all of us. Today's debate should
help Council members to further improve procedures
and working methods. The Council has agreed on new
measures complementing the note by the President of
the Security Council contained in document S/2010/507,
but clearly there is room to do a lot more. Our focus
should be on effective follow-up and implementation of
the measures.

In December, the Council took decisions on
appointing chairpersons of subsidiary bodies in a
balanced, transparent, efficient and inclusive manner.
That has already made a difference as, perhaps for
the first time, there was a sense of consultation
surrounding the process, especially among the newly
elected members. It is my delegation's hope that the
practice and trend will be reinforced in future. There
is also a need to ensure that selection and appointment
processes involving various expert panels and groups
are more transparent, balanced and representative.

The President's August note S/2013/515 prioritizes
enhanced interaction with non-members of the Council.
We are pleased that the practice of holding wrap-up
sessions, which was revived during Pakistan's January
presidency of the Council, has been supported and
appreciated both inside and outside of the Council.
In that regard, I thank all Council members that
have mentioned that today, especially the Rwandan
delegation.

We welcome the recent adoption of note
S/2013/630, on enhancing consultations with troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries (PCCs), which are important stakeholders in
the Council's work. Pakistan, as Chair of the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations, has organized a
number of meetings with the participation of TCCs and
PCCs to address diverse, cross-cutting peacekeeping
issues. In that context, I express our deep gratitude to
Ambassador Rosenthal for recognizing that.
We should now make additional efforts to increase
the number of the Council's public meetings, as
compared to closed consultations. It would serve the
Council well to fully implement Articles 31 and 32 of
the Charter of the United Nations in order to enhance
access and participation by non-members of the
Security Council in the work of the Council and its
subsidiary bodies.

We have seen the increased use of the informal
interactive dialogue, which has been useful in enabling
the Council to interact and engage with greater candor,
with important interlocutors. Video-teleconferencing
technology has enhanced flexibility and provided more
options in terms of ways to brief the Council frequently
and upon short notice.

Cooperation with regional organizations has
increased in recent years. It merits further strengthening,
including by improving coherence and consistency in
approaches.

Pakistan believes that the Council should rely more
on diplomacy and the peaceful settlement of disputes
under Chapter VI of the Charter. Excessive reliance on
Chapter VII can lead to impasse on several issues and
create an erroneous impression of the sanctity and force
of non-Chapter VII resolutions. The Council also needs
to discuss from time to time its implementation of its
resolutions, especially those on long-standing issues.
The Council's effectiveness, after all, will be judged
by its performance in dealing with the core issues of
international peace and security.

The Council's work is a collective effort. Enhanced
cooperation and consultation between the permanent
and non-permanent members is of fundamental
importance in that regard. We have seen that dialogue
between the permanent and non-permanent members
works reasonably well in normal circumstances, and
the Council is then seen to be functioning as a whole.

But in crisis situations, there are at times gaps and
breakdowns in communication. Sometimes the media
are ahead of members of the Council in obtaining
information. Instead of waiting to hear from the
Council, people learn about the latest developments
from Tweets. In fact, intra-Council dialogue and
communication should be enhanced, not cut down,
during crisis situations.

This could be done in two ways. First, we understand
that a sensitive and fast-evolving issue requires
confidentiality and sufficient time for consultations
between the primary interlocuters. After their internal
discussions, the permanent five members may choose to
brief non-permanent members in closed consultations.
Second, the President, especially if the presidency is
held by a non-permanent member, should be taken into
confidence about various developments. The President,
as deemed appropriate, may be authorized to brief the
entire Council, the general membership and the media.
Council presidencies are well placed to promote such
dialogue and communication.

As part of a comprehensive reform, the Council's
working methods are closely linked to accountability
towards the general membership. Past practice indicates
that elected members, being accountable to regional
groups and to the entire United Nations membership,
are keener to improve working methods. The best way to
enhance the representative and democratic character of
the Council is to reinforce the norms of accountability
and transparency. This, coupled with the cooperation of
the permanent members, would lead to more synergy in
the Council around the common objective of improving
its working methods.

