Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative of New Zealand to hold this
open debate on the security and peace challenges facing
small island developing States (SIDS). China welcomes
Foreign Minister McCully to New York to personally
preside over the meeting. I am grateful to Prime
Minister Malielegaoi, Prime Minister Simpson Miller
and Minister Adam for their respective briefings.

SIDS represent a major driving force in promoting
the realization of global peace, security and
development. In recent years, SIDS have become united
and strong and active in international cooperation and
thus have made major contributions to the maintenance
of global peace and promotion of common development.
However, for historical reasons and geographical and
resource limitations, SIDS are faced with the task of
pursuing further economic development while faced
with such non-traditional security threats as organized
transnational crimes, rampant piracy and climate
change. The international community should pay close
to attention to the concerns of SIDS and continue to
strive to safeguard their interests. In that connection, I
would like to offer the following points.

First, a sound concept of common development
should be established. In order to promote the
comprehensive development of SIDS, problems should
be addressed at their roots. Since development holds the
master key to a solution to all problems, the international
community should step up the implementation of the
measures found in the Barbados Programme of Action,
the Mauritius Strategy, the SIDS Accelerated Modalities
of Action, and the outcome document of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
designed to help SIDS achieve sustainable development.

In the meantime, efforts should be made to
establish, develop and deepen partnerships with SIDS
and establish mechanisms, in order to further open
markets to SIDS in support of their participation in
the global economy and international economic and
technical cooperation. All ofthat will create an inviting
environment for the development of SIDS. Efforts should
also be made to promote South-South cooperation,
explore innovative means of funding, strengthen
infrastructure development, establish interconnectivity
and promote the common development of SIDS. The
foreign debts of SIDS should be reduced so that their
own development capacity can be increased. Developed
countries should honour their commitments in the areas
of resources and capacity-building and step up the
transfer of technology so as to help those countries to
respond to special challenges, such as climate change.

Secondly, the non-traditional security threats
faced by SIDS should be properly addressed. In this
globalized world of ours, no country can address
these non-traditional security challenges on its own.
The international community should strengthen
international cooperation and help SIDS to better
respond to the above-mentioned challenges. When
addressing the challenges of non-traditional threats,
the voice of SIDS should be better heeded and
their sovereignty better respected, and constructive
assistance should be provided in accordance with their
needs.

Thirdly, more attention should be paid to the
capacity-building of SIDS. The emphasis should be on
providing comprehensive and coordinated support in
the area of information-sharing, technical training and
equipment assistance.

Fourthly, regional organizations such as the Pacific
Islands Forum and the Caribbean Community should
play an even greater role in responding to non-traditional
security challenges and form synergy by formulating a
unified strategy and coordinated course of action.

Fifthly, relevant agencies and organs of the United
Nations should work within their mandates and bring
into full play their respective advantages. The General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and the specialized agencies all have
their own mandates and functions. When helping
SIDS address challenges and pursue comprehensive
development, there should be a clear division of labour,
so as to avoid redundancy in functions and waste
of resources. The international community should
also support the Office of the United Nations High
Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island
Developing States in playing a greater role and
stregthen its monitoring of the implementation of
various mechanisms and initiatives.
Helping SIDS pursue comprehensive development
is a requirement of the global cause of development.
It is also a shared responsibility of the international
community. We support the efforts of SIDS to accelerate
their own development and to improve their situation.
We are ready to join hands with the international
community to make a greater contribution to the
maintenance of social order and the achievement of
development and prosperity in small island developing
States.

