Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China wishes to thank you, Sir, for convening today's
meeting.

We are very honoured to submit the annual draft
report of the Security Council for the year 2017, and
we hope that it will be formally adopted today. I wish
to take this opportunity to thank all Council members
for their spirit of cooperation and flexibility during
the process of drafting the report. I also wish to thank
the Secretariat, and in particular the Security Council
Affairs Division of the Department of Political Affairs,
for sharing its rich experience and presenting invaluable
suggestions during the drafting process, and for doing
a huge amount of collection, collation, statistical,
editorial and translation work.

As President of the Council in July 2017. China is
responsible for coordinating the drafting activities for
the introduction of the draft report. In accordance with
presidential note S/2017/507, of 30 August 2017, for the
first time, the report has adopted the practice ofcovering
a calendar year, from 1 January to 31 December,
including all Council activities in the maintenance of
international peace and security, managing agenda
items, Council resolutions and meetings, presidential
statements and other results.

In summarizing the activities of the Council
over the course of the past year, we have sought to
be as objective as possible and have made the utmost
effort to describe the background information for all
Council actions in order to improve the transparency
of the Council's work. During the drafting process, we
comprehensively solicited the views and comments of
relevant Members of the United Nations.

The draft report is a document of the Council.
The introduction has been endorsed and approved by
all Council members for the reporting period. Upon
adoption of the draft report by the Council, it will
be submitted to the General Assembly for review. In
accordance with Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the annual report is a key component of the
work of the Council. We therefore hope that it will
serve as a beneficial reference for Council members,
the membership at large, the Secretariat and those
committed to maintaining international peace and
security.

