Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin
by expressing my sincere appreciation for the United
Kingdom's leadership in convening today's open
debate. In order to save time, I will circulate my full
text and make only the salient points.

On the issue of conflict prevention, 1 would like
to underscore the necessity for the Security Council,
the United Nations system as a whole and Member
States to take appropriate measures quickly, before
situations require large-scale action. It is also important
to promote peacebuilding to prevent relapses into
conflict. According to the World Development Report
201], published by the World Bank, 90 per cent of the
conflicts that occurred from 2000 to 2009 were in fact
relapses.

To tackle those issues, I would like to share with
the Council Japan's experiences from two angles.

First, as the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) working group on lessons learned, Japan has
been leading the discussion on challenges that countries
might face after the withdrawal of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. The working group heard from
the countries on the PBC's agenda facing transitions,
namely, Sierra Leone, Burundi and Liberia. Discussions
led us to identify two major challenges faced by those
countries in transition. The first was how to maintain

financial sustainability, and the second how to ensure
the continuity of an inclusive political process.

To overcome those challenges, we need to consider
a way to maintain the attention and commitment of the
international community, as well as to strengthen a
country's ownership of its institutions and its political
engagement. I believe the PBC can play a role in
addressing the risk of recurrence during the transitional
period by monitoring the progress and reporting on the
evolution of the political situation, if appropriate, to the
Council. I hope the Council will further strengthen its
coordination with the PBC to that end.

Secondly, Japan, in its national capacity, has also
contributed to assisting in conflict prevention and
the consolidation of peace. Let me touch upon four
examples.

First, Japan has provided post-conflict countries,
such as Afghanistan and Cambodia, inter alia, with
seamless assistance for in the consolidation of peace.
Secondly, Japan is also an active advocate for human
security. Since 1999, Japan has contributed $390 million
to the United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security.
Thirdly, with respect to our efforts in Africa, Japan
has actively supported African countries' own efforts
to consolidate peace through the Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD) process.
Last year, TICAD V was held in Yokohama, Japan. On
that occasion, we announced financial assistance in the
amount of $550 million for peacebuilding in Africa.
Lastly, Japan promotes the role of women in preventing
conflict as well as in consolidating peace. Our efforts
range from the training of female mediators to the
setting up of vocational training centres in order to
empower women affected by conflict.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Japan's
determination to take an active role in conflict
prevention. Under the banner of "Proactive Contributor
to Peace", Japan will continue to work together with the
international community to that end.

