Mr. Henze (Germany): Germany welcomes the
recent progress made by the parties to the Angolan peace
process in implementing the relevant provisions of the
Lusaka Protocol. The international community has
invested significant resources in the Angolan peace
process during the last couple of years and has a strong
vested interest to see it concluded successfully. In his
latest report, however, the Secretary-General rightly points

 

out that the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol proceeds
only "in fits and starts" (5/1996/1000, para. 28).

We note with great satisfaction that UNITA today
issued a formal written declaration that all UNITA soldiers,
with the exception of 453 police officers, have been
quartered. Thus, one of the major military aspects of the
Lusaka Protocol has been successfully implemented.

We also welcome the letter of the Permanent
Representative of Angola, Ambassador Van Dunem
"Mbinda", and the communique stating that the nine
UNITA generals have received their commissions and
specific assignments in the regular Angolan Armed Forces.
We very much hope that the integration of the regular
UNITA soldiers will now start and be accomplished soon.

The political issues still have to be addressed. We urge
the Angolan Government and the leadership of UNIT A to
resolve before the beginning of next year, as requested in
the draft resolution being put to a vote today, the
outstanding issues and to arrange a meeting between
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi in Angola to
determine the special status of the President of UNITA, to
extend State administration throughout the territory of
Angola, to return all elected Deputies to the National
Assembly, to form a Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation and to establish the free circulation of people
and goods.

Time is short. The mandate of UNAVEM. III will
finally expire in February 1997.

I wish to underline the importance my Government
attaches to the problem of successfully demobilizing ex-
combatants and reintegrating them, along with internally
displaced persons, into civil society. I agree with the report
of the Secretary-General that this is one of the most critical
challenges under the Lusaka Protocol. Germany, as a major
donor country, feels a particular responsibility in this field.
By this summer, my Government had already launched a
pilot project for the demobilization and socio-economic
reintegration of ex-combatants and internally displaced
persons, in cooperation with the Angolan Government, local
authorities and United Nations agencies. Germany has
already pledged DM. 1 million, about $650,000, for this
project. The success of this pilot project has encouraged my
Government to initiate concrete planning for the launching
of this major project for the demobilization and socio-
economic reintegration of ex-combatants and internally
displaced persons as of 1 January next year. The German
Government stands ready in principle to pledge additional
funds, amounting to DM. 6 million, or approximately $4
million. Furthermore, my Government has contributed
significantly to the efforts made by the international
community in the field of humanitarian assistance, and
will continue to do so.

We are also continuing to pay particular attention to
the grave problem of landmines in Angola and to the
need for effective demining. Germany has provided up to
nine demining experts as inspectors for demining
activities within UNAVEM. III to support the United
Nations-contracted demining company MECHEM. in its
efforts, which have resulted in the clearing of more than
4,000 kilometres of roads of landmines. In addition, two
German non-governmental organizations are carrying out
mine-clearing activities in the field. Assistance to the
Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Clearance
of the Department of Humanitarian Affairs is another
aspect of our activities in Angola.

In concluding I wish to reiterate that despite all the
efforts made by the international community to assist the
peace process in Angola, the ultimate responsibility for
peace and tranquillity in that country lies with the parties
to the Angolan peace process themselves. The fate of the
people of Angola is in their hands. It is our hope that
they will act in accordance with that responsibility.

In the light of those considerations, Germany will
vote in favour of the draft resolution on Angola before
the Council today.

