Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): At the outset, I
would like to express my delegation's appreciation for
the convening of this open debate on the draft
resolution on non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and on the threat it poses to international
peace and security. The participation of the entire
United Nations membership in this important debate
ensures the need, or the needed collective vision, to
address the existing gap in the current non-proliferation
regime and represents a great value added to the work
that the Security Council is currently undertaking.

The threat posed by terrorist organizations to
international peace and security is an undisputed reality
of contemporary life. To prevent the access of terrorists
and non-State actors to weapons of mass destruction,
related materials and their means of delivery is a new
challenge to non-proliferation efforts and a recognized
priority to be addressed by the international
community.

The presidential statement adopted by the
Security Council meeting at the level of the heads of
State and Government in 1992, Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), and General Assembly
resolutions concerning the need for strengthening
multilateral arms control and non-proliferation regimes
to combat international terrorism demonstrate the
international community's awareness and commitment
in addressing the threat posed by the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their use
by terrorists. The regime established by the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is of
particular relevance. Strengthening the effectiveness of
the comprehensive International Atomic Energy
Agency's safeguard system is another important
contribution to such endeavours. The draft resolution
subject of our consideration today takes stock of the
disarmament concerns that should be strengthened by
reaffirming the need for all Member States to fulfil
their obligations in relation to arms control and
disarmament in all its aspects.

The terrorist attacks on 11 September conferred a
greater sense of urgency on the required common effort
to prevent the ability of terrorist organizations to
acquire nuclear, chemical or biological weapons. The
mandate conferred upon it by the United Nations
Charter entitles the Security Council to play the leading
role in this global fight against terrorism. Accordingly,
we welcome the Council's decision to consider the
adoption of a resolution on these matters in the context
of a widely felt urgency to fill the existing gap in
international law relating to the current non-
proliferation regimes in preventing chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons and the means to
deliver them from falling into the hands of non-State
actors, especially terrorist groups.

By adopting resolution 1373 (2001), the Security
Council took the unprecedented step of bringing into
force legislation binding all States on the issue of
combating terrorism. The draft resolution which is the
object of our consideration today, aimed at denying
access of non-State actors and terrorists to weapons of
mass destruction, is in accord with the objectives stated
in resolution 1373 (2001). Its adoption will constitute a
new landmark in the global fight against terrorism and
in the ability of the Security Council to lead the fight
against such threats.

We believe that open debates of the Security
Council such as the one we are holding today are
necessary and timely. They contribute to mutual
understanding and to the broad expression of views on
subjects of great importance to international life -
outstanding issues such as the issue of arms control and
disarmament and international nuclear cooperation for
peaceful purposes. The follow-up mechanism on the
implementation of the resolution and on the issue not
yet resolved might be an object of creative approaches
in today's debate whose outcome will surely be very
useful for the improvement of the work on the draft
resolution under consideration by the Security Council.
I therefore commend you, Mr. President, for holding
such a debate today.

The fundamental outcome in the process of the
resolution's adoption is that the international
community shares a common vision on this subject
matter and that the Security Council reaches a strong
consensus on the need and on the provisions of the
resolution to be eventually adopted.

