Mr. Smirnov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, I would like to welcome to this
Chamber the Deputy President of South Africa,
Mr. Zuma, and I would like to thank him for the report
he gave to the Security Council over this current
situation of the peace process in Burundi. We are also
grateful to the President of the Economic and Social
Council, Mr. Rosenthal, for his contribution to our
debate today.

Our meeting today does reflect the interaction
and the complementarity of the United Nations bodies
and of the regional efforts in trying to resolve a
specific conflict situation. We note significant progress
made in handling the crisis in Burundi, and this was
thanks to the signing in Dar es Salaam on 16 November
of the Agreement on Peace between the Government
and the National Council for the Defence of
Democracy-Forces for Defence of Democracy (CNDD- FDD) groups of Mr. Nkurunziza, with the assistance of
the Governments of South Africa, Mozambique,
Uganda and Tanzania.

The decision to establish a new Government in
the country was a major step towards reconciliation in
the country. We would note the role of the African
Union and the African Mission in Burundi. Despite the
rather considerable difficulties they face, they are
doing everything possible to ensure that a large-scale
bloody war does not break out again.
Unless there is a truly comprehensive agreement
on a ceasefire, to which all of the conflicting parties
must be party without any exception at all, it will not
be possible to achieve a stable peace in Burundi. The
Security Council has already several times called on
and demanded of the Forces nationales de liberation
(FNL) that they stop fighting and join in constructive
talks with the central Government. Unfortunately, no
significant progress has yet been achieved in that
direction. The African Union and the countries that
have influence there must try to do their utmost to
bring influence to bear on the FNL.

We are willing to study carefully the proposals
presented today to advance the peace process. It is time
to put an end to the fighting in Burundi. The faster that
can be done, the faster peace, stability and
development can be achieved in the Great Lakes
region.

