Ms. Wilson (Australia): Australia also welcomes
the timely initiative of the People's Republic of China
in convening this open debate. The debate takes place
during a time of great challenges posed by terrorist
organizations, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and Al-Qaida, and other non-State actors
threatening the global order.

Australia strongly condemns all acts of terrorism,
wherever committed and whatever the purported
motivation. Terrorism's growing transnational nature,
including recruitment, facilitation and funding, and the
indiscriminate nature ofattacks and victims underscores
the importance of international cooperation to combat
that pernicious threat.

The United Nations has a unique international
role to play in preventing and fighting terrorism. Its
conventions and resolutions on terrorism have set
valuable international norms and established legal
instruments. United Nations sanctions regimes are
also an important enforcement tool, particularly in
disrupting the sources of terrorist financing.

Australia has established invaluable counter-
terrorism partnerships in forums such as the United
Nations, the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation,
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, and the Global
Community Engagement and Resilience Fund. We
also continue to work bilaterally with various country
partners, helping to build their capacity to combat
terrorism. Australia also strongly supports the
critical role of community groups and civil-society
organizations in countering violent extremism and
extremist messages. We need to counter the narrative
from terrorist groups such as Da'esh, which have been
using social media to spread their destructive ideology.
Governments need to work together to contest the
social media space. We also need to engage the private
sector and industry, because of their significant role in
countering violent extremism and extremist messages.
We also need to create an environment that is conducive
to social and religious tolerance, harmony and cohesion.

The issue of foreign terrorist fighters is one of great
concern to Australia, with an estimated 25,000 foreign
terrorist fighters originating from over 100 Member
States involved in the conflict in Syria and Iraq.
Australia continues to advocate for full implementation
of resolution 2178 (2014), which focuses international
attention on the foreign terrorist fighter threat.
Australia supports the Secretary-General's
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. In
particular, we welcome the Plan's call for countries to
develop national and regional plans to prevent violent
extremism. The Plan aligns well with Australia's
strategy for countering violent extremism and provides
a framework for advancing the outcomes of Australia's
Regional Summit to Counter Violent Extremism held in
Sydney in June 2015.

Looking ahead, the June Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy review will be another key opportunity to
ensure that our international efforts to combat terrorism
are the best they can be.

Australia remains firmly committed to working at
all levels to bolster international action against terrorism.
We urge Member States to ensure that any measures
taken comply with the Charter of the United Nations
and their other obligations under international law, in
particular international human rights law, international
refugee law and international humanitarian law.

