Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): As
Council members know, the sixth paragraph of Article
49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Times of War states
that "[t]he Occupying Power shall not deport or
transfer parts of its own civilian population into the
territory it occupies". The International Committee of
the Red Cross has recognized that the purpose of that
paragraph of the Convention is to prevent the
recurrence of actions carried out by certain States
during the Second World War, which transferred a
portion of the population of territories occupied by
them for political and ethnic reasons with a view to
colonizing those territories. Those explanations require
no further comment.

Article 8, paragraph 2(b)(viii) of the 1998 Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court identifies as
a war crime "[t]he transfer, directly or indirectly, by the
Occupying Power of parts of its own civilian
population into the territory it occupies".

After having reaffirmed in resolution 446 (1979)
that the Fourth Geneva Convention applied to the Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967, the Security
Council affirmed in paragraph 1 of the resolution that

"the policy and practices of Israel in establishing
settlements in the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since 1967 have no legal
validity and constitute a serious obstruction to
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East".

The Security Council has reaffirmed that position
for over 30 years, including in resolutions 449 (1979),
452 (1979), 465 (1980), 476 (1980) and 478 (1980)
regarding settlement activities. Similarly, the General
Assembly has reaffirmed it in dozens of resolutions.
Most recently, resolution 65/104 reaffirms that
settlement activities in Arab territories occupied since
1967 are illegal and constitute an obstacle to achieving
peace. The Assembly has called for the immediate and
complete cessation of settlement activities.

The International Court of Justice concluded in
paragraph 120 of its 2004 advisory opinion on the legal
consequences of the separation wall that the
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, were created in violation of
international law. It is also worth noting that the Road
Map adopted by the international Quartet and by the
Security Council in resolution 1515 (2003) calls on
Israel to freeze all settlement activity, including natural
growth of settlements, and to immediately dismantle
settlement outposts erected since March 2001.

The Joint Understanding of the 2007 Annapolis
Conference reaffirmed the fact that the parties were to
continue to implement their mutual commitments in
accordance with the Road Map until the achievement
of a peace agreement. This includes Israel's
commitment to freezing all settlement activities. The
Security Council adopted the contents of the Joint
Understanding in resolution 1850 (2008). Pursuant to
that declaration, the international Quartet continues to
call for implementation of the provisions of the Road
Map, including freezing all settlement activities, most
recently in its statement of21 September 2010.

The provisions of international law with respect
to the settlements include the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, the
Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice,
and the positions of the Quartet on the subject of
Israeli settlement activities. However, these are the
very positions and provisions that Israel continues to
disregard and to defy. In point of fact, Israel's
settlement policy was established and has continued
since 1967. To date, neither international legitimacy
nor the peace efforts has dissuaded Israel or stopped it
from carrying out settlement activities. For example,
the numerous settlements today include more than
517,000 settlers within the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. This is more than
twice the number that existed on the eve of the 1993
Oslo agreement. It is striking that the number of
settlers since 1990 has increased by 4.9 per cent
annually - three times more than the rate of growth of
Israeli society, which is at only 1.5 per cent.

Since the Israeli Government lifted the freeze on
settlements last September - a freeze that was only
partial, in point of fact - the settlement activities have
not only reached their previous rate of growth but
doubled to the point that, during the first six weeks
after that September date, they had made up for that
10-month freeze and even gone beyond it.

Those are the latest developments in settlement
activity, the latest challenge of which was on 16 January
2011, when Israel declared that it was building 1,400
new housing units.

Israel's settlement policy is not only a challenge
to the will of the international community and a
violation of the provisions of international law. It
carries the danger that Palestinian land is being
absorbed and dismantled, and in that way the basis of
the two-State solution is being undermined.

While we recognize all the international efforts to
resolve the Arab-Israel conflict - in particular the
efforts of President Obama's Administration - if the
Council today cannot oppose the grave dangers of
Israel's settlement activities, then its credibility and
effectiveness will be hampered. Our image will be
affected because the impression would then be that a
double standard is being applied with regard to certain
States while the actions of another are ignored, as if
that State were above the law and could not be subject
to any accountability.

We therefore submitted yesterday a draft
resolution on Israel's settlement activities, and it has
been circulated to the Council in blue ink (S/2011/24).
We are proud to see the unprecedented number of
sponsors for this draft 4 more than 120 States - and
we express our full gratitude to them. The purpose of
this draft resolution is to ensure that the Council will
stand on the side of justice, and we trust it will play its
role in supporting this draft resolution unanimously in
the very near future.

Just as the Council has responded and spoken in a
single voice when adopting historic resolutions -
resolutions 242 (1967), 252 (1968), 338 (1973), 446
(1979), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008) -
we invite it to speak with a single voice on the
settlement activity and say that enough is enough.

