We would like to express our gratitude to Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing on the progress achieved in the reform of United Nations peacekeeping operations and the problems they have encountered in connection with the coronavirus epidemic. We regard peacekeeping operations as a key instrument of the United Nations for maintaining international peace and security. United Nations missions are deployed in dangerous environments, complicated by dire humanitarian and socioeconomic situations. They are often accompanied by asymmetric threats. Such realities, combined with the changing nature and dynamics of conflicts, require the appropriate adjustment of peacekeeping mechanisms. Obviously, the outbreak of the coronavirus disease has also impacted the Blue Helmets' ability to fully fulfil their mandates. We appreciate the efforts of the Secretariat to ensure the safety of peacekeepers and to mitigate the effects of the pandemic on missions, including by strengthening their response capacity, improving the medical service system and taking measures to reduce the risk of the spread of the virus among personnel and through interaction with the civilian population. Assistance in countering the coronavirus can be provided to host States upon the request of national authorities within the framework of the respective mission mandates. We believe that positive examples in this regard have been set by the United Nations operations in the Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which have assisted host countries in developing pandemic response plans. Any changes related to troop rotations should be implemented in close cooperation with troop-contributing countries. Despite the current unprecedented circumstances, it is important that United Nations peacekeeping operations evolve in the right direction going forward. At the same time, it is absolutely imperative to respect the sovereignty of host States, uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and observe the basic principles of peacekeeping. We are convinced that the Blue Helmets must maintain their neutral status in all circumstances. The Security Council can provide robust or proactive mandates on a case by case basis, depending on the situation on the ground. The goal of peacekeeping is the peaceful settlement of conflicts by political means. We therefore supported the call of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire, which provided a favourable background for continuing mediation efforts to encourage parties to conflict to advance national reconciliation processes. Despite the temporary difficulties caused by the pandemic, the gains already achieved in implementing peace agreements must be maintained. The most important prerequisite for the effectiveness of any peacekeeping operation is constructive cooperation with the host country. Amid the pandemic it has become even more important to build confidence and promote information exchange. Dialogue is especially necessary to ensure timely access to essential goods, medical equipment and medicines for United Nations mission personnel, as well as to resolve other pressing issues, including those related to the possible introduction of restrictions necessary to combat the spread of the coronavirus. Furthermore, we consider it extremely important to take into account the views of the host States and troop-contributing countries when considering issues concerning the extension of mandates and to consult with them when preparing recommendations for assessment reports on the effectiveness of the work of peacekeeping missions. In particular, significant provisions related to the highly sensitive issues of the use of modern technologies - unmanned aerial vehicles and surveillance equipment - that may affect the sovereignty of the host State have recently been made to the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Such uncoordinated actions with the host State also impose an additional burden on the United Nations budget. In this regard, we see a contradiction in the positions of some States, which simultaneously inflate mandates and call for a reduction in the funding of missions and the number of peacekeepers. The slogan "do more with less" can be applied in economic theory, but is unlikely to be useful for ensuring the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. The optimization of the mandates of peacekeeping missions for the sake of efficiency must be accompanied by a reduction in secondary and non-core tasks for peacekeepers, in particular those related to human rights, social and gender issues. Mandates should not be populist, but clear and realistic. We find it necessary to further improve the trilateral cooperation among the Security Council, troop- and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat in order to strengthen the spirit of partnership, cooperation and mutual trust. This approach is at the heart of the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative, which calls for close cooperation among all peacekeeping actors to ensure the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. During the most recent substantive session of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the General Assembly (C-34) this year, it was agreed that A4P could be further carried out in line with the views and recommendations of Member States, including those presented at the high-level event in September 2018. To this end, the structure of the C-34 report was aligned with the main thematic elements of A4R. We expect that the recommendations and decisions contained in the report of the Special Committee will serve as the basis for further activity of the Secretariat on the peacekeeping track. In conclusion, we would like to take this opportunity to express our gratitude to the Under-Secretary-General, as well as the military and civilian personnel of the United Nations peacekeeping operations, for their unwavering commitment to fulfilling their duties in the current difficult conditions.
