Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to fully associate myself with the statement
to be delivered on behalf of the European Union.

Luxembourg warmly welcomes the convening of
this open debate and the adoption of the new resolution
on the issue of children an armed conflict (resolution 1998 (2011)). This demonstrates the continuing
commitment of the Security Council to promote the
protection of children, both in countries that are on its
agenda and in other situations that are of concern to us
all.

We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of UNICEF for their tireless efforts
in support of children. We encourage them to continue
to strive to ensure that children are better protected and
that violations against them are brought to our
attention.

The roll of shame that is annexed to the
Secretary-General's reports and, more generally, the
Secretary-General's reports based on information
gathered thanks to the monitoring and reporting
mechanism are of vital importance in obliging us to
face up to the brutal reality of children in time of
armed conflict. The country visits by the Special
Representative, the work of experts on the protection
of children in field missions and the new practice of
field visits by the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict contribute considerably to greater
awareness of violations against children in conflicts.

Initial tangible results can indeed be seen. More
and more children are being released by armed forces

or rebel groups in many conflict situations. However,
additional efforts and resources will be necessary in
order to have a greater impact on the ground.

In 2010, the Security Council, following
consultations with the Special Representative, imposed
for the first time sanctions against individuals in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo who were
responsible for serious violations against children. The
Council will be able to build on that precedent in order
to punish in the same way those who are responsible
for serious violations against children in the context of
other armed conflicts.

We call on the Security Council to continue to
work to that end and at the same time to consider, as
the Secretary-General has suggested, ways by which
sanctions may be imposed in contexts where there are
no Security Council sanctions committees.

From now on, parties to a conflict that attack
schools or hospitals could find themselves on the list of
shame contained in the report of the Secretary-General.
We congratulate the Council for having thus enhanced
the monitoring mechanism, and it is our hope that the
Council's gradual approach will allow for the
inclusion, in the not-too-distant future, of the two other
categories of serious violations against children
identified in resolution 1612 (2005). Ultimately, we
must assign equal importance to all serious violations
against children.

Allow me briefly to dwell on the issue of attacks
against schools. As is clear from the report of the
Secretary-General, we are witnessing on an
increasingly frequent basis the destruction of schools
and attacks on students and their teachers. In certain
cases, girls' schools are specifically targeted. Insecurity
prevents parents from sending their children to school
for fear that their health or even life might be at risk.

This year, the Economic and Social Council is
examining, at its substantive session now under way in
Geneva, the issue of education for all. Synergies with
our debate today are quite clear. In his speech before
the Council on 5 July last, the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg,
Mr. Jean Asselborn, emphasized the fact that
"protection against violence is one of the key
preconditions for enjoying the right to education". He
welcomed the Security Council's initiative aimed at
expanding the criteria for listing on the list of shame to
cover attacks against schools and hospitals, thereby
allowing for the imposition of sanctions on those
responsible and contributing to the fight against the
impunity that is far too common for these heinous
crimes.

Minister Asselborn called on the international
community to take additional measures to help the
28 million children who are deprived of education
because of armed conflicts and who are subjected to
11-41067
rape, sexual Violence, targeted attacks against their
schools and other human rights violations. I wish to
reiterate that appeal today.

