Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): In order to save time I will read a condensed
version, and I wish to place on record the full version
of my statement.

The series of terrorist attacks in the most diverse
parts of the world that followed the criminal acts of 11
September, the State terrorism against the Palestinian
people and the spiral of violence that this generates,
and the terrorism against Cuba, inter alia, demonstrate
that a comprehensive and collective solution can be
found to this ancient and terrible scourge only through
harmonious cooperation and consensus, and not by
means of war.

Hegemonic unilateralism and double standards
have prevented the United Nations from recovering its
prerogatives and discharging its peace functions.
Unilateral acts or pre-emptive war by a State or a group
of States however powerful they may be, on the pretext
of combating terrorism are totally unacceptable.

For several decades Cuba has struggled in an
exemplary fashion and taken effective measures against
international terrorism. It has never carried out,
financed, tolerated or permitted a terrorist act, not even
in legitimate defence against the direct perpetrators or
the masterminds of heinous crimes committed against
our people. It has never allowed its territory to be used
for terrorist acts against any State, without exception,
and it has declared that it will do everything in its
power to prevent this in the future.
I categorically reject the slander by the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Director, Mr. Robert
Mueller, before the Senate Intelligence Committee on
11 February 2003, which sought to present Cuba as a
threat to the United States, and I challenge him to
present the slightest evidence in this regard.

On the contrary, on 29 November 2001 Cuba
proposed to the United States Government, without any
condition and in keeping with Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001) of 28 September 2001, three
draft bilateral agreements. The first is a programme of
bilateral cooperation to combat terrorism, with
measures to prevent and suppress the planning,
organization, execution, support for or collaboration in,
and financing of any terrorist act against the other
party; and proposals concerning exchange of
information and investigative and judicial cooperation.
The second is a cooperation agreement to combat illicit
traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.
The third is an agreement on illegal trafficking in
persons. Although the United States, on the slightest
pretext, has refused even to consider them, Cuba still
hopes that there will be a change in that policy.

In the midst of the anthrax crisis, in October
2001, the United States Government was offered 100
million tablets of ciprofloxacin, and in November it
was offered a supply of equipment for rapid low-cost
typing of strains and spores. In August 2002, Cuba
proposed joint investigation and research into the West
Nile virus.

It is impossible to eliminate terrorism if some
terrorist acts are condemned while others are
concealed, tolerated or justified. For ethical reasons,
the use of the veto to block international action to
protect the Palestinian people from Israeli State
terrorism must end. There must also be an end to the
American supplies of aircraft, helicopters and other
means whereby that terrorism is carried out.

Terrorism against Cuba continues to be carried
out with absolute impunity from United States territory.
In Havana on 16 June 1998, Cuba officially handed
over to two high-ranking FBI officers incontestable,
abundant and detailed evidence of those activities,
which included 331 pages, record sheets of 64 known
terrorists, 4 hours and 38 minutes of secret filming and
21 telephone interceptions. On 12 August, in Havana,
The New York Times was exclusively provided, at its
request, essentially the same information provided to
the FBI two months earlier. Interviews with detained
terrorists were allowed, and access was given to a
Cuban agent who had infiltrated the Cuban American
National Foundation and was living under cover.

The only response from the FBI was to detain, on
12 September 1998, Gerardo Hernandez, Ramon
Labafiino, Fernando Gonzalez, Rene Gonzalez and
Antonio Guerrero. As has been clearly shown, they
were, with lofty altruism and courage, trying only to
obtain information about terrorist groups based in
Miami with a View to preventing their violent acts and
saving the lives of Cuban and United States citizens.

A civil court in Miami sentenced them to the
maximum penalty, without the safeguards of due
process, on false charges - including charges that the
District Attorney asked to be withdrawn due to lack of
evidence - and with a jury that was subjected to
threats by terrorist groups and exposed to the
intolerance of radical organizations and the anti-Cuban
press. A number of known terrorists, called by the
defence to testify, were protected by the Fifth
Amendment.

At the request of the United States Attorney
General, the sentences of two of those men, who are
United States citizens, include the following unusual
paragraph, which insults the memory of the victims of
11 September, only three months after that crime was
committed. It states:

"As a further special condition of supervised
release the defendant is prohibited from
associating with or Visiting specific places where
individuals or groups such as terrorists, members
of organizations advocating violence and
organized crime figures are known to be or to
frequent".

The President of the United States has
emphatically stated:

"Justice demands that those who helped or
harboured the terrorists be punished- and
punished severely. One of the things we will do
is enforce the doctrine, part of the doctrine that
says, 'If you harbour a terrorist, you're just as

39?

guilty as a terrorist .
And he launched a war on that premise.

On 20 May 2002, President Bush made an
offensive anti-Cuban speech in Miami. A photograph
taken by United States television on that occasion
shows the presence, on the podium a few feet away
from the President, of Sixto Aquit Manrique, who was
convicted in 1995 of carrying out an act of terrorism in
Miami. In 1992 he took part in a plot to assassinate the
President of Cuba. In 1993, he attacked the Maltese
vessel Mykonos. He is associated with an armed
infiltration of Cuba on 17 October 1996. In 1998, the
FBI was given a great deal of evidence relating to that
individual.

In another photograph taken at the same
ceremony, Orlando Bosch Avila can be seen in the
front row. On 23 January 1989, the Acting Associate
Attorney General of the United States, Joe Whitley,
wrote, in a confidential decision to deny asylum to and
deport Orlando Bosch after his illegal entry into the
United States and his imprisonment in 1988, that the
United States Government had confidential information
confirming that "the bombing of a Cuban airlines
aeroplane on 6 October 1976 was a CORU operation
under the direction of Bosch". However, the order to
deport Bosch, was cancelled, despite the fact that a
court had endorsed the Department of Justice decision.
He was pardoned by President George Bush in 1990
and granted residency in the United States.

In a radio broadcast, on 6 June 2002, and then on
16 June in Diario de las Americas, Orlando Bosch
reiterated his call for the use of terrorism against Cuba.
On 5 December 2002, the Miami New Times quoted
Bosch, stating "All the people on the aeroplane were
henchmen", in reference to the Cuban aeroplane that
was bombed.

Roberto Martin Perez also appears in photographs
of the 20 May ceremony. He is the head of the
paramilitary group of the Cuban American National
Foundation and one of the organizers of the plan to
assassinate the Cuban President during the Ibero-
American Summit on Margarita Island in November
1997. He was also an organizer of another, aborted,
assassination attempt that was to take place during the
CARIFORUM. Summit in the Dominican Republic in
August 1998.

The terrorist Rodolfo Frometa Caballero, head of
F-4 Commandos, issued a statement on 9 January 2003
in a Miami newspaper called La Verdad, declaring, "In
2003 we are still at war". Earlier, on 31 December
2002, the El Nuevo Herald had confirmed that his
group had participated in an attack allegedly
undertaken in Cuba. As if that were not enough, on 29
January 2003, The Wall Street Journal referred to the
alliance of that organization with Venezuelan groups
resident in Miami, which organize and carry out
military training with a view to confronting the
constitutional Government of Venezuela. Information
on that terrorist was likewise provided to the FBI.
Posada Carriles, one of the perpetrators of the
Cuban aeroplane bombing, was a CIA agent for many
years. He escaped from a Venezuelan prison in an
operation organized and financed by the Cuban
American National Foundation. According to United
States Senate records, he reappeared as one of the
"Contra-gate" operators, receiving a salary from both
the CIA and the United States Department of State. He
travelled freely to Miami in 1997 and 1998. He was
responsible for the bombing campaign against Havana
hotels in 1997 that killed an Italian tourist and injured
12 Cubans. He also organized an assassination attempt
against the Cuban President on the occasion of the
Ibero-American Summit in Margarita Island. Now he is
in prison in Panama, awaiting a trial on charges of
trying to blow up, using 20 kilogrammes of C-4 and 50
packets of Semtex, a university auditorium during a
speech by President Fidel Castro on 16 November
2000, in the presence of thousands of professors and
students from Panama, on the occasion of another
Ibero-American Summit.

Dionisio Suarez was one of the most eloquent
speakers to take part in a ceremony in Miami on 15
November 2002 to pay tribute to the terrorists detained
in Panama. He served a l2-year prison sentence for the
murder of a Chilean diplomat, Orlando Letelier, and
the American citizen Ronnie Moffit. Referring to the
acts that those terrorists had planned to carry out in
Panama, Dionisio Suarez said, "They deserve respect;
they deserve applause". Suarez, too, was invited to the
presidential ceremony that took place on 20 May 2002.

On 11 November 2002, a Cuban AN-2 aircraft
was hijacked and taken to United States territory.
Instead of being put on trial, the eight hijackers were
given asylum. Instead of being returned, the aircraft
was auctioned off.

Two weeks ago, on 7 February, during the
"orange" antiterrorist alert in the United States, a
military vessel from the Cuban coastguard service
arrived at Key West without being intercepted and
docked there. The vessel was carrying four armed men
wearing camouflage fatigues. Although the vessel was
returned, the hijackers have not been returned to Cuba
and have not been charged.

With complete impunity and with the complicity
of United States authorities, funds are being collected
in Miami for the purpose of financing terrorist acts.
Bank accounts that finance terrorism are operating
openly and normally; terrorists are being recruited;
weapons supplies are being produced; safe haven is
being provided. The territory is being use by those who
finance, plan and carry out terrorist acts.

Cuba expects the Security Council and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee to take action. Does
resolution 1373 (2001) not apply to the terrorism that,
on an ongoing basis and with manifest impunity, is
being undertaken from United States territory against
Cuba?

