Mr. Pillai: It is an honour to be in the Security
Council today for this important meeting on the Great
Lakes region, and I thank the Angolan presidency for
organizing it.

It has been three years since 11 nations signed
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
Agreement for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region. Since then, there has been
progress but, as speakers before me have highlighted,
significant challenges remain. Today's meeting is a
good opportunity to renew international support for
delivering on the fine principles and commitments
laid out in the Framework Agreement. On behalf of the
World Bank, I would like to make three points.

First, the Great Lakes region presents a stark
example of the economic and human costs of conflict.
As we all know, the drivers of that conflict are deep-
seated - weak institutions, a lack of access to basic
services and economic opportunity, an uncertain
security situation and ethnic divisions, all compounded
by rapid population growth and competition over
natural resources. We continue to see examples in
the Great Lakes of how a lack of peace and stability
plays through very quickly in terms of macroeconomic
instability, rising fiscal deficits and reduced investor
appetite, which further fuel the lack of jobs and access
to basic services.

As a development institution, the World Bank is
acutely aware that peace and stability are essential
prerequisites for our support to the region, which is
aimed at reducing poverty and expanding opportunities.
We emphasize to national and international partners
that ensuring peace and stability is an urgent need for
the region, for only then can its people reap the full
benefits of development cooperation.

Secondly, in 2013 the President of the World Bank
and the Secretary-General visited the region, and their
message was very clear: the international community
is committing development resources to support the
objectives of the Framework Agreement. The World
Bank Group had committed to providing $1.2 billion in
additional resources for regional solutions in the Great

Lakes. Today, I am pleased to report that we are well
advanced in approving regional projects for the full
amount. Over time, those projects will help to tap into
regional power-generation opportunities, providing an
additional 250 megawatts of power, and will facilitate
secure and higher incomes for nearly 100,000 trading
communities and small-time traders who currently
sustain life through insecure cross-border trading. The
projects will help to alleviate the misery of thousands
of women who have been sexually abused as a result of
the conflict and of people who have suffered the grim
consequences of forced displacement.

Those are difficult areas to tackle in any country,
and more so in places with weak capacity and uncertain
security environments. The World Bank remains
committed to working with the Governments involved
to ensure that those projects are effectively implemented
so that the benefits flow in full for the people of the
region, thus creating a path to a virtuous cycle between
development benefits that help to further enhance the
region's peace and security objectives.

Finally, the Framework Agreement recognizes
specific roles for the national Governments and the
international community. Each has a role to play.
In addition to what is stated under the Framework,
all of us - countries, bilaterals and multilateral
partners - have a responsibility to act in a coordinated
manner. I am delighted that the World Bank has
been working well with the United Nations and other
development partners and remains committed to
sustaining those partnerships for the benefit of the
Great Lakes region.

