Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation too wishes to welcome the presence of the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also thank the High Representative
for his excellent work and for his recent report
(S/2007/253, annex).

Since the Council's last meeting devoted to the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, general elections
have taken place. These were of crucial important for
the country and its future prospects. The High
Representative reports that, unfortunately, the elections
did not put an end to nationalistic rhetoric, which is
obviously a source of tension and a reason for concern.
Nevertheless, we note that most institutions have been
established: for instance, a new Government has been
formed, along with new administrations in most of the
country's cantons. Among the outcomes of the October
2006 elections have been the decline of nationalist
parties and, especially, the power-sharing among
various political forces at all levels. The electoral
success should make it possible to relaunch the
constitutional reform process and the negotiations with
the European Union on the Stabilization and
Association Agreement. As the High Representative
has pointed out, progress in that connection has slowed
due to the political uncertainty prevailing in the region.

It seems to us more useful than ever to reaffirm
the need to encourage the local population to take
ownership of their own affairs as soon as possible and
to make them responsible for their own destiny. The
positive outcome of last October's elections, which
were organized by local authorities themselves for the
first time, is an encouraging sign in that regard and
illustrates the genuine desire of all parties to begin to
build a functioning, modern and democratic State.

However, much remains to be done to help
Bosnia and Herzegovina to ensure its transition
towards a peaceful, reconciled and integrated nation in
the heart of Europe, in accordance with the provisions
of the General Framework Agreement and resolution
1722 (2006), which the Council adopted on 21
November 2006.
First of all, the process of constitutional and
economic reform must continue. Of course, thanks to
the commitment of the parties and the tireless efforts of
the High Representative, important reforms have been
carried out with regard to the police and defence
forces, as well as in the economic area. With regard to
the latter, a broad-based undertaking has made it
possible to clean up the business environment.

It is nevertheless the case that, under the
authority of the new leadership and thanks to the
positive contributions of all parties, major efforts are
still needed in such critical areas as the implementation
of the 18 March 2006 agreement on the reform of the
constitution. That continues to be an historical step
towards peace and economic and social reconstruction,
as well as a precondition to consolidating the
democratic process. The Council's recent decision to at
last settle the issue of non-certified police officers
constitutes an effort to calm the situation, which we
welcome.

It will then be the duty of the authorities to do
everything possible to overcome the remaining effects
of a difficult past by redoubling efforts to arrest
fugitives responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity with a view to transferring them to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. The High Representative rightly
emphasized that point, as any hesitation in that regard
will continue to have an impact upon the viability of
the peace process and national reconciliation, as well
as upon the implementation of the completion strategy
that the Council has set for the Tribunal.

The implementation of the Peace Agreement in
the troubled Balkan context is a source of satisfaction.
The Council must nevertheless avoid a hasty
disengagement, for we must guarantee and consolidate
the realization of the common vision of peace and
development shared by the ethnic groups of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We therefore support the gradual hand-
over to local authorities of the powers of the High
Representative. However, the challenges that still lie
ahead call for caution. We therefore fully support the
tireless efforts of the High Representative and the
multinational stabilization force. We encourage the
new authorities and all stakeholders not to relent in the
implementation of commitments, so as to strengthen
the rule of law and good governance.

