Mr. Zannier: The report before the Council
today (S/2010/ 169) details the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) from 16 December 2009 to 15 March 2010.
Today, I intend to highlight key issues and update the
Council on events that occurred after 15 March.

Overall, since my most recent address to the
Council in late January (see S/PV.6264) the situation in
Kosovo has remained stable, although the potential
remains for volatility and instability, especially in
northern Kosovo and a number of significant
developments have taken place. The absence of a
significant process of reconciliation between the
communities continues to be a challenge, and that,
coupled with economic difficulties, continues to pose a
risk of social unrest.

UNMIK is devoting close attention to issues
affecting relations between the communities to
facilitate regional cooperation, including through its
presence at meetings; to focus on northern Kosovo,
including by exercising administrative responsibilities
in northern Mitrovica; to engage with all interested
parties on issues relating to cultural and religious
heritage; and to offer its good offices for the resolution
of practical issues between Pristina and Belgrade in the
expectation that more direct channels of dialogue for
the resolution of such issues can be activated between
the parties.

While there has been some encouraging
movement in the cultural heritage sphere and in
UNMIK's efforts to address practical inter-ethnic
issues in Mitrovica, progress in other areas is still
heavily conditioned by the prepositioning of the sides
in relation to the upcoming International Court of
10-36420
Justice advisory opinion on the legality of Kosovo's
declaration of independence.

In particular, regional cooperation, which is key
to badly needed economic development, has suffered
notable setbacks due to status-related considerations.
However, while there are no standardized procedures
for the participation of the Kosovo institutions in
regional or other international forums, UNMIK'S
facilitation has in most cases allowed the seemingly
incompatible demands of the two sides to be
reconciled, thus providing a concrete contribution to
the development of regional cooperation initiatives.

Indeed, particularly at the technical level, we
have had considerable success in facilitating Kosovo's
participation in regional and international encounters,
although the Kosovo authorities appear to believe that
UNMIK's facilitation role is not in the interest of their
declared sovereign status. As long as it is needed and
helpful, UNMIK will continue to play its status-neutral
role with all stakeholders in order to foster regional
dialogue and cooperation. In this context, I have
continued to engage with both Belgrade and Pristina,
as well as with regional leaders, holding consultations
on the margins of international events, as well as
meetings in capitals both within and outside the region.

With UNMIK's facilitation, Belgrade and Pristina
continue to have direct dealings on missing persons
issues through the Working Group on Missing Persons
chaired by the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), and on religious and cultural heritage
issues through the Reconstruction Implementation
Commission for Serbian Orthodox Religious Sites in
Kosovo, chaired by the Council of Europe. While we
have seen encouraging progress in the area of cultural
and religious heritage with the welcome appointment
of the head of Greece's liaison office in Pristina as a
European Union (EU) facilitator, the problem of
missing persons remains a major challenge to the
process of reconciliation between the communities.

ICRC estimates that, as of 27 April this year,
1,862 individuals were still missing across Kosovo. On
8 April, when the Working Group on Missing Persons
met in Pristina with delegations from Pristina and
Belgrade, representatives of Kosovo-Albanian and
Kosovo-Serb families expressed dissatisfaction with
the progress made to date and demanded that the issue
be depoliticized. Their call should be heeded. In this
light, I warmly welcome the, announcement by
10-36420

Serbia's war crimes prosecutor's office on 10 May of
the discovery, in cooperation with the EU Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), of a mass grave near
Raska in Serbia. The site is believed to contain the
remains of some 250 Kosovo Albanians. The prompt
identification and return of the remains to surviving
family members will help the bereaved to achieve
closure and start the healing process.

Regrettably, direct practical cooperation between
Belgrade and Pristina has not extended to areas other
than those I have just mentioned. The efforts of
EULEX to re-establish a fully functioning multi-ethnic
court in the northern part of Mitrovica have produced
mixed results so far. Similarly, progress towards the
establishment of full-fledged customs facilities at gates
1 and 31 is also proving difficult.

I mentioned at the outset the particular potential
for volatility and instability in northern Kosovo. The
situation in northern Mitrovica remains politically
delicate, and the experience of past years shows that
the reconstruction and returns activities in the
inter-ethnic Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani neighbourhood need
to be adequately shepherded. So far, 17 Kosovo
Albanian families and 40 Kosovo Serb families have
moved into reconstructed and newly constructed homes
in the neighbourhood, and UNMIK wishes to see this
process continue unhindered. We have made efforts to
assist the families in addressing the infrastructure
needs of the neighbourhood through UNMIK-
facilitated technical working groups, and I am pleased
to report that both communities have been constructive
and cooperative and that the building season in Kroi i
Vitakut/Brdjani has recommenced peacefully this year.
The everyday problems facing the communities here,
as in so many other locations throughout Kosovo, do
not discriminate; they affect all ethnicities and are best
addressed through joint efforts.

Intent on opening new channels for direct
dialogue between the northern and southern parts of
Mitrovica, particularly on the pressing issue of
returns - which leaders on both sides have raised with
me - I have repeatedly visited Mitrovica over the past
few months to meet with the key players.
Unfortunately, obstacles to agreeing on the modalities,
including who should or should not participate in this
dialogue, have so far stymied my efforts to bring the
two sides together on the issue, politics once again
prevailing. My staff and I will continue our efforts but,
ultimately, the effort and good will must come from the
3
local leaders on both sides, as well as from Pristina and
Belgrade.

The issue of returns continues to be a source of
tension in other parts of Kosovo as well, with this
period having witnessed a serious display of local
resistance to returns in the Village of Zallq/Zac in
north-western Kosovo. The spontaneous return of 23
Kosovo Serbs to the village in late March was met with
repeated protests by groups of Kosovo Albanian
residents of Zallq/Zac and neighbouring villages, who
alleged that the returnees included individuals who had
committed war crimes in the area - allegations which
have not been substantiated. Five people from
Zallq/Zac are still considered missing from the
conflict. There have also been allegations that the
protests may be motivated by property disputes.

Whatever the case, encouragingly, the Kosovo
authorities welcomed the returns and allocated
€100,000 to the accommodation of the returnees, and
Kosovo police and the Kosovo Force provided
protection. Regrettably, however, this did not stop
further repeated attacks by stone-throwing youths and,
most recently, the firing of bullets into the tent of a
returnee family, which fortunately did not result in any
injuries.

Ultimately, the situation in Zallq/Zac can be seen
as a microcosm of Kosovo's humanitarian and
economic challenges: the unresolved missing persons
issues, the related lack of reconciliation, the difficult
economic circumstances, security and property issues,
and the cumulative effect of all these issues on the
returns process. The reaction of the Kosovo authorities
has been encouraging, but it is clear that more must be
done at the grass-roots level to overcome the legacy of
the past.

Since the submission of the report before the
Council, measures taken by the Kosovo
Telecommunications Regulatory Authority to dismantle
and destroy transmitters and other equipment of
unlicensed telecommunications service providers in
Kosovo led to widespread disruption in the
communication infrastructure in minority areas,
including for emergency services. In response,
transmitters operated by licensed service providers in
northern Kosovo were attacked with explosives.

The issue is a complex one, with legal, political,
commercial, humanitarian, and security implications.
While the Telecommunications Regulatory Authority
viewed the situation as a rule of law and commercial
matter, the humanitarian impact of disconnections so
abruptly implemented is unquestionable. The Law on
Telecommunications was promulgated by UNMIK in
2003 and is still the only telecommunication sector
regulation in Kosovo. In the past, UNMIK has
repeatedly reminded unauthorized providers of the
licensing requirements foreseen in that Law.
Nevertheless, UNMIK remains concerned by the
humanitarian impact of the disconnections and is
monitoring the steps being taken by the Kosovo
authorities to lessen the impact of the disconnections
on the minority communities affected.

Since I last addressed the Council, there have
been some significant changes at both the local and
central governance levels in Kosovo. The newly
created Kosovo Serb-majority municipalities have now
set up their administrative structures and, while they
enjoy a certain degree of attention and goodwill from
the Kosovo authorities, it is nonetheless too early to
assess their performance with respect to catering to
their constituents' needs and aspirations.

At the central level, the major event since the
submission of the report before the Council was a
cabinet reshuffle announced on 31 March. Six
ministers were replaced and a new Ministry of
European Integration was established. A reshuffle of
deputy ministers, which had been expected in late
April, has been delayed. In the meantime, a EULEX
investigation into allegations of corruption concerning
the Minister of Transport and Telecommunication has
strained relations between the Kosovo authorities and
elements of the international community in Kosovo.

Relations between UNMIK and the Kosovo
authorities are courteous, if at arm's length, and the
UNMIK staff continue to maintain a variety of daily,
fruitful contacts at the working level with their Kosovo
counterparts.

Finally, I wish to highlight the progress we are
making in the integrated mission planning process
mandated by the Secretary-General. UNMIK and the
United Nations Kosovo team are in the process of
developing a United Nations strategic framework for
Kosovo that will allow us to better share the
overarching objective of ensuring lasting security and
stability in Kosovo. The United Nation's strongest
comparative advantage in Kosovo is its acceptance
among all the communities. In this regard, UNMIK and
10-36420
the United Nations Kosovo team have identified a
number of common priorities and challenges that
would maximize the impact of the interventions of
United Nations bodies in Kosovo, especially with
respect to human rights and governance, inclusive
municipalities, the situation in the North and the issue
of returns. I am pleased with the progress we are
making.

In closing, on behalf of all UNMIK staff, I wish
to thank the Council for its support and assure it that
UNMIK will continue to perform its mandated
functions in order to ensure continued peace and
stability in Kosovo and in the region. We hope that the
two sides will continue to take advantage of UNMIK's
facilitation and good offices. With encouragement from
this Council and cooperation from all sides, UNMIK is
confident that it can continue its work.

