Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the United States for putting forward resolution 2356
(2017). France welcomes its unanimous adoption.

For years, North Korea has been insistently pushing
the development of its nuclear and ballistic programmes
at the highest levels of the regime. It has been
methodically trying to acquire an operational nuclear
arsenal at the sacrifice of its own population. Let us be
clear: each ballistic launche brings the North Korean
regime closer to developing precise and diversified
operational military nuclear capabilities. That is
progressing at an alarming and ever-increasing rate. At
the same time, North Korea possesses other weapons
of mass destruction - chemical and biological * a
danger that must not be underestimated.

The current situation is greately fuelling tensions
on the Korean peninsula. Every country could be within
range of North Korean missiles one day. It is therefore
a security threat for all countries. Moreover, it is the
entire non-proliferation regime - which underpins our
security framework - that is in danger.

Despite our repeated warnings, North Korea has
flouted every one of the Council's resolutions and has
defied the entire international community. Given the
severity and urgency of the threat - one of the most
acute threats to international peace and security - there
was an urgent need for the Council to express its
concern and reaffirm its authority.

France therefore welcomes the unanimous adoption
of the resolution proposed by the United States, which
makes it possible to reaffirm an unambiguous triple
message of unity, firmness and commitment on the
part of the Security Council. By this resolution, the
Council condemns North Korea's unjustifiable actions
and punishes individuals and entities that are central
to the operations of the regime and its programmes,
in particular the ballistic-missile programme, and
their financing.

The resolution is a determined response as well
as a fresh warning. North Korea's dangerous and
irresponsible headlong rush must come to a stop.
North Korea must become aware that, if it insists on
choosing escalation and provocation, then we will
have no other choice but to increase pressure with
total determination. France has said that sanctions are
not an end unto themselves, but when we are faced
with the irresponsible, unjustifiable obduracy of the
North Korean regime, there is no other solution today
than to stand firm and convince it to return to the
negotiating table.

The present situation is the exact opposite of a
context of dialogue. It is therefore up to North Korea
to sincerely demonstrate through concrete and good
faith gestures that it is ready to invest in a negotiated
solution and contribute to the casing of tensions in
the Korean peninsula. Our objective must remain the
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula.

