The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Dominican Republic.

It is an honour to preside over today's open debate
on natural disasters and environmental degradation and
their effects on development and international peace
and security. I would like to thank all participants in
today's debate for their considerable interest in the
topic. I would like to warmly welcome and commend
my colleagues - Ministers for Foreign Affairs - who
are here today. I would also like to thank all of the
briefers - Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Mr. Achim Steiner,
Mr. Pavel Kabat and Ms. Lindsay Getschel, for their
various presentations today

Considering the link between the effects of climate
change and security is a very high priority for the
Dominican Republic. The increase in recent years in
the frequency and intensity of extreme natural disasters
in the Caribbean raised the alarm in our country and
our region. A failure to recognize and address that
vulnerability in a timely manner will have serious
consequences for our nations, as well as for those of
other regions also affected.

At the outset, I would like to emphasize that the
attention we give to the link between the environment
and security is, from our point of view, consistent with
efforts that we make, together with other members of
the international community, to build an institutional
architecture that responds to the multiple challenges
posed by environmental degradation. The United
Nations and its subsidiary bodies have made significant
progress in considering the issue from the perspective
of its impact on development. The agreements reached
during twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, held in Katowice, on the guidelines for
implementing the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
are a key step in that direction.

Meanwhile, for more than a decade now, the
nexus between climate change and security has been
addressed sporadically in the Security Council. It is
no coincidence that there is renewed interest in the
issue, sparked by the debate organized by Sweden in
2018 (see S/PV.8307), the debate we are presiding over
today and the plans announced by other members,
such as Germany and Belgium, during their time as
non-permanent members of the Security Council. Such
focus goes hand in hand with an increasing awareness
of the urgent challenges posed by environmental
degradation and its negative consequences.

We all know that climate change is the greatest
global challenge facing humankind and that it requires
collective action in order to address all its dimensions.
With regard to the link between the environment
and security, the Security Council has already set
precedents by accepting that environmental change and
degradation are risk factors in several conflict-prone
areas and that the negative effects of climate change can
contribute to destabilization. In the specific instances
of Lake Chad and the Sahel, the Council has made it
clear that certain effects of climate change are linked to
other factors that exacerbate the situation.

All evidence available suggests that the effects
of climate change will be felt more strongly at the
global level in the coming years. The report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change states
that, if the current trend continues, by 2030 global
warming will lead to greater risks to health, human
life, food security, water supply and economic growth.
That trend therefore implies the need to prevent such
negative effects from becoming root causes of conflict.
We therefore believe that it is vital to pay attention to the
link between environmental degradation and security
and to create mechanisms to address that nexus within
the framework of the body responsible for ensuring
international peace and security.

We must equip the Security Council with the tools
necessary to systematically assess the relationship
between the effects of the climate change and
conventional risks, in particular in vulnerable areas.
In that regard, there are already several ideas on the
table to which we must pay attention in order to make
the most appropriate decisions. The time has come for
us to take those steps, and we hope that today's debate
will be a positive contribution in that direction. The
nexus between the adverse effects of change climate
change and security is perhaps more obvious from the
perspective of developing countries, in particular small
island developing States and countries suffering from
extreme vulnerability, including those of the Central
American isthmus.

Our countries are already experiencing a new
reality, which includes increasingly severe natural
disasters and risks that emerge more gradually, such
as human displacement, food insecurity and recurring
and unpredictable failures in critical infrastructure. We
thank Mr. Steiner for his illustration of the enormous
impact of natural disasters and the importance of
improving institutional arrangements in order to better
coordinate our prevention and response capability.

The DominicanRepublic brings to the table thevoice
of the countries that suffer more intensely the effects
of natural disasters as a result of climate change, due
to both their geographic location and their institutional
and/or economic vulnerabilities. For that reason,
we feel that it is particularly urgent for the Security
Council to reach consensus on the best way to include
climate-related effects in its work on security. We are
facing an unconventional threat, which demands that
the Council reflect further on its role in the prevention
of conflicts. That is a reality that is already present on
the ground, which we cannot ignore. Our work must be
to adapt to that and update the Council's approach on
security with a view to increasing its analytical skills
in order to identify, and eventually prevent, causes
of conflict.

In that regard, Ms. DiCarlo was very eloquent in
explaining how the consideration of instability and
conflicts, which arise at the intersection between
climate change and social, economic, demographic
and political factors, fall within the purview of work
of the Council. Mr. Kabat also showed us the effects
on highly-populated areas and particularly vulnerable
areas as a result of extreme climatic events, such as
floods and droughts.

As other members have already said, it is not
appropriate, and it should not be our aim, to duplicate
the work of other United Nations organs, but rather
to explore ways by which they can complement each
other, working within their own mandates. By creating
an institutional space for reflection on the link between
climate change we would be contributing to the Council's
knowledge and equipping it with the mechanisms it
needs to ensure the relevance of its analyses of risks
and causes, and therefore the effectiveness of its action
to promote peace.

It is of the utmost importance for the Council
to have the necessary information for it to make
strategic decisions, taking into account the impact of
unusually fierce natural phenomena on the Sustainable
Development Goals, and so that, ultimately, it can carry
out that role and respond to the aspirations of millions
of people, mostly youth, to live in a better world, in
a sustainable, resilient and peaceful environment. The
Dominican Republic proposes that all of the proposals
discussed here be compiled into a report that is then
given to the Secretary-General.

We urge members to lend their support to concrete
steps that will allow us to move towards consensus that
would include that new dimension in our work, both
to improve our understanding of today's conflicts and
prevent those of the future.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

May I remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their text in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.

I also wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate through the lunch hour, as
we have a long list of speakers.

I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Guatemala.

