Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): Let me join
others in welcoming to the Security Council the
Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), Ms. Fang Lui. I thank her for her
informative briefing. Let me also thank Ambassador
Aboulatta for his briefing as Chair of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee.

We sit in a city that will forever stand testament
to the vulnerability of civil aviation to terrorism and
to its tragic consequences. Since the beginning of civil
aviation, terrorists have found it to be an appealing
target. In the past century, the hijacking of airplanes
and the taking of innocent passengers as hostages for
ransom or to achieve political gains was one ofthe most
well-known manifestations of terrorism. However, the
attack of 11 September 2001 brought about a new and
unimaginable manifestation - the use of commercial
airlines to commit the mass murder of civilians, both
in the air and on the ground. Since then, we have
increasingly seen attacks on the aviation industry that
seek to spread fear and disruption.

At the same time, international civil aviation
is essential. Interconnectivity contributes to the
globalization that has spread prosperity and greater
understanding between different nations and cultures.
Yet with this greater interconnectedness comes
interdependence. That is particularly true when it
comes to aviation security. Ensuring that aviation is
safe and secure for all is truly a common task among
nations: we are only as safe as our weakest link.

Aviation security is an area where significant
international cooperation is already taking place.
We commend ICAO for its role in this work, not
least in providing capacity-building and technical
assistance to States. We welcome the improvements
in the implementation of ICAO's Standards and
Recommended Practices. We also welcome the ongoing
work on the development of a new Global Aviation
Security Plan that will support collective action in
support of aviation security.

We appreciate the efforts of ICAO, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate to work together to
find synergies among their respective areas of expertise.
We need to support each other in effectively enhancing
our aviation security. That includes operational
cooperation and information exchange, not least on
information specifically related to terrorist threats to
civil aviation. Further capacity-building in this area
is essential.

For the European Union (EU), as for so many others,
the attacks of 11 September 2001 were a watershed
moment. The new reality led to enhanced joint efforts
on aviation security within the EU. A common
legislative framework is now in place across the EU,
which incorporates ICAO standards as well as annex
17 of the Chicago Convention on International Civil
Aviation. That legislative framework covers, inter alia,
the screening of passengers, airport security, aircraft
security checks, as well as other types of screening.
The EU also provides support for capacity-building as
part of its development cooperation policy. Partnerships
with national and regional authorities play an important
role in our efforts to build capacity in this area.

Attacks in recent years, including those on airports
in Brussels and Istanbul, have shown that there is no
room for complacency. We need to redouble our efforts
and constantly improve the level of aviation security.
Our work on aviation security must dovetail with our
efforts to ensure effective and secure border control,
airport security and cargo security. In addition, more
work is needed to address emerging areas of potential
vulnerability, including the landside security of airports
and how to deal with new cybersecurity threats. Sweden
is committed to working at home and together with
our EU partners to ensure that our contribution to the
global chain of aviation security is strong.

The aim of aviation security is, first and foremost,
preventative. Today's discussion on aviation security is
an important contribution to our collective efforts to
counter and mitigate the direct threats terrorism can
pose to civil aviation. In the broader context, we also
need to ensure continued work, in compliance with
international law, to prevent radicalization to violent
extremism and terrorism in the first place, in line with
our common United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy as well as the Plan ofAction to Prevent Violent
Extremism. The newly established United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism will be instrumental in
their implementation.

We should not forget that, for generations, aviation
has created a sense of adventure and opportunity
for millions. Terrorist attacks and threats seek to
undermine that sense of wonder, and replace it with
fear and distrust. By working together, we can ensure
that they do not succeed.

