Mr. Ahsan (Bangladesh): We have been
witnessing in the past few weeks a dangerously
escalating situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
and East Jerusalem. We are extremely concerned at the
continuation of the alarmingly high level of violence
taking place daily and causing numerous deaths and
intolerable human suffering. Apart from its
implications for the peace process, the situation
represents a threat to peace and security in the region
and warrants consideration by the Security Council in
view of the Council's role in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We therefore strongly
supported the request made by the member States of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference for holding
an emergency meeting of the Council. We commend
you, Mr. President, for responding to this call.

The Security Council, however, is not considering
this issue for the first time, nor is it acting in a void. In
our opinion, the Council has and must play its
legitimate role in the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. In its resolution
1322 (2000) of 7 October 2000, the Council called for
the establishment of a mechanism of inquiry into the
tragic events of the preceding few days. The Council
invited the Secretary-General to continue to follow the
situation and to keep the Council informed. It may be
recalled that the Council also called for the immediate
resumption of negotiations within the Middle East
peace process on its agreed basis for achieving a final
settlement of the question. These, in our view, are
parameters that establish a continuing relevance for
Council action on the issue.

The gravity of the situation has been stressed by
previous speakers today and has also been addressed by
the international community in recent days. Apart from
the human suffering that the continuing violence has
caused, we are gravely concerned at the unravelling of
what remains of the Middle East peace process. The
dynamic of events, on the one hand, and the unilateral
policy of applying military force, on the other, have
unmistakably contributed to this unravelling.

The cycle of violence has apparently resisted
efforts to stop it. The reasons are not very far to seek.
Maintaining the economic blockades and closures,
destruction and other illegal measures in the occupied
territories and continuation of the settlement activities
are factors that stand in the way of ending violence.
The Council should address this issue carefully. While
the Sharm el-Sheikh Fact-finding Committee - the
Mitchell Committee - report clearly enumerated
recommendations for the parties, we have seen
attempts to avoid their implementation.

As has been done in various other forums
recently, the Council should emphasize that the full
implementation of the recommendations of the Fact-
fmding Committee, without any preconditions, is of
crucial importance at the present time. Unfortunately,
recent events on the ground are not giving encouraging
signs for achieving that objective. The international
community has made valuable investment in the peace
process, in particular following the Sharm el-Sheikh
meeting. We recognize and welcome these efforts at
mediation. It is expected of the sponsors of these
efforts to remain engaged, especially in view of the
serious deterioration in the situation that threatens the
agreed basis of the peace process.

We are firmly of the view that the current volatile
situation calls for a continued and more intimate
involvement of the international community.
Bangladesh strongly endorses, therefore, the idea of
establishment of a monitoring mechanism to help the
parties implement the recommendations of the
Committee. There is no scope to confuse the purpose of
this mechanism. Clearly, allegations and counter-
allegations about the bona fides of one side or the other
have gone on for long enough. The time has come for
all to realize that the parties need help in achieving
what they have failed to achieve so far on their own.

Both sides have agreed to the full and
comprehensive implementation of the Committee's
recommendations. The Council should do its part to
help them achieve that objective by establishing a
monitoring mechanism of an international character.
Such a mechanism would have the advantage of
impartially establishing the factors acting against
ending the current cycle of violence, monitoring the
efforts employed by parties in line with the
recommendations and exerting, as a consequence, the
much-needed calming influence on the situation.

Bangladesh commends the initiatives of the
Secretary-General in recent months, including his visit
to the region in June, as a part of his ongoing efforts to
find a political solution to the crisis based on relevant
United Nations resolutions. We fully endorsed the
stated objective of his visit, that is, to press the two
parties to implement in their entirety the
recommendations of the Sharm el-Sheikh Fact-finding
Committee. We particularly welcome his efforts during
his visit to nudge the parties towards an early
resumption of negotiations. We feel that he correctly
emphasized the need for political contact between the
parties beyond security talks. He also recognized that
the international community should work with them to
get them into the logic of implementation of the
Mitchell plan.

We see in today's discussion the Council's
responsibility, its mandate and also, in line with earlier
resolutions, its obligations. We believe that the Council
should call on the parties to desist from actions that
contradict the spirit of the recent ceasefire agreement.
Despite the widespread violence that marked the
ceasefire, we believe that it remains the point of
departure for any meaningful action.

However, along with the measures that the Tenet
work plan outlines, there must also be commensurate
action taken at the political level - actions that will
affect the situation on the ground. The Israeli policy of
collective punishment and targeted killings, economic
blockades and deprivation and, most recently, measures
such as occupation of the Orient House and other
Palestinian institutions in and around occupied East
Jerusalem are, in the first place, actions that must be
reversed - not only because these are illegal, but also
because these actions have contributed to the
deterioration of an already fragile situation and
aggravated the crisis of confidence between the parties.

What the Israeli policy has achieved by
economically strangulating the Palestinian people and
their economy has been well documented. The
Secretary-General's report of 6 July 2001 to the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, under the item of the fifty-sixth session of the
General Assembly entitled "Strengthening of the
coordination and disaster relief assistance of the United
Nations, including special economic assistance",
mentions, "severe internal and external closures
[that have] resulted in large-scale losses to the
Palestinian economy, wiping out more than three years
of prior growth" (A/56/123-E/2001/97, para. 5).

With a 50-per-cent income loss and with
unemployment tripled, the impact on the livelihood of
the Palestinian people has been devastating. In his
conclusions, the Secretary-General argues in favour of
a resumption of political activity leading towards a just
settlement and of economic activity leading to an
improvement of living conditions. That provides a
useful perspective for action by the Council. We
support the appeal to the international donor
community to extend economic and financial assistance
to the Palestinian people, and we acknowledge the
crucial role it has been playing in laying the
foundations for the viability and sustainability of the
Palestinian economy. We call on Israel to reverse the
policy of closures and economic blockades and to
transfer without delay the revenue it is withholding
from the Palestinian authority in contravention of
signed agreements.

The reality of the current situation demands
concerted action in the Council. Lack of unanimity,
however, should not be used as an argument for
Council inaction on this issue. We would strongly urge
all concerned to evaluate the situation from the
standpoint of what is expected of the Council in such a
situation. In our View, the Council has a responsibility
to call for the immediate implementation of the
Mitchell Committee recommendations and for the
launching of a viable political process. We believe the
current situation, if left to the momentum it has
generated, is unlikely to lead to any fruitful outcome.
The language of force must be replaced with the
language of peace. The painful reality remains that no
such possibility exists as long as the policy of
systematic, unilateral military action is in place in
contravention of norms of international humanitarian
law and human rights. The Security Council should
support the idea of establishing a monitoring
mechanism.

