I thank the Secretary-General for his opening remarks and Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. We appreciate all the hard work Mr. Mladenov and his team are putting in to address this continued conflict. I would also like to welcome the Ministers and the representative of the League of Arab States to our virtual discussion today. Peace between the Israelis and Palestinians is the primary reason we are gathered together today, and President Trump has dedicated much time and energy into developing the Vision for Peace. The United States cares deeply about the people of the region, and we believe that the status quo hurts both the Israelis and the Palestinians, and that no one benefits from the existing situation - a perpetual limbo of suffering, lost opportunities, reliance on foreign assistance and repeated cycles of violence, war and destruction. That is why our team has dedicated three years to finding a way forward from the past failed attempts to an alternative path towards peace and resolution of the conflict. President Trump's Vision for Peace is a genuine effort at peacemaking. It is designed to lead the sides to a realistic two-State solution, offering a viable path to Palestinian statehood, in which Palestinians' legitimate aspirations for independence and national dignity can be realized in a peace agreement with Israel. President Trump stated on 28 January that "The] was saddened by the fate of the Palestinian people. They deserve a far better life. They deserve the chance to achieve their extraordinary potential." It takes courageous Israeli leadership to make the tough decisions and compromises to reach a settlement. This is the path to peace we must support with respect and understanding in an effort to make this happen. Without dismissing the hard work put in by dedicated peacemakers over the years, I think we can all agree that past efforts have not brought the sides closer to peace. There have been countless dollars spent, international conferences and United Nations resolutions and statements on the issue, but there has been little real progress. We believe that only bold thinking at this juncture - as laid out in the Vision for Peace - will ultimately be to the benefit of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples. We understand that there are elements of our Vision for Peace that some believe should be adjusted, and, as we have clarified on many occasions, it has never been our intent to impose a solution. Again, I ask that the international community and the Palestinian leadership not dismiss our Vision for Peace out of hand and revert to past statements and arguments that have not led to real peace. I believe it is our collective responsibility, for both the people of Israel and the citizens of a future Palestinian State, to keep an open mind and be willing to break with existing paradigms in order to seek resolution to this conflict. I understand that many participants in today's meeting have concerns with the issue of the potential extension of Israeli sovereignty in the West Bank. At the same time, we ask that that people with this concern also hold the Palestinian leadership accountable for acts for which it is responsible. It does not help anyone to only look backwards and point to what could have been. The Palestinian leadership has a responsibility to pursue the prosperity of its people. At the end of the day, is reverting to old talking points the best we can do as an international community? The United Nations television archives contain recordings of multiple gatherings like today's. I think we can do better. Actually, I know we can do better, and I think we owe it to future generations of Palestinians and Israelis to break this cycle and be the catalysts for change. We therefore again urge the Palestinian leadership to look closely at our Vision for Peace and engage us. As we have said before, our plan is not a "take it or leave it" proposition. It is not set in stone. It is an opening offer. It is the beginning of a conversation - not the end of one. All the diplomats lined up here today have presented, or will present, their passionate speeches, without however addressing the core issue here: the need for Palestinians and Israelis to work together. Whether it is condemning settlement activity or advancing any other common criticism, the repetitive rhetoric we see in these meetings only inflames tensions, antagonizes the parties and undercuts any chance of real lasting peace. The hard truth is not that there will never be a judicial resolution to the conflict; arguments about who is wrong as a matter of international law will not bring about peace. This is a complex political problem that can be solved only by negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians. The United States, under the leadership of President Trump, is addressing this core issue by offering the beginning of a conversation - I reiterate: the beginning of a conversation. We remain open to speaking with anyone about how to bring the parties to the table, and we both urge and welcome any and all engagement.
