Mr. Fernandez Revollo (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for today's
meeting. It is very important for the Security Council
to be updated on developments in the conflict in South
Sudan. We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mr. David Shearer for his briefing
on the situation in the country and for his excellent
work at the helm of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan.

We are deeply concerned about the high levels
of insecurity and the economic and humanitarian
crisis affecting a large part of the population of South
Sudan. Regrettably, there has been no improvement in
the situation since last year. We reiterate once again
that there is no military solution to this conflict. It
is necessary to redouble our efforts to revitalize the
political process and to call for a constructive dialogue
between the parties in order to find a solution that will,
first of all, make it possible to defuse tensions and put
an end to armed confrontations. In that regard, we hail
initiatives that contribute to that objective, such as the
announcement of the unilateral ceasefire by President
Salva Kiir on Monday, 22 May, when the members of
the National Dialogue Steering Committee adopted
their position. That event could signal an emergence
from conflict, provided that there is true compromise
on the part of both the Government and the opposition.

Bolivia welcomes the good offices of President
Yoweri Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda,
who was present at the aforementioned event last
Monday. On that occasion, he mentioned several points
that I would like to highlight today. First, he spoke
very appropriately about the danger of forgetting the
common interests of the people and called for the unity
of the South Sudanese people. Secondly, he also spoke
about the respect that the people of South Sudan have
for the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) and the
need to revitalize that movement, stating that the use
of force should be a last resort. In that vein the SPLA
should not lose the trust of those whom it is supposed
to protect.

As we have said many times, Bolivia believes that
the support of regional organizations is essential in
order to reach a solution to the conflict. It is they who
should lead the processes. Neighbouring countries,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the African Union and former Presidents Mogae and
Konare are all working to find a way out of the crisis.
In that regard, we call for coordinated actions and the
establishment of a strategy that would make it possible
for us to deal with the issue in a comprehensive,
unified fashion.

We are of the View that the three points proposed
by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres to resolve the
conflict in South Sudan - the cessation of hostilities,
the resumption of the peace process through inclusive
dialogue, and unrestricted access for humanitarian
assistance i provide the necessary focus for dealing
with the matter. The will and commitment of the
Government and the opposition are essential to
ensuring the establishment of a true political process.
The South Sudanese should take that first step, making
it possible to achieve reconciliation. National dialogue
should make it possible to have the broad participation
of all concerned to identify the main problems affecting
South Sudan and to reach a lasting peace.

We likewise express our concern at the terrible
humanitarian situation in South Sudan. Thousands
of internally displaced people and refugees in recent
months find themselves in unacceptable conditions.
There is a lack ofbasic services, and women and children
are those principally affected. We hail the efforts of
UNMISS to respond to those needs, in particular the
effort to provide drinking water to internally displaced
people in various areas. In that vein we call on the
Government to cooperate with and facilitate the work
of humanitarian agents and UNMISS.

The situation of insecurity and the escalation
of violence in several regions of the country are also
of great concern. They have led to the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation and make it difficult
to provide assistance to those affected. Compliance
with the ceasefire and the cessation of facilities
are indispensable.

We trust that the regional protection force will
contribute to the lowering of tensions and to the
protection of civilians who are trapped between two
opposing forces. We hail the progress that is taking
place in terms of the deployment of that force, and we
urge cooperation and permission from the Government
so that the force will be able to fulfil its mandate as
quickly as possible.

Lastly, we wish to encourage UNMISS to continue
its work. We place great value on the measures it is
taking to increase the effectiveness of its work. We
know how complicated the situation that they face on
a daily basis is. We express our support and thanks for
the work they are doing.

