Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General O'Brien for giving us a very clear
and sombre picture of the situation on the ground, and
for being very clear about the demands that he, as a
humanitarian actor, is making, very legitimately.

I would also like to pay tribute to the United Nations
and to Mr. O'Brien's staff and partners, who are doing
very admirable work on the ground in very challenging
circumstances. I would also like to particularly thank
him for bringing up the situation of the 6 million
children in need in Syria. Children are being killed
and maimed in indiscriminate attacks on a daily basis.
They are callously targeted in the schools and hospitals
where they seek shelter and, perhaps, a modicum of
normality in their otherwise shattered lives. A whole
generation of Syrian children have had their childhood
stolen from them. We commend the efforts of UNICEF
and its partners in responding to their needs, and we
emphasize the importance of helping them to access
their right to education and the psychosocial support
they need.

The overall level ofinsecurity within Syria remains
difficult to comprehend for those of us on the outside.
The Syrian people continue to face danger and the
threat of death every day. Every avenue must now be
vigorously pursued to end the violence, and we therefore
welcome the recent reduction in violence, mainly in the
four de-escalation zones, as a result of the most recent
meetings in Astana. We are nonetheless concerned
about the military offensives being conducted outside
those zones, primarily by the Syrian regime. It is
essential to ensure that de-escalation in one set ofzones
does not result in an escalation in violence or the siege
of other areas.

One of the primary sources of suffering for those
in besieged areas is a lack of access to even the most
basic needs, such as food. Humanitarian access to
areas besieged by the Syrian regime in April and May
has been deplorable, as we just heard, with only one
convoy, to Duma, getting through, and that despite
the decrease in violence. It is clear that a systemic
change in the approval process is needed and long
overdue. We therefore renew the call we have made
on several occations to Damascus to provide safe,
unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access to all
in need. We also urge the Syrian authorities to grant
permission for humanitarian agencies to use the road
between Aleppo and Qamishli, which has opened up for
commercial traffic.

The Duma convoy shows that access can be achieved
with Russia's active engagement. My key message
today is that I urge the Astana guarantors' working
group to prioritize implementing the humanitarian
provisions of their memorandum. We call on them
to initiate a dialogue with the United Nations and its
partners as soon as possible to agree on streamlined
access procedures for the four de-escalation zones. As
we heard today, the United Nations is ready to engage
and has the capacity to deliver. Ifhumanitarian agencies
are granted unimpeded access to those zones they could
reach all of the towns besieged by the regime except
one, which would be a significant breakthrough. As a
co-penholder, Sweden has continued to engage with all
the relevant stakeholders and partners in order to seize
this opportunity. Expectations for the guarantors to
deliver on their commitments are high.

We are also concerned about the fact that armed
opposition groups, listed terrorist groups and Kurdish
local administrations are increasing restrictions to
access in Idlib and elsewhere. We urge those with
influence on them to use it to bring a halt to that trend. I
would also like to underline that increased humanitarian
access, including in the de-escalation zones, is critical
to sustaining the Astana process and improving the
conditions for achieving results in Geneva. The only
way to end this humanitarian crisis, of course, continues
to be a political solution, and we urge everyone to
intensify their efforts in support of the next round of
talks in the United Nations-led Geneva process.

On Thursday of last week, Mr. President, we
gathered in this Chamber under your presidency to
hold an open debate on the protection of civilians (see S/PV.7951). Many of us spoke about the situation in
Syria, where, as the Secretary-General has said, there
are no events in recent history that compare to the current
protection crisis. We reiterate our concerns about the
forced displacement of civilians to areas where there is
a severe lack of protection for them. Any evacuation of
civilians must be safe and voluntary, and to a place of
their choosing. We remind all parties involved of their
obligations under international humanitarian law.

Civilian casualties are no longer seen as a
consequence of this conflict. Civilians and civilian
infrastructure such as medical facilities are targeted
as objectives to gain military advantage, particularly
by the regime side. Despite resolution 2286 (2016),
there have been over 400 attacks on medical facilities
since the conflict began, with 30 hospitals reportedly
attacked in April alone. This fundamentally undermines
international humanitarian law. It is now incumbent on
the Council to intensify our efforts to halt this trend
and to build on the consensus during Thursday's
important debate that civilians in armed conflict must
be protected.

