Mrs. Haley (United States of America): There are
a few things that I think we have to realize here. I think
a lot of it has do with genuineness - whether it was
used or not; with the actors, Whether they were to be
trusted or not; with the process of how all ofthat played
out; and where we go from there. Given that, I have a
few comments to make.

First, we all voted. We voted that we were going
to follow the rules. We were going to take the Russian
draft resolution (S/2017/933) first and the United States
draft resolution (S/2017/962) second. Bolivia showed
a complete lack of respect for the Council by turning
around and playing a game so as to have its vote after
the vote on the United States draft resolution. We will
have that vote, and it will have the same outcome. For
a member that always says it wants to be transparent,
there was nothing transparent about that. Bolivia really
tried to pull one over on the entire Council, and it is on
Bolivia alone to deal with.

Secondly, the United States took the draft resolution
very seriously. The Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) is one that we strongly believed in.
We engaged in good faith with Russia when we first
came up with the JIM. We were all united and together
when we established the JIM. It was there for a reason,
because chemical weapons usage in Syria continues,
and people continue to die from it. Because of that, we
knew how important the JIM. was. I was glad to hear
Russia say how important the JIM. is.

What is fascinating, however, is that Russia is now
suddenly finding numerous flaws in the JIM. - but it
never found any when we held the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria (ISIS) to be responsible. The flaws did not
seem to exist then. They came about only when Syria
was blamed. Why is that? Was the process different? Did
the experts not do it the same way? Did they treat ISIS
differently from how they treated Syria? Is that what we
are going to imply? So where is our responsibility? Our
responsibility is that the JIM. must remain independent.
So then we had a new draft resolution. By the way,
the United States worked with each and every member
of the Council on the draft resolution, even Russia.
Though it did not want to engage with us, we took into
account things that we knew we could bring in from
the draft resolution, and we have the changes. I showed
Russia those changes, and Russia then said it had had
no intention of voting for it from the very beginning
and that it was always going to veto it. Again, that was
disingenuous, because Russia should have just told all
of us that that was its intention in the first place.

Let me turn now to the process. There is another
draft resolution on the table. Suddenly, Russia puts out
a draft resolution and Chinajoins it. They did not touch
base with a single other country on the Council. Neither
ofthem held consultations and neither ofthem wanted to
discuss it. To them it was all a game, in which they would
just counter it with something else - and they did. All
ofus can still look at it, and I can tell you what we think.
They want a JIM. that does not have independence. They
want a JIM. that does not have reporting. They want a
JIM. that they can micromanage - or that any member
can micromanage. That is the JIM. they want. That is
what they are looking for.

Today, I have heard so many of my friends on
the Council talk about how this is all embarrassing.
It is embarrassing that the Council is not united. It is
embarrassing that we are allowing this to play out.
No. What is embarrassing is that we do not have a
JIM. renewal. What is embarrassing is that everyone is
worried about who they are going to upset, and they
are not thinking about the people who were abused by
chemical weapons.

To realize the importance of what this investigative
mechanism would do, one has to also realize when a
country is playing games with people's lives. That is
exactly what is happening here, and it is happened
10 times. We have watched it happen - 10 different
vetoes. And I will say that the only thing that today has
proved is that Russia cannot be trusted in the political
process in Syria. Russia will not be a good and trusted
actor because it wants to control who is at fault; it wants
to control what happens; it wants to control that area,
because it wants to work with Iran and Syria to make
sure that they have that all under control. If someone is
okay with that, then he or she should make the decision.
The United States is not okay with that.

So what I will say is that through this process we
were very kind and tried to work with everyone - as
we always do - because we think that every member
is important. And we may smile, and we may work with
everyone, and we may incorporate these changes, but
the United States will not be disrespected. We worked
for weeks on a draft resolution, and then they turn
around and say "Oh, can we come up with something
else?" I have a draft resolution with every change that
was requested, but we are going to allow one member to
basically give a pass to chemical-weapons use in Syria.

I will tell my Russia friends this - the next
chemical-weapons attack is on their hands. The next
pictures I hold up will be because they let it happen.
Because by not having the JIM, they are basically telling
the entire world that chemical weapons are okay to use.
That is what we should be embarrassed about today.

