Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): It is a privilege to welcome
you to today's Council meeting, Mr. President. Bolivia
commends the presence and the work of Mr. Ghassan
Salame, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). We want to express our
support and gratitude to him for his major efforts in
achieving the progress that has been made since his
appointment. We also express our appreciation for
the work and briefing of Ambassador Olof Skoog in
his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
Bolivia also commends His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Siala, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Libya, for his
presence here today.
We would like to begin by calling on parties to
implement the Libyan Political Agreement and to
maintain a sustained dialogue aimed at accomplishing a
peaceful, orderly and inclusive political transition, led by
and for the Libyan people, that addresses their interests
and will enable them to define their own future within
the framework of Libya's independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity. We believe that Mr. Salame's
proposals - which include establishing a national
conference to bring together all political stakeholders
to work together on constitutional, legislative and
institutional reforms, as well as organizing an electoral
process that will enable the adoption of a Constitution
and promote progress towards presidential and
parliamentary elections - will pave the way to that
goal. In that context, we emphasize and highlight the
importance of the mediation efforts that the various
regional and international stakeholders have been
making to promote the Libyan political process and to
strengthen the related cooperation mechanisms, and
we acknowledge the initiatives undertaken by Egypt,
Algeria and Tunisia to support and promote the process.

We are very concerned, however, about the
continuing sporadic clashes between the parties and
their high humanitarian cost. According to an UNSMIL
report of 1 November, the casualties recorded in the
month of October alone included 15 people injured
and 23 killed by bombing, crossfire, or the presence
of explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices. Sadly, we must add those fatalities to the more
than 30,000 victims of the conflict since 2011.

Moreover, the alarming number of migrants and
refugees who have lost their lives in the Mediterranean
Sea - which in 2017 reportedly exceeded 5,000,
according to a 13 November report from the
International Organization for Migration - is only
one aspect of the critical situation that these people
are enduring on the Mediterranean coast. According
to a report published by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, more than
13,000 migrants and refugees have been rescued in
the Mediterranean Sea by the Libyan Coast Guard,
an accomplishment that we appreciate and would like
to highlight. We are nevertheless deeply troubled by
the reports of the indefinite detention of migrants,
reportedly amounting to more than 20,000 people
in custody. The conditions to which they have been
subjected while in custody reportedly include torture,
sexual Violence and harassment, including the denial of
medical help. In that regard, we call on all the parties
to work to prevent and end human rights violations
and abuse of migrants in centres under their control.
We remind them that they must fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law and guarantee
the rights of these individuals. In that regard, we call
for the corresponding investigations to begin in order
to identify those responsible for these violations and
ensure that they are duly investigated and prosecuted.

We remind the actors and parties involved in the
conflict that they are obligated to uphold and comply
with their obligations in the framework of international
humanitarian, avoid causing greater suffering to the
civilian population and refrain from violating their
fundamental rights.

Furthermore, we wish to express our support
for the progress reported today by the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya in accordance with its mandate
and on follow-up tasks regarding the implementation of
resolution 2362 (2017).

Finally, it is important to reiterate that the impact
that the Libyan conflict has had on the security
situation in the region is a direct consequence of the
interventionist practices and regime change policies
that have had an effect extending far beyond the Sahel
region, with terrible consequences that we are still
witnessing today.

