Mr. Holmes: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on my visit to the
occupied Palestinian territory and Israel from 14 to
18 February. I spent a day in Gaza, a day in the West
Bank and a morning in Sderot in southern Israel. I also
called on Israeli Government officials, the Prime
Minister of the Palestinian Authority and others and
held intensive discussions with the United Nations and
other humanitarian agencies and non-governmental
organizations working in both the West Bank and Gaza
and with representatives of civil society.

I found conditions for the people of Gaza grim
and miserable, and far from normal. Eight months of
severe restrictions on the movement of goods and
people entering and leaving the territory, following the
Hamas takeover in June 2007, have taken a heavy
economic and social toll, coming on top of years of
difficulty and economic decline. Whilst the most basic
humanitarian goods, particularly food aid, have mostly
continued to struggle through, other imports have been
progressively closed off, including critical spare parts
and raw materials such as cement. Only about 10 per
cent of what went into Gaza in January 2007 was
allowed to enter in January 2008. In addition, in

October, Israel started to reduce the flow of industrial
diesel used to operate the single power station in Gaza.
In February, the amount of electricity supplied to Gaza
from Israel was also reduced. Since June 2007, the
movement of Palestinians in and out of Gaza has been
virtually impossible, apart from the short period when
the Rafah wall was down, and with limited exceptions
made for urgent medical cases, pilgrims, those with
student and work visas and foreign residence
documentation.

The consequences are increasingly severe and
visible. Almost 80 per cent of the population are now
receiving food aid; most industry and agriculture has
collapsed, raising unemployment and poverty to new
heights; frequent and lengthy power cuts severely
impair the functioning of essential services and
infrastructure; water quality is declining rapidly, where
water is available at all; the inadequacies of the sewage
system are increasingly exposed, with a real risk of a
sewage lagoon at Beit Lahiya collapsing; the medical
and education systems are teetering on the edge of
failure, as lack of equipment, spare parts and qualified
staff, and psychological strains, undermine their
functioning.

Vulnerability of the weakest to disease is rising,
notably among children, who make up more than half
of the population of Gaza. For instance, in October
2007 the number of children under the age of 3
diagnosed with diarrhoea increased by 20 per cent
compared to the previous year, and anaemia among
children is up by 40 per cent. This bleak situation is
further compounded by bureaucratic difficulties
between the Palestinian Authority and those
administering health care, for example, in Gaza.

The Israeli Government has said that, while there
are security concerns about the crossing points
themselves, which have been fired on and through
which attempts have been made to smuggle arms and
potential bombers, the main motivation for the
restrictions is the continuing firing of Qassam rockets
from Gaza. My visit to Sderot, which has been the
target of more than 4,300 rockets since 2004, brought
out the physical and psychological damage to the
population there from this constant barrage. These
crude rockets are aimed at hurting civilians and clearly
constitute terrorism. Their continued firing is
completely unacceptable and must be halted
unconditionally. Hamas, which claims to govern the
Gaza Strip, must accept its full share of responsibility
for the suffering in Gaza. Above all, it must act to stop
these rockets immediately.

However, I also made clear publicly and privately
my View that, whatever the provocation and illegality
of the rockets, the effective Israeli isolation of Gaza is
not justified, given Israel's continuing obligations to
the people of Gaza. It amounts to collective
punishment and is contrary to international
humanitarian law. Moreover, it does not appear to be
having the desired effect, either in halting the rockets
or in weakening Hamas's position among the people of
Gaza, or more widely. Only those who want to see
further radicalization can be happy with the present
situation.

Meanwhile, the consequences for civilians on
both sides are dramatic, not only through the imposed
restrictions and the continuous firing of rockets, but
also through the resulting repeated incursions into and
military clashes inside Gaza, which cause many
civilian casualties, however unintended they might be.
The fundamental principles of distinction between
combatants and non-combatants and of proportionality
in attacks during the conduct of hostilities must be
respected by all sides.

The current situation in Gaza is not sustainable
and is extremely damaging to the prospects for the
current peace process. Only political efforts can change
this dynamic. Meanwhile, from a humanitarian point of
View, while a return to the 2005 Agreement on
Movement and Access is what is really needed, I
pressed the Israeli Government and the Palestinian
Authority at least to ensure that more humanitarian and
other goods are allowed in, on a more predictable and
systematic basis. I made the same message clear to
Hamas in what I said publicly.

This means reopening the crossings and
establishing better mechanisms for identifying and
addressing the fundamental needs of the population. In
particular, I asked that the materials necessary for the
restart of $213 million worth of frozen humanitarian
United Nations projects, in areas such as sanitation,
housing, education and health, be allowed in by Israel
and that spares and equipment for medical and
sanitation services be given priority. There were some
indications that the Israeli authorities are willing to
respond positively to these requests.

I would add that the proposals of the Palestinian
Prime Minister, Salam Fayyad, for the reopening of the
key Karni crossing - the only one with adequate
infrastructure to process large quantities of goods
appropriately and effectively - deserve all our
support. A properly negotiated role is also necessary

08-2520]
for the Rafah crossing, a role which does not give
credence to the idea that Israel can hand over its
responsibilities and obligations for Gaza to Egypt or
any other State or authority. Arrangements which
ensure proper screening for goods passing in both
directions through the crossings, to meet Israel's
security concerns, should be possible, if necessary with
appropriate international support.

The conditions of life I saw in the West Bank
were obviously better than those in Gaza, but the
situation there is of no less fundamental humanitarian
concern. I had read about the barrier, the settlements,
the permit regime and the access closures, but that had
not prepared me for the visible and tangible reality on
the ground.

The combination of the construction of the
barrier, the steady expansion of the settlements, all still
illegal, and the now 580 separate checkpoints and
blockages within the West Bank is fragmenting
communities. It seriously impairs the access of tens of
thousands of people to their lands and to essential
services, not least medical services. Severe restrictions
on the movement of goods and people are affecting
economic growth, as well as increasing poverty and
food insecurity and reducing health standards. They
further threaten the viability of a future Palestinian
State.

In my meetings with Palestinians in the West
Bank, I felt that the despair and sense of humiliation
and injustice were no less than in Gaza. This was
particularly evident from my visit to Hebron, where the
presence of a relatively small group of 600 settlers and
the considerable security arrangements put in place to
ensure their protection have divided the city and
severely affect the economy and the lives of its
citizens. Representatives of Palestinian civil society
throughout the West Bank appealed passionately to the
United Nations, through me, to do something about
their plight and their lack of a viable future, as they
saw it.

Israel has legitimate security concerns and a right
and duty to defend its citizens. But even in such
circumstances, security cannot override all other
concerns or justify so much damage to ordinary
people's livelihoods and infringements of their human
dignity and human rights. Israel has obligations
towards the Palestinian population under occupation. I
therefore pressed the Israeli authorities to begin
implementing their commitments to ease at least some
of the restrictions.

08-2520]

Looking at these deteriorating realities on the
ground in Gaza and the West Bank, as well as in
Sderot, the disconnect between these realities and the
hopes and aims of the continuing peace talks seemed
almost total and, indeed, risks making a mockery of the
readiness of the international community to invest
$7.7 billion in the economic development of the
occupied Palestinian territory. As the Special
Coordinator has stressed, unless this chasm is bridged
quickly and the humanitarian indicators begin to rise
and create some sense of hope for the future, the
chances of success in the peace talks may be fatally
undermined, no matter how great the sincerity and
ingenuity of all concerned. And we desperately need
those talks to succeed this year. The alternative
comforts only the extremists.

Notwithstanding all the difficulties, the
humanitarian community will continue to do all it can
to respond to the moral imperative of saving and
improving lives and preserving human dignity. The
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the other agencies and
NGOs working in Gaza, in particular, are doing a
heroic job under circumstances that are difficult and
dangerous, not least due to the imposed restrictions on
the movement and access of United Nations staff,
which are too often not consistent with the immunities
and privileges to which they are entitled.

Meanwhile, I also appeal to the donor community
to continue to respond generously to what has now
become the third largest annual consolidated appeal for
humanitarian funds, after Darfur and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Finally, I appeal to the Security Council to
continue to speak up about the consequences for
civilians, in both the occupied Palestinian territory and
Israel, of what is happening and about the overriding
duty on all sides to comply with international
humanitarian law and the resolutions of this Council.

