Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): It is regrettable to see such inhumanity at the outset of this meeting when the Security Council voted against the will of the General Assembly, as if we, in this international Organization, abide by two charters rather than one: a charter that some members of the Security Council implement and another, comprehensive, Charter according to which members of the General Assembly act. It is also regrettable that the commitment made by the General Assembly in resolution 46/182, which established the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), has not been respected. Moreover, the remarks made by the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation at the beginning of this meeting have been subjected to a political agenda that has forcibly dominated the humanitarian agenda since the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014). I would like to lay bare to the Council the reasons for my position. Since the outbreak of the terrorist war against my country, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has undertaken relentless efforts to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance and services, as well as support to all its citizens, without discrimination, throughout the country. Those efforts have enabled millions of Syrians to continue receiving their monthly entitlements, social support, food aid, health care and free education, as well as salaries, despite the blockade and coercive unilateral measures imposed against the Syrian people. The Government of my country, along with its key humanitarian partners, such as the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and duly authorized non-governmental organizations (NGOs), has engaged in_ sincere cooperation with relevant United Nations agencies and other humanitarian actors, such as the International Committee of the Red Cross and 27 NGOs that have been authorized to operate in Syria. The Syrian Government has rendered all facilities and support to all those organizations, while fully upholding the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as the guiding principles of coordinating and strengthening humanitarian action, as set forth in General Assembly resolution 46/182. In the face of the efforts of the Syrian Government, buttressed by its allies who believe in international law and the provisions of the Charter, the representatives of Western countries in the Council, including humanitarian penholders, have persistently violated the provisions of the Charter by using the forum of the Security Council to defame the Syrian Government and prolong the crisis by hindering its settlement. What is astonishing is that OCHA has become totally partial and taken the side of Western States, in showing hostility towards the Syrian State, by perpetuating a hostile approach against the Syrian Government and overlooking the significant efforts made by the Syrian Government and its institutions at the humanitarian level, as well as the crucial role of the Syrian Government in facilitating United Nations work and other humanitarian partners. Most important, OCHA has included myriad fabrications, misleading assessments and inflammatory rhetoric in its various reports, which is both unprofessional and unethical and runs counter to the spirit of partnership and cooperation that the Syrian Government adheres to in dealing with relevant United Nations agencies and humanitarian partners. In the Council's meetings held on 19 and 20 December 2019 (see S/PV.8694 and S/PV.8696), my delegation clearly expressed its legal, humanitarian and ethical concerns and motivations behind our position in rejecting the renewal of the provisions on the cross- border humanitarian aid mechanism, as established in resolution 2165 (2014), which was adopted under artificial circumstances - circumstances that do not exist today, as I will detail in the following reasons. First, there is no legal or ethical status of the so- called penholders, and the Western States supporting them, because any claim that they care for the Syrian people is a mere lie. Such claims stand in contradiction to the practices carried out by their Governments that invest in terrorism, perpetuating occupation, waging wars and aggression and imposing unilateral coercive measures against my country, as well as pillaging our natural wealth. Second, the penholders and their supporters have unceasingly ignored that the heart of humanitarian action in Syria is, and should always be, exclusively in the capital, Damascus, rather than some other capital or city in neighbouring countries and beyond, in line with the inviolable sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic, as underscored by the relevant Security Council resolutions. The penholders' violation was clearly demonstrated today in the statement delivered by the Permanent Representative of Belgium, who noted in his opening remarks that the delegations of Belgium and Germany had consulted with members of the Council and countries neighbouring Syria - that is what he said. However, he forgot the imperative of consulting the Syrian Government, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 46/182. The Belgian Ambassador then called for a vote on the oral amendment introduced by the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation. That oral amendment demonstrates the importance of upholding resolution 46/182. The Ambassadors of Estonia, the United Kingdom and the United States of America regrettably repeated the same unilateral interpretation of the provision of the new resolution (resolution 2504 (2020)) in their statements. They said - and those present heard them - that cross-border humanitarian access does not require consultation with the Syrian Government. That of course contravenes the logical and legal interpretation that was, for example, presented by the Ambassadors of China and the Russian Federation, among others. Third, the penholders and their supporters did not honour the commitment that they made in resolution 46/182, which, as I mentioned, governs humanitarian action and underscores the need for respecting the national sovereignty of the State concerned and for cooperation with it to provide assistance for those in need, not providing it only with notices with minimum standards of transparency, professionalism and credibility. Fourth, the penholders and their supporters have ignored developments on the ground since the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014), on 14 July 2014. Such developments include, inter alia, the recovery by the Syrian Government and its allies of all the areas previously classified by the United Nations as besieged or hard-to-reach. Today there are no besieged, restricted or hard-to-reach areas. They no longer exist. Fifth, facts are uncovered about the unlimited support for terrorism provided by Governments that are known, after long denying practices, such as the use of the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing, not controlled by the Syrian Government, to ensure the continuous delivery of money and weapons, including chemical weapons to terrorist organizations, and the smuggling of our oil, artefacts and property. Sixth, OCHA staff and the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism have been unable to ensure the continuous delivery of humanitarian aid to Syrian civilians in need. They have also been unable to ensure that assistance does not fall into the hands of terrorist organizations, which have pillaged and used such assistance for years to strengthen their control, fund their terrorist acts and recruit new terrorists. That applies to the city of Idlib and its environs, which are controlled, as the Council knows, by the terrorist Jabhat Al-Nusra group, whose lifeline and survival are dependent on the support of the rogue Turkish regime, through operations in the town of Gaziantep, which was chosen by the United Nations to set up an operating room. They control our border crossings with Turkey, through which money, weapons and assistance flow. Who knows? Terrorists who are transferred publicly by the Turkish regime from north-western Syria in Idlib to Libya may get their share from such United Nations assistance. That means that OCHA is also providing food and humanitarian assistance to terrorists in Idlib who are bound for Tripoli through Turkey. That is the humanitarian action envisaged by some members. Of course, OCHA and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs will always commend the violations of international law committed by the Turkish regime and its support for terrorism. They will then call on countries to reward that regime. That is hypocrisy. Seventh, OCHA and the Monitoring Mechanism have been unable to provide enough clarification on the nature of so-called partners and third-party independent companies, despite our repeated requests to provide such clarifications in that respect. It is high time for some to abandon their approach of remote diplomacy and politics as though it were a PlayStation game. They should engage professionally and objectively, particularly the penholders, in supporting the efforts and institutions of the Syrian Government and stop levelling accusations, conducting smear campaigns and fostering hostility. In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that the priority is to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria, which can be achieved only by supporting the efforts of the Syrian Government and its allies, end the unilateral coercive measures imposed on the Syrian people and cease attempts to undermine reconstruction and recovery, while providing an environment conducive to the return of migrants.
