Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Today is a great day in
the history of East Timor and in that of the United
Nations as we celebrate the independence of East
Timor. It is particularly significant that this meeting is
taking place today under the presidency of Singapore, a
country that in the Council has always shown special
interest in matters concerning East Timor. My
delegation is particularly happy to see you,
Mr. Minister, presiding over today's meeting.

Today is the culmination of the struggle of the
East Timorese people, who, with the support of the
United Nations and of the international community,
will, from today, begin to enjoy the fruits of freedom
and independence. We congratulate the Government
and the people of East Timor on this historic
achievement, and we convey our best wishes to
President Xanana Gusmao and to his newly sworn-in
Government. Mauritius is pleased to be among the 92
countries whose dignitaries are attending the
independence celebrations. We are represented by our
President, Mr. Karl Offmann, on this auspicious
occasion.

We all know that the East Timorese people's road
to independence has not been easy. We hail the courage
and resilience of the people of East Timor in their fight
against all adversity. Their great courage and
perseverance in rising to every challenge that has
confronted them deserve to be commended. It is our
sincere hope that the constitutional and administrative
structure put in place over the past two years by the
international community will set out the path for the
island State towards the successful establishment of a
peaceful, democratic society, living in peace with its
neighbours and promoting stability in the region.

We acknowledge the significant role played by
the Secretary-General, both through his Special
Representative and in his personal capacity. The
Security Council has also been continuously engaged
throughout the process leading to the statehood of East
Timor, and it is important that that engagement
continue in order to assist East Timor in its economic
reconstruction and its nation-building process. The
continued support of multilateral and bilateral donors
will also be crucial for East Timor's development
programmes. We would like once again to place on
record our tribute to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and to
the entire staff of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), whose
contributions have been extremely valuable.

My delegation is confident that the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), under the able guidance of the Special
Representative, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, will maintain
the momentum in the development, economic
reconstruction and institution-building of East Timor.
Mauritius looks forward to East Timor's becoming a
member of the United Nations family very soon. We
express our best wishes and our support to President
Gusmao in his work to ensure the well-being of the
people of East Timor and to shape their destiny.

