Mr. O'Brien: I returned yesterday from a town
called Reyhanli, in Turkey, just across the border from
Syria. What I saw there was harrowing - orphaned
Syrian girls and boys ranging from toddlers to young
teens with no family left to look after them. I went to a
hospital and met Syrians who had been injured after the
internally displaced person (IDP) camp they had fled to
in Syria to escape violence was itself recently bombed.
I sat down at Dr. Mazin's bedside as he struggled for
life with appalling and severe brain, abdominal and
facial wounds, after he was struck by an air strike on
Al-Quds hospital in eastern Aleppo on 27 April, as he
was bravely himself saving lives. A bare whisper was all
he could muster: "Please, peace". I met refugee families
traumatized by the effects of five years of constant war
who dream of nothing more than returning to Syria to
live a normal life.

I promised to carry their stories to the Security
Council. I promised to highlight once more the tragic
and ever-worsening situation in Syria. But truth be told,
I have run out of words to fully explain how the actions
of the parties to the conflict have led to the devastation
of a country and its people. As the war continues, it
is innocent civilians and children who continue to be
subjected to even greater levels of suffering and misery
than could ever have been imagined five years ago.

I remain particularly concerned at the upsurge in
violence across various parts of the country and its
impact on civilians. Indiscriminate attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure, including schools
and hospitals, mosques and public markets, continue
with impunity and total disregard for international
humanitarian law. In early May, scores of civilians
were killed and injured by strikes hitting two IDP
settlements in Sarmada, Idlib. These were places
where displaced people had sought sanctuary from the
conflict. One of the strikes reportedly hit a school tent,
resulting in the deaths of eight children. Just this week,
several terrorist attacks claimed the lives of over 100
civilians in the coastal cities of Jableh and Tartous.
Over 40 patients and accompanying family members
were killed and 35 people injured when a suicide
bomber walked into the Jableh hospital and detonated
an explosives belt. An emergency doctor and two nurses
died in that explosion, with another 11 health workers
wounded. Similarly, Ziad Al-Buqaa hospital - Khan
Al-Shih's last operational hospital serving people in
Khan Al-Shih, Zakia and surrounding areas - was
reportedly struck by barrel bombs on 17 May. This
hospital provided medical services to 4,200 patients
daily and served about 100,000.

The continued use of siege and starvation as a
weapon of war is reprehensible. We are continually
monitoring the situation on the ground throughout Syria
and, based on the latest information, we now estimate
that some 592,700 people are currently living in
besieged areas. This includes 452,700 people besieged
by the Government of Syria in various locations in
rural Damascus, as well as in the Al-Waer area of Homs
city, an area that I visited myselfjust a few months ago,
but which has been closed off since March. Elsewhere,
110,000 people are besieged by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) in Deir ez-Zor city, 20,000 people
by non-State armed groups and the Al-Nusra Front in
Foah and Kefraya in Idlib, and 10,000 besieged by the
Government of Syria and non-State armed groups in
Yarmouk, Damascus.
These figures are shocking, as they underscore
the sharply deteriorating situation for civilians, even
while the cessation of hostilities is in place. According
to the most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/460), the number ofpeople in besieged areas was
517,700, itself up from 486,7000, due to more accurate
numbers of people emerging from Deir ez-Zor, Foah
and Kefraya, and Yarmouk, as the facts on the ground
have changed. But I must reinforce that these figures
are really shocking. Today, 592,700 people are living
in besieged areas because of the appalling deteriorating
situation in Al-Waer on the other side of the very line
I myself crossed last year, as reported to the Council
in detail.

The punishment of civilians through besiegement
tactics must stop immediately. The primary
responsibility lies with the party that maintains the
siege and routinely and systematically denies people
the basic necessities of life and freedom of movement.
However, other parties that conduct military activities
in or from populated areas, endangering their safety,
also bear their share of responsibility for the immense
suffering in besieged areas. And we cannot ignore the
fact that many on all sides are profiting handsomely
at the expense of innocent civilians from their ability
to control the goods that enter through irregular and
unofficial channels.

The humanitarian and protection situation in many
hard-to-reach areas also remains critical, including in
some that are on the brink of besiegement. I remain
extremely concerned about the conditions for the
hundreds of thousands of civilians in northern rural
Homs, specifically in the towns of Rastan, Talbiseh
and Taldo, as well as in the adjacent area of Habarnafse
in rural Hama. People in these areas have limited
freedom of movement and diminished access to clean
water, medical care and food. The recent humanitarian
convoys to northern rural Homs were vital but must be
followed up by greater access if we are to alleviate the
suffering of civilians.

The situation across Aleppo governorate also
remains alarming for civilians. In northern Aleppo, just
across the border from Turkey, the situation for tens of
thousands of people is precarious, with many having
been displaced multiple times this year alone as a result
of heavy fighting between non-State armed groups and
ISIL. That fighting is ongoing as of today and is likely
to fuel further displacement and vulnerability along the
border areas.
In Aleppo city, fighting has continued to affect
civilians over the past few weeks and also had an impact
on humanitarian operations. The United Nations hub
in the western part of the city has repeatedly been hit
by shelling, while access for cross-border aid to assist
300,000 people in eastern Aleppo city, along Castello
road, the last remaining route into the area, has been
repeatedly out due to air strikes and heavy fighting.

The current reality in Syria is not something that we
should or can accept. There should never be impunity
for behaviour that shows complete disregard for
international humanitarian law, flouts the resolutions
of the Security Council, and causes such immense
human suffering. One day all those responsible must
and will be held to account.

Despite the extremely challenging environment,
United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organization partners continue their tireless efforts
to meet the urgent humanitarian needs of the Syrian
population. Millions of people were reached with
assistance in April, while UNICEF and the World
Health Organization began another nationwide
immunization campaign to reach 2 million children.
And cross-border shipments provided food aid to over
a million people, as well as other types of assistance to
tens of thousands more.

Cross-line inter-agency operations to besieged,
hard-to-reach and other priority locations have
continued, with over 800,000 people reached this year
in these areas, and many more than once. We have very
recently gained access to besieged eastern Harasta
with food and other humanitarian supplies for 10,000
people - a first since March 2013, over three years ago.
In addition, since 10 April, the World Food Programme
successfully carried out 44 high altitude airdrops over
the besieged city of Deir-ez-Zor. These airdrops mean
that 762 metric tons of urgently needed food assistance,
distributed by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent on the
ground, reached approximately 100,000 people.

But several weeks of air drops have brought an
amount of food equivalent to only one convoy. Let me
repeat that several weeks of air drops have brought
an amount of food equivalent to only one convoy by
road, and the Council should have no doubt about the
challenges our partners are facing to deliver assistance
by air. Airdrops are an option of last resort; they are
costly, dangerous and technically very challenging.
However, as I have said before, the gravity and scale of
need means that the United Nations must consider such
options, but only as a last resort, and not forgetting that
the United Nations would require the approval of the
Government of Syria.

Deliberate interference and restrictions by the
parties, notably the Syrian Government, continue to
prevent effective aid delivery. For example, on 20 April,
the United Nations submitted its inter-agency convoy
plan for the month of May, which included requests to
reach 904,750 people across 35 besieged, hard-to-reach
and priority cross-line locations. The Syrian authorities
granted approval in full to only 14 locations, with
224,000 people, and approvals conditional on the type
and amount of assistance to another eight locations, for
some 306,000 people. That effectively left more than
40 per cent of the planned target population, including
in Aleppo, Al-Waer, and Talbiseh, without access to
basic necessities and food. That of course leaves me
extremely concerned. We recently submitted our plan
for June with a request to reach 1.1 million people in
34 besieged, hard-to-reach and other priority cross-line
locations, including all the places we could not reach
in May. I call on the Syrian Government to approve
the plan in full and to remove any and all conditions,
not least regarding the amount or type of aid that can
be delivered.

Even for the locations that were approved for
deliveries in May, the Syrian Government has severely
curtailed the ability of the United Nations to reach
those in need. A convoy and assessment mission to
Darayya, where 4,000 civilians have been besieged
for almost four years, scheduled for 12 May, had to be
aborted due to unconscionable last-minute restrictions
imposed by Government security forces. At the last
checkpoint, Government forces removed all basic
supplies, including nutritional items for infants. No
conclusion can be drawn other than that this was
simply an effort to further punish civilians, and this
time infants. Similarly, an inter-agency convoy that
was supposed to reach Mu'addamiyah on 14 May was
unable to deploy. Security force representatives never
turned up at the warehouse to monitor the loading of
trucks, as previously agreed, despite constant outreach
at various levels. As a result, the convoy was never
given permission to depart. At the same time, non-State
armed groups continue to prevent a United Nations
assessment mission from proceeding to the besieged
towns of Foah and Kafraya in Idlib governorate.

Moreover, the removal of life-saving medicines
and medical supplies such as surgical, midwifery and
emergency kits has continued unabated, with supplies
for an estimated 150,000 treatments removed from
convoys since the beginning of the year. Since the
adoption of resolution 2139 (2014), medical supplies for
more than 650,000 treatments have been removed from
aid convoys. Such restrictions are not only violations
of earlier guarantees and approvals obtained from
the Syrian Government and other parties, they are
deliberately and cynically designed to inflict more
unnecessary suffering on civilians living in besieged
and hard-to-reach locations.

As the Council knows, the international community
came together in Istanbul earlier this week for the World
Humanitarian Summit, called for by the Secretary-
General. I emphasized at the Summit that we must all live
up to our responsibility, collectively and individually,
to meet the needs of the most vulnerable people and
make a real difference for the people who need our help
most. Syria is a stark example of why the Secretary-
General called for the Summit. As he has said, we are
one humanity, with a shared responsibility not only to
keep people alive, but to give people a chance at life in
dignity. The bottom line is that, politically, we continue
to fail the people of Syria dismally in that regard.

On 17 May, the International Syria Support Group
called on all parties to the Syrian conflict to immediately
comply with the terms of the cessation of hostilities. It
further called for the lifting of all sieges and urged the
Syrian Government to swiftly approve United Nations
delivery requests in their entirety. Frankly, the parties
to the conflict, and those with influence over them,
urgently need to turn this into decisive, positive action
that can have a direct, positive effect on Syrian lives on
the ground.

However, let me state clearly that protecting
civilians and granting access should never be dependent
on political negotiations or as a bargaining chip for ad
hoc deals on the ground. These are fundamental tenets
of international humanitarian law and must be respected
by the parties and all who support them. There must
be access to those in need, and not just to a third of
those in need, but to all; not just one-off deliveries, but
sustained, immediate and unimpeded humanitarian

access throughout the country; not just access to
deliver vaccines, but the full package of supplies,
including medical and surgical items, delivered on
the basis of the needs assessments made by the United
Nations. The sieges have to be lifted once and for all,
and immediately. They exist today only because of a
lack of will to end them. Millions of women, men and
children and, as I mentioned early in my statement, Dr.
Mazin - struggling for life in that bed in Reyhanli and
all across Syria - each and every one of them depends
on the Council's action, right now.

