Ms. Cousin: Mr. President, I wish to thank you for
this opportunity.
Ten months ago, in this very Chamber, I reported
to the Council the World Food Programme's (WFP)
grave concern at the deepening humanitarian
crisis inside Syria (see S/PV.7433). I discussed the
increasing hardship and deprivation facing people in
besieged areas, leading not only to despair but also to
malnutrition, starvation and death.

I called for the Council's support for redoubling
efforts enabling the entire international humanitarian
system to access people in cut-off and hard-to-reach
areas. Today I not only reiterate the call for help; I implore
the Council for its assistance. The most powerful tool
at the disposal of the United Nations for the prevention
and protection of civilians - enshrined in international
humanitarian law - is strong, qualitative consensus.

Because the reality is more severe, the situation
today is also more severe than when I addressed the
Council 10 months ago. More than 4.6 million people,
as my colleague noted, are trapped in besieged or hard-
to-reach areas, and our food-security analysis suggests
that 2.5 million are severely food-insecure inside these
areas. Every day we receive alarming reports of a lack
of food and water and of acute malnutrition and death.
Food security requires not only food but also access to
water, sanitation and essential medical treatment. Let
us not allow populations in other locations to suffer the
same fate as Madaya if they are not already suffering.
As I am speaking to the Council now, we estimate that
there are 18 besieged areas and close to half a million
people cut off from food and other crucial humanitarian
assistance. In many of them, people are running out, or
may already have run out, of food. We simply do not
know. It isjust a matter oftime before the brutal images
we have witnessed these past few weeks hit our screens
again. UNICEF and the Ministry of Health have been
conducting assessments across the country, and severe
cases of acute malnutrition are surfacing in horrendous
numbers.

More than half of these places have been besieged
for a shocking three years. Some of their populations
can be found in parts of rural Damascus where the
WFP has not been able to provide food assistance for
three years and where we know the price of food is
more than double, and sometimes even triple, what it is
in Damascus. Moadamiyah borders Damascus city and
was one of the most contested locations at the beginning
of the crisis. In 2014, a reconciliation agreement was
reached between the Government and armed groups
that allowed the first inter-agency convoy to enter
Moadamiyah in July of that year. After the agreement
was reached, people were able to leave and enter the city
through a single checkpoint, carrying small amounts of
food for their daily needs. However, unfortunately, the
checkpoint was closed in December 2015, and 44,000
people are now besieged inside the city. Directly
after the siege was lifted, people rushed to the small
shops to buy the food items that were available, and
that accelerated the price increases. Many items, such
as wheat flour, beans, pasta, lentils, oil and meat, are
now available only in very limited quantities. Fruits
are unavailable, in fact non-existent. What is most
heartbreaking is that this location is a mere lS-minute
drive from the WFP's Damascus office, and yet we
cannot help.

In Darayya city, where farming has stopped
because of the heavy incidence of landmines, we
have recorded similar sharp price increases. Most
people consume just one meal a day. Together with
the international community, the WFP has continued
to appeal for access to these and other besieged and
hard-to-reach locations. The Council heard from my
colleague about the success, or lack of it, we have had
with our inter-agency requests. To date, more than
60 per cent of the requests that the WFP has made have
simply not received an answer. The meagre number
of positive responses we did get were then tied up in
bureaucratic procedures that resulted in zero access to
these besieged areas throughout 2015. We had recent
breakthroughs just this month. They have enabled us to
reach a mere 24 per cent of the besieged locations, with
one-off support in Idlib governorate, where opposition
groups have been blocking assistance to some 12,500
vulnerable Syrians.

I should also note that half the besieged
population - an estimated 200,000 people - are
trapped inside Deir ez-Zor, which the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) took control of in July
2014. Deir ez-Zor has largely been inaccessible to
humanitarian assistance since May of last year. ISIL
currently controls most areas of the governorate, while
the airport, along with five of the city's neighbourhoods,
is under the control of the Syrian Government. It has
been reported that ISIL targets the besieged locations
on an almost daily basis, resulting in civilian fatalities
and injuries. ISIL maintains extremely tight control
over these cities, with little prospects for negotiation.

The Damascus highway, the primary road for
taking supplies to Deir ez-Zor city, remains closed
due to the ongoing conflict, which means that the
airport is the only corridor through which to bring in
commodities, including food from outside. The WFP
has been authorized to airlift into Deir ez-Zor. However,
owing to a combination of reasons - the extensive
damage that has been done to the runway, a lack of
air-space security for our planes and the inability of
our staff and partners to distribute - we have been
powerless to assist those in need in Deir ez-Zor. At the
moment, small commercial airplanes carrying small
quantities of food are able to land, but this situation
has resulted in the highest price increases in the whole
country. The purchasing power of households has
consequently dropped to alarming levels, with people's
access to food limited as their financial wherewithal
for buying food in the markets has been almost erased.
In fact, a month's supply ofbasic food items costs some
LSZ40,000, 10 times what it would be in Damascus.

The truth is, the requirement in resolutions 2165
(2014) and 2139 (2014) that assistance not be impeded or
hindered has yet to be fully realized. Despite some local
successes, we do not have the access necessary to reach
the hungry and those in need. The fact is, our persistent
efforts to make gains in besieged and hard-to-reach
areas are still thwarted by many obstacles. The physical
and logistical challenges often pale in comparison to
the numerous checkpoints our vehicles and staff must
pass through, the presence of security forces in our
warehouses, the burdensome administrative procedures
surrounding the loading and sealing of our trucks and
the lengthy bilateral negotiations necessary to get
facilitation letters signed off on - not to mention the
presence of radical armed groups such as ISIL.

The time for fully and collectively implementing
the Council's resolutions is long overdue. Access must
not be arbitrary, ad hoc or one-time. Effective access
must not require unreasonable approvals. It must be
reasonably safe, regular, transparent and accountable.

The Council can rest assured that the World Food
Programme and its partners will continue to do their
utmost to overcome these barriers and hurdles and
provide lifesaving assistance. We will continue with
our steadfast efforts, exhausting every means at our
disposal, reaching every child, woman and man in
Syria where we can. Yet we cannot and do not perform
alone. Of course, we work with others from the United
Nations country teams and our 40 non-governmental
organization partners.

Let me be very clear: to prevent imminent
starvation, we need the support and action of every
Council member and every Member State. Preventing
mass starvation requires more than a four-town
agreement. Preventing a humanitarian crisis requires
that humanitarian organizations have unimpeded and
sustained access in order to deliver immediate relief,
including food, to all those in need in Syria. Preventing
a humanitarian crisis requires humanitarian pauses and
unconditional, monitored ceasefires to enable food and
other urgent assistance to be delivered to civilians and
to support the necessary vaccination and other health
campaigns. Preventing a humanitarian crisis - and a
food nutrition security crisis - requires a halt to attacks
on civilian infrastructure. Preventing a humanitarian
crisis requires ensuring freedom of movement for all
civilians and the immediate lifting of all sieges by all
parties. That is the only way to end hunger and treat
malnutrition, child by child, adult by adult, town by
town.

Paulo Coelho has said that the world is changed by
our example, not by our opinion. Our responsibility is
to ensure that the decisions and choices made in this
Chamber become reality on the ground. That is the only
way we can save and protect people and enable Syria's
next generation to heal.

