Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for his detailed briefing and the work that
he is carrying out with his team. I also welcome the
presence of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Jordan
and Palestine.

We are deeply concerned over what is no longer a
status quo but a continuous deterioration of the situation
on the ground, which is moving us further and further
away from the two-State solution. The settlement in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, continues
unabated and undermines the very foundation and
feasibility of a two-State solution. Numerous legislative
initiatives contribute to encouraging the settlement
policy and facilitating accompanying measures, such
as demolitions, evictions and forced displacements.

We note with concern, for example, that 51 schools
are being threatened with demolition, including the
Um Sidra school, in Hebron governorate. That policy
seriously undercuts the exercise of the fundamental
rights of Palestinians and is illegal under international
law, including resolution 2334 (2016).
We reiterate our deep concern at the worrying
increase in the demolition and confiscation of the
infrastructure of humanitarian projects. We demand that
the Israeli authorities put an end to those demolitions
and grant reparations or compensation for the damage
incurred. Moreover, we are deeply concerned about the
increase in the use of violence by settlers, as well as
against settlers. We reiterate our firm condemnation of
any use of violence, regardless of the perpetrator.

Resolution 2334 (2016) calls on States to make a
distinction in their exchanges between the territory
of the State of Israel and the territories occupied
since 1967. In that regard, Belgium recalls that the
European Union has adopted several measures and
instruments to achieve that differentiation. Belgium
remains committed to the full, continuous and effective
implementation of that policy.

The Viability of a Palestinian State also means a
return to stability in Gaza. We call on all parties to
exercise restraint and recall the imperatives of protecting
civilians and respecting international humanitarian
law, including the principles of proportionality
and distinction.

We are deeply concerned about the humanitarian
and health situation. All parties must ensure free
humanitarian access at all times, also taking into
account the gender dimension and the specific needs
of women and girls. Here I would like to commend the
indispensable role of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
the mandate of which Belgium will continue to support.

The resolution of the crisis in Gaza requires
a fundamental change, including the lifting of the
blockade and the full opening of the crossing points,
while taking into account Israel's legitimate security
concerns. A political solution to the crisis also requires
the return of Palestinian territory to the control of the
Palestinian Authority. We call on all parties to engage
constructively in inter-Palestinian reconciliation efforts.

For Belgium, there is no alternative to the two-
State solution within secure and recognized borders,
based on the 1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the capital
of both States. We will not recognize any changes to
the previous 1967 borders, including with regard to
Jerusalem, except those agreed by the parties.

In conclusion, Belgium calls on all parties to
the conflict to refrain from unilateral measures and
declarations taking us farther away from the parameters
agreed by the international community and endorsed
by the Council. It is time, now more than ever, to work
for a solution under international law to achieve a just
and lasting peace and a stable regional environment.

