Mr. Lamamra (spoke in French): Mr. President,
allow me at the outset to say what a pleasure it is to
address the Security Council under your presidency on
behalf of the African Union Commission and its
Chairperson, Mr. Jean Ping, on a question of great
importance for the promotion of peace, security and
stability on the African continent. But first of all, I
should like, Mr. President, to congratulate you upon
your appointment as Permanent Representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations and
upon your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I am especially grateful to you,
Sir, for having invited us to this debate devoted to the
consideration of the report of the African Union-United
Nations panel on modalities for support to African
Union peacekeeping operations (S/2008/813). This
question now lies at the very heart of the problem of
strengthening the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations throughout our continent and throughout the
world.

09-2716]
In this context, we are also grateful to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his unswerving commitment
to peace in Africa and to the promotion of an effective,
exemplary partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union. With respect to this partnership, the
appointment of Chairman Romano Prodi, a faithful
friend of Africa, to head this African Union-United
Nations group of experts was a guarantee of the
success of this endeavour, as demonstrated by the
report currently being considered. I should like to
convey here to Chairman Prodi, as well as to the
members of the panel, the congratulations of the
African Union Commission and my own.

In fact, this report accurately reflects the quality
of work built on the lessons learned from peacekeeping
operations in Africa and opens up new, promising
prospects for greater effectiveness in the African
Union's efforts in this regard via the availability of the
predictable and lasting financial resources that the
Union needs to further strengthen its role in the field of
peace and security. The need to strengthen institutional
capacities of the African Union, the increase in
resources and the stabilization of peacekeeping
financing in Africa are opportunely highlighted in this
report.

Just as pertinent are the special recommendations
aimed at strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in the field of
operational collaboration at various levels. The same is
true with regard to the creation of new financing
mechanisms that would enable us to support specific
peacekeeping operations, whether through United
Nations-assessed funding or by way of the proposal for
a multi-donor trust fund funded by voluntary
contributions. In our opinion, this measure is timely,
innovative and worthy of everyone's support.

Over these last few years, regional arrangements
have demonstrated renewed dynamism in the
promotion of peace, security and stability in their
respective regions. Nowhere is this new reality more
apparent than in Africa. For a few years now, the
African Union has given a new dynamic to its efforts
aimed at meeting the pressing challenges facing the
continent in the field of peace and security.
On the basis of relevant provisions of the
Protocol relating to the establishment of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union, a continental
peace and security architecture has been born.

Certainly, a great deal remains to be done to render this
architecture fully operational. Nonetheless, significant
progress has been achieved, as evidenced by the daily
actions of the Peace and Security Council and the
initiatives undertaken by the Panel of the Wise as well
as the measures undertaken within the framework of
the setting up of the Continental Early Warning System
and the measures aimed at the launching in June 2010
of the African Standby Force. Moreover, the African
Union and the regional mechanisms are working ever
more closely together within the framework of the
Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation
concluded in January 2008.

Alongside the progressive implementation of this
architecture, the African Union is, on a daily basis,
committed to efforts aimed at preventing, managing
and settling conflicts. That the challenges are huge is
clear to all. It is sufficient to skim through recent news
articles on the continent to see that. However, today,
we have a strong political will to face those difficulties
by stepping up efforts to ensure that structural
prevention, mediation and good offices enable us to
keep latent tensions and crises from degenerating into
open armed conflict.

Africa's experience in the field of the deployment
of observers and military units has developed in
various parts of the continent in sometimes especially
difficult conditions. That was the case in the recent
past in Burundi and the Sudan. It is the case today in
Somalia, where battalions deployed by Uganda and
Burundi within the framework of African Union
Mission in Somalia are bravely striving to support the
incipient progress of the Somali people on their road to
peace, reconciliation, security and stability.

In undertaking such initiatives, the African Union
is of course discharging its own political
responsibilities, and clearly such actions are eloquent
proof of an African solidarity that yearns to be
proactive and that wants other African States to stand
side by side with Somalia in its ordeal. At the same
time, the African Union, through all these initiatives in
the field of restoring peace and in promoting and
supporting peace, is also acting on behalf of the
international community, specifically on behalf of the
Security Council, which bears the main burden in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

It is thus in this context that the African Union
has requested that the United Nations, within the

framework of Chapter VIII of its Charter, consider the
possibility of financing, via regularly assessed
contributions, peacekeeping operations undertaken by
the African Union or under its authority and with the
consent of the Security Council. The process launched
following that request, pursuant to a well-advised
proposal submitted by South Africa, has resulted in the
report submitted for the Council's consideration today.
I wish to express the deep appreciation of the African
Union Commission to Ms. Dlamini Zuma, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of South Africa, for her country's and
her personal commitment to undertaking this noble
project.

Indisputably, the report being considered today is
an important step in the overall efforts aimed at
building the capacities of the African Union, meeting
the challenges facing the continent in the field of peace
and security, and mobilizing increased support from the
international community. The recommendations on the
financing of African Union peacekeeping operations
are, from that point of view, of special importance.

The President of the African Union Peace and
Security Council for March will have the opportunity
to share with Council members the specific
contributions that the Peace and Security Council
wishes to make directly to the Council's consideration
of the issue.

The future of maintaining international peace and
security requires creativity and boldness from all of us.
Greater decentralization or devolution, requiring
harmonized efforts at the global and regional levels
and cohesive strategies, is an ever more essential part
of addressing the major challenges in the field of peace
and security facing the international community,
especially in Africa. At a time when Africa, having
correctly anticipated the new realities and requirements
of peacekeeping and acquired a comprehensive and
progressively operational peace and security
architecture - of which the African Standby Force
must be a rapid and effective tool - it is necessary to
effectively meet the challenge of financing equitably
and as a shared responsibility.

The Prodi report stands as a qualitative and
decisive step in that direction. The African Union will
spare no effort to ensure that the guidance and
recommendations of the report are turned into realities,
to the greatest benefit of peace and security throughout
our continent and the world.

