Mr. Montaflo (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
appreciates the initiative of the Republic of Korea to
convene this debate and welcomes the participation of
the Minister of Foreign Affairs of that country.

In the 10 years since the adoption ofresolution 1540
(2004), Mexico has derived great satisfaction from the
fact that, throughout this decade, the Security Council
has promoted measures to prevent the manufacture,
acquisition, possession, development, transport,
transfer and use of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their delivery systems by non- State actors.
My country's Government reaffirms its commitment
to the resolution and emphasizes its importance as a
crucial mechanism for coordinating the efforts of the
international community to face the challenges of the
non-proliferation regime, in particular by preventing
non-State actors from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction.

Successfully combatting that threat requires the
implementation of the commitments and obligations
undertaken in existing international instruments. We
reiterate that non-proliferation and disarmament are
complementary and mutually reinforcing processes
that require balanced and parallel progress. The best
formula for non-proliferation is the prohibition and
elimination of weapons of mass destruction.

Mexico has fulfilled all its commitments on
nuclear security, radiological security and the physical
protection of nuclear material. We have undertaken a
strategy to promote the ongoing strengthening of the
system of export controls and controls for the transfer
of technologies, equipment and materials that could be
used in the production of weapons of mass destruction,
and we support the strengthening of the strategic
control of international trade in dual-use goods and
technology. Those measures have led Mexico to
join three multilateral export control regimes: the
Wassenaar Arrangement, the Nuclear Suppliers Group
and the Australia Group.

At the international level, Mexico cooperates with
international organizations and other countries to
undertake efforts focused on expanding its capacity in
this area and in the field of atomic energy. We have
controls for radioactive sources aimed at ensuring
regulatory verification for such sources in compliance
with the International Atomic Energy Agency's Code
of Conduct on the Safety and Security of Radioactive
Sources. These examples demonstrate that the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) is contributing to the reconfiguration process
that the global cooperation architecture is undergoing,
with a focus on inclusion. States parties are potential
providers and recipients of such cooperation.

The trade in strategic goods involves a certain
risk of the proliferation of conventional weapons and
weapons of mass destruction. Governments must
establish effective controls and restrictions on the
transfer of arms, military equipment and dual-use
items or technology, and ensure that such laws and
procedures are compatible with the obligations arising
from international treaties on disarmament and
non-proliferation.

We believe that it is important that the work of the
1540 Committee universalize the practice of submitting
national reports, which are the most important tool for
strengthening transparency and building confidence.
We encourage those nations that have not yet done so to
present such reports as soon as they can.

The Government of Mexico believes that
international cooperation is essential for resolving
issues of global impact. In line with its tradition of
pacifism, Mexico will continue to work actively on
initiatives that strengthen the aforementioned regimes
and contribute to a safer world that is based on
international law.

