Ms. Honore (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
express my sincere thanks to Spain in its capacity as
President of the Security Council and to all members of
the Council for convening today's meeting to examine
the Secretary-General's report on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (8/2015/667), issued on
31 August.

(Spoke in French)

I would also like to take this opportunity
to acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Haiti.

(Spoke in Spanish)

I would like to express my special gratitude to all
the countries that have contributed troops and police
elements to the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and to all Member States that
are collaborating in the peacebuilding process in Haiti.

(spoke in English)

On 9 August, Haiti took the all-important step
of holding the first round of elections to renew
the executive, legislative and local leadership of
the country. On 27 September, after protracted
deliberations by the electoral tribunals on 203 contested
cases, the Provisional Electoral Council published the
results, according to which 2 of the contenders for the
20 Senate seats and 8 for the 119 seats in the Chamber
of Deputies won an outright victory. Twenty-five
electoral districts will require re-runs of the first round
for 6 Senate and 25 Chamber of Deputies seats because
of electoral violence or irregularities affecting the vote.
First- and second-ranked candidates will be competing
for 12 Senate and 86 Chamber of Deputies seats in the
second round run-offs on 25 October.

I am encouraged by the ongoing preparations of
the Haitians authorities, and I am confident that Haiti
is now moving resolutely towards the renewal of its
democratic institutions and the re-establishment of
institutional balance crucial for the consolidation of
democracy and stability.

Notwithstanding the efforts of the Provisional
Electoral Council, the Government and the Haitian
National Police (HNP), severe acts of violence and
some technical irregularities invalidated the 9 August
voting in 13 per cent of the country's voting centres. In
that regard, I am encouraged by the actions taken by the
Provisional Electoral Council aimed at addressing those
shortcomings and at responding to recommendations
from political parties, candidates and observer
groups. These actions range from a swift response to
the violence that occurred on 9 August and a revived
interaction with political parties and candidates, which
is important for the transparency and inclusiveness
of the electoral process, to corrective measures
aimed at improving technical aspects of the electoral
operations. These include the timely publication of
voter lists, a reassessment of voting centres, a review
of the performance of the Provisional Electoral Council
staff, addressing the issue of party poll-watchers, and a
modification ofthe electoral calendar to simplify voting
by deferring the local Government vote from the second
to the third round on 27 December. To recapitulate,
therefore, the 25 October polls will include the first-
round presidential, the second-round legislative and the
municipal vote, together with the re-runs for the first
round legislative vote in the constituencies affected on
9 August.

It is to be noted that, for the first time in the electoral
history of Haiti, the Provisional Electoral Council has
taken punitive action against instigators of electoral
violence. On 19 August, 16 candidates from 10 different
political parties were barred from further participation
in the elections following their involvement in acts
of electoral violence. Warnings were also issued to
17 political parties whose supporters were reported to
have instigated criminal acts and voter intimidation.
This has sent a clear signal to all contenders that the
use of force and electoral violence will not be tolerated.
I urge the judiciary to follow suit and take appropriate
legal action, where needed, to send a firm message to
all who contemplate the use of force to pursue their
goals, irrespective of their political affiliations, that
impunity is not an option.

In the wake of the continued consolidation of
MINUSTAH, these elections also serve as a test of
the capacity of the Haitian National Police to maintain
security during a challenging period. It is against that
background that I note that the security environment has
remained generally stable, more calm and less violent as
compared with previous electoral cycles. Though fewer
and short-lived, violent election-related protests remain
an element to be carefully monitored as we approach
the second round of the voting, in which the political
stakes will be higher. I note that commitment expressed
by the Haitian National Police to undertaking measures
to improve police performance in the upcoming round
with a view to contributing to a conducive electoral
climate. To that end, the Haitian National Police, with
the Provisional Electoral Council and supported by the
United Nations, is working in an integrated manner
to adjust logistics and security plans for the coming
rounds and is conducting operations in violence-prone
communes across the country ahead of the polls.

In parallel, work continues towards the
implementation of the HNP 2012-2016 development
plan, which is now in its fourth and final year. To build
on the achievement of the National Police and the current
level of security and stability obtained in a number of
departments, the United Nations is working towards
reshaping its assistance to acknowledge progress and
concentrate its action where criminality most affects the
main security indicators, such as homicides and gang
confrontations. I encourage Member States to provide
experts in administrative, technical and operational
support in the form of Government-provided personnel,
as well as specialized teams in key fields of policing,
with a view to creating longer-term post-MINUSTAH
partnerships among the Haitian National Police, donors
and other international partners.

While the organization of the 9 August polls bears
testimony to the increased capacity of the Provisional
Electoral Council, the Government of Haiti and the
Haitian National Police to assume greater responsibility
in leading the country's democratic process, the
engagement of the United Nations system, including
MINUSTAH and its uniformed components, continues
to be required in support of operations, logistics and
security. Equally, while acknowledging the Haitian
Government's substantial budgetary allocations in
support of the process - including as the largest donor to
the United Nations Development Programme-managed
basket fundamental a the financial contributions of
Haiti's international partners continue to be critical to
the completion of the electoral cycle.

(spoke in French)

We believe, however, that this will be the last
election in which electoral assistance at the level of
that provided by the peacekeeping operation will be
necessary. Future elections in Haiti should be managed
by the Haitian authorities, with the targeted and limited
logistical and technical assistance of United Nations
agencies and international partners.

(Spoke in English)

To allow for an orderly and sustainable transfer
of these and other activities currently undertaken
by MINUSTAH as part of a transition process to the
Haitian authorities and other partners, and mindful
of the tasks ahead of us to assist Haiti's authorities in
completing the electoral cycle, the Secretary-General
has recommended the extension by one, possibly final
year of the MINUSTAH mandate at the current troop
and police levels. An integrated strategic assessment
mission will be deployed after the completion of the
electoral cycle and the installation of a new President
and new authorities to formulate recommendations for
the future presence of the United Nations in Haiti.
In the meantime, MINUSTAH will concentrate
on specific areas, including good offices, police
development, the rule of law and human rights, while
intensifying work with the United Nations country
team to identify areas where the latter can strengthen
its engagement and joint programming can be
developed. A one-year extension will also afford the
new Administration a period of continued support to
allow for the consolidation of State authority and the
time necessary to articulate how best the country's
institutions may be support by the United Nations in
the future. That is of prime importance to the orderly
and durable transition of the current peacekeeping
presence.

Haitian ownership of the future posture of United
Nations assistance is vital so that the Government
and society can build on the achievements of the past
11 years and further consolidate the stabilization gains
for the well-being of the Haitian people. The early
involvement of the new Administration in the transition
planning and decision-making process with respect to
the future United Nations presence will be as critical as
unity in the efforts and the vision of the international
community in support of a durable transition.

(spoke in Spanish)

In conclusion, allow me to emphasize that it is
of the greatest important that the electoral cycle be
completed in accordance with the Constitution, that the
fiftieth legislature can take office on 11 January and
that the new President take office on 7 February 2016.

(spoke in French)

I would like to commend the commitment of the
Haitian political actors in these elections, in spite of the
challenges that the process has faced. Carrying out an
equitable, transparent and inclusive electoral process in
a climate ofpeace is a prerequisite for Haiti to continue
moving forward on the path towards stabilization,
democratic governance, strengthening the rule of law
and socioeconomic development. I urge all political
actors to continue making their contribution so that
these vital elections take place in a climate of calm
and mutual trust, allowing the greatest possible voter
participation. I call on all voters to exercise their right to
vote in peace in order to contribute to the consolidation
of Haiti as a more stable, democratic and prosperous
country.

(spoke in English)

I call on all of Haiti's international partners to
continue to support the country's electoral process,
as well as its long-term stability and development,
following the installation of a new Government.

I thank all my colleagues in MINUSTAH and the
United Nations country team for their dedication and
commitment during this transformative period. Allow
me also to pay tribute to our former Force Commander,
Lieutenant General Jose' Luiz Jaborandy, Jr., who
passed on 30 August. On behalf of MINUSTAH and the
wider United Nations system in Haiti, I thank members
for their messages of condolence and for accompanying
the United Nations and the family of the former Force
Commander through this difficult moment.

