Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): My Government
warmly welcomes the signing of the Agreement on a Firm
and Lasting Peace between the Guatemalan Government
and the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca
(URNG) in Guatemala City on 29 December 1996. We are
pleased that the longest and most destructive armed conflict
in Central America - along with the tremendous suffering
it inflicted on the people of Guatemala - has finally come
to a peaceful conclusion. We extend our heartfelt
congratulations to the Government and people of Guatemala
on this watershed event in their country's history.

We commend the parties concerned for their firm
commitment to peace and the spirit of compromise, without
which the successful conclusion of the negotiations could
not have been achieved. We also wish to recognize the
Secretary-General, the Group of Friends of the Guatemalan
Peace Process and the United Nations system as a whole
for the invaluable assistance they rendered to the parties
concerned in their search for firm and lasting peace.

The entire Central American region can take pride in
this remarkable achievement. With the end of conflict in
Guatemala, the region is peaceful for the first time in nearly
three decades and is free to continue peaceful progress
towards democracy and development.

We believe the peace process in Guatemala has
demonstrated that, even in the wake of severe civil
conflict, peace and democracy are not unattainable goals
so long as the parties concerned exhibit the necessary
political will to make peace, and are supported in their
efforts by their regional neighbours, the United Nations
and the international community as a whole. The role of
the United Nations in the peace process has been
particularly noteworthy. As elsewhere in Central America,
throughout the conflict in Guatemala the United Nations
has played an indispensable role in promoting peace by
making available its good offices and by establishing in
1994 the United Nations Mission for the Verification of
Human Rights and of Compliance with the Commitments
of the Comprehensive Agreement on Human Rights in
Guatemala (MINUGUA). Recently, in anticipation of the
historic conclusion of the final peace agreement, the
General Assembly renewed the mandate of MINUGUA
until 31 March 1997 as a clear expression of the
international community's continued political support for
the peace process in Guatemala.

Notwithstanding the ground-breaking achievements
made thus far, Guatemala's journey to lasting and long-
term peace and stability is not yet over and is unlikely to
become any less arduous. The most important task in the
coming days must be to ensure the implementation of all
the agreements which the parties have freely entered into.
Needless to say, peace and reconciliation agreed to on
paper can only be translated into reality if both parties
comply fully with their obligations under the peace
agreements.

With the signing of the final peace agreement last
December, the overall package of peace accords is now
in full force. In light of the peace package's
comprehensive nature, its implementation will present a
major challenge, not only to the parties themselves but
also to the United Nations and the international
community as a whole. While we encourage both the
Government of Guatemala and the URNG to use the
momentum now created to undertake all necessary
measures to fully implement the peace package, we
believe that the United Nations should also help
consolidate the historic progress made towards a lasting
peace in Guatemala.

It has long been anticipated that verification of the
military aspects of the peace agreement will require the

 

deployment of military observers. Given that the overall
package of peace accords has entered into force and the
request has been made by the parties for the deployment of
the United Nations verification mission, we support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to attach a group
of military observers to the existing MINUGUA operation.
We believe that the recommended dimensions of
deployment would enable the effective fulfilment of the
entrusted tasks, namely, ceasefire verification, separation of
forces, and the disarmament and demobilization of URNG
combatants.

My delegation will therefore vote in favour of the
draft resolution on authorizing the attachment to
MINUGUA of a group of 155 military observers and
requisite medical personnel for a period of three months.

