Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
thoughts of the Senegalese delegation are with Zaida
Catalan and Michael Sharp. We would like to convey
our sincere condolences to their families and the
Swedish Government and the American Government.
Our thoughts are also with the four Congolese nationals
whose whereabouts are still unknown. We must find
the murderers of Zaida and Michael and bring them
to justice.

Resolution 2348 (2017), which we have just adopted
by consensus and which renews the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
marks without a doubt a critical phase in the United
Nations presence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and, we hope, towards lasting peace and stability
in a great African country and a friend of Senegal.
My delegation was guided, throughout the process of
negotiating and drafting the resolution, by the desire
to see strengthened coordination on the ground among
the various partners of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to ensure the greatest possible impact for the
activities of the United Nations and the African Union,
of course, as well as the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region of Africa.

Today's resolution reaffirms the Council's support
for the implementation of the San Silvestro agreement.
It reaffirms, among other things, our support for
MONUSCO and improves its agility. We hope that,
with better equipment, MONUSCO will be able to
contribute more effectively to the protection of civilians
and, at the same time, in coordination and cooperation
with the Forces armees de la Republique democratique
du Congo, to combat and neutralize the negative forces.

I take this opportunity to express Senegal's support
for all United Nations staff who have worked tirelessly
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. First and
foremost, I would like to thank Mr. Maman Sidikou,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, who is a dear
friend of ours. It is in that spirit that Senegal, a troop-
contributing country, is awaiting the strategic review of
MONUSCO and wishes every success to the mediation
efforts of the Conference episcopale nationale du
Congo aimed at ensuring a credible and successful
peace process.

