The President (spoke in Spanish): After
consultations among the members of the Security
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the statement
of its President of 23 September 2008
(S/PRST/2008/36) and takes note of the report of
26

the Secretary-General on enhancing mediation
and its support activities (S/2009/ 189), as well as
the recommendations contained therein.

"The Security Council, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and as the
organ with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
underscores its intention to remain engaged in all
stages of the conflict cycle, including in support
of mediation, and expresses its readiness to
explore further ways and means to reinforce the
promotion of mediation as an important means
for the pacific settlement of disputes, wherever
possible before they evolve into violence.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of mediation, to be launched at the
earliest possible phases of conflicts, as well as in
the implementation phases of signed peace
agreements and underlines the need to design
mediation processes that address the root causes
of conflicts and contribute to peacebuilding, in
order to ensure sustainable peace.

"The Security Council stresses that the
principal responsibility for the peaceful
settlement of disputes rests with the parties to the
conflict and that it is only through their full
participation and genuine commitment to resolve
the conflict, including its underlying causes, that
peace can be achieved and sustained. In this
regard, the Council underlines the importance of
building national and local capacity for
mediation.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of the actions undertaken by the
United Nations Secretary-General in promoting
mediation and in the pacific settlement of
disputes and welcomes the continued efforts by
the Department of Political Affairs, in particular
through the Mediation Support Unit, to respond
to emerging and existing crises. It underscores
that mediation support efforts should be
responsive to the demands of fast-moving peace
processes.

"The Security Council recalls the important
contribution of Member States, regional and
subregional organizations, civil society and other
stakeholders to the pacific settlement of disputes.
The Council welcomes the efforts made by
regional and subregional organizations to
enhance their mediation role and appreciates the
efforts of the Secretary-General to continue to
assist them in this regard.

"The Security Council urges the Secretariat
to work with all partners to ensure the availability
of well-trained, experienced and geographically
diverse mediation experts at all levels to ensure
the timely and highest-quality support to
mediation efforts, and it urges those possessing
cadres of mediation experts to cooperate with the
Secretariat in this endeavour.

"The Security Council further requests the
Secretary-General to work in partnership with
Member States, regional and subregional
organizations and other relevant partners in a
coordinated and mutually complementary manner
when cooperating in a mediation process.

"The Security Council notes with concern
the very low numbers of women in formal roles
in mediation processes and stresses the need to
ensure that women are appropriately appointed at
decision-making levels, as high-level mediators
and within the composition of the mediators'
teams in line with resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008). It reiterates its call to the Secretary-
General and the heads of regional and
subregional organizations to take the appropriate
measures to that end.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to keep it informed of the
action undertaken by him in promoting and
supporting mediation and pacific settlement of
disputes, ensuring coherence with the ongoing
efforts to strengthen peacebuilding and
peacekeeping."

This statement will be issued as a document of

the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/8.

I thank all delegations for participating in today's

discussion.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.
