Mr. Chergui: Allow me first of all to warmly
congratulate Sweden on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, and I commend your
initiative, Madam President, to convene this timely
and very important meeting on cooperation between
the African Union and the United Nations, which takes
place on the eve of the twelfth annual consultative
meeting between the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the United Nations Security Council. I
am also pleased to note that today's meeting is being
held only a few days after the very successful African
Union-United Nations second annual conference, held
in Addis Ababa on 9 July.

At the outset, I would also like to thank my sister,
Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde, for the important briefing she
delivered. I would like to tell her that the African Union
Commission recognizes itself fully in all she said. It is
therefore my distinct honour to address this meeting to
highlight the significant progress that has been made
in the partnership between our two organizations and
the coherence in our decision-making, while enriching
each other with the knowledge of our respective
comparative advantages.

Over the years, the African Union has forged a
critical partnership with the United Nations in order
to achieve its Vision of a peaceful, prosperous and
integrated continent. That relationship was given new
impetus by the signing in Apri12017 of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security by Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat. That
renewed commitment has indeed moved the partnership
from an ad hoc approach into a more structured and
predictable one.

The second annual conference of the African
Union and the United Nations, which took place
recently in Addis Ababa on 9 July, reaffirmed the
importance of our partnership and the significance of
multilateral responses to global security challenges.
In that regard, we have committed to enhancing
collaboration, cooperation and coordination between
our two organizations, based on the principles of
complementarity, comparative advantage, burden-
sharing and collective responsibility.

We have also agreed to enhance consultations
prior to decision-making in order to reach a shared
understanding of the issues at hand and attain
consistency in the support for African-led peace
support efforts. As the Council has already noted,
the ever-growing partnership with United Nations
colleagues has allowed us to incorporate an additional
operational tool, which is the joint Visits that I started
with Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix to Darfur and the Central
African Republic. That effort will continue in the
coming weeks and months. It is essential that the positive
momentum currently prevailing between our respective
secretariats continue to foster dynamism in cooperation
and coordination between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council.

In the field, the partnership between our two
decision-making bodies is manifest in our collaborative
peacemaking efforts in several conflict and post-
conflict situations, including in the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Great
Lakes region, Guinea Bissau, Mali and the Sahel, South
Sudan and Somalia, just to name a few.

Despite the progress achieved so far, we still face
some challenges, particularly when it comes to the
relationship between the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the Security Council, where more
work is needed in order to achieve greater coherence
and coordination when dealing with crisis situations on
the continent. Those include building on recent gains
made in South Sudan to impress upon the parties to
uphold and implement the signed agreements. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, attention must
be focused upon addressing the future challenges
associated with the general elections scheduled for
23 December in line with the 31 December 2016
agreement. In Somalia, resource mobilization to enable
the African Union Mission in Somalia to deliver on its
mandate, including the gradual handover to the Somali
security forces through Somalia's transition plan and
capacity-building, remains a critical challenge. If not
addressed, the progress made in Somalia might be
reversed. The deteriorating security situation in the
Central African Republic is a continuing source of
concern. The African Union is grateful to the Security
Council for recognizing the African Initiative for
Peace and Reconciliation as the main framework for
achieving a political solution in the country, and I urge
the Council to continue to support it.

The situation across the Sahel region also requires
our urgent attention. The instability in northern Mali
has not only spilled over into the central region of the
country and to neighbouring Burkina Faso and the
Niger; it has also morphed into intercommunity clashes
spurred by the conflict between herders and farmers.
Critical support from the United Nations is therefore
required to hasten the operationalization of the Joint
Force ofthe Group ofFive for the Sahel. For its part, the
African Union is finalizing the revision of its strategy
for the Sahel in line with the decision adopted by the
African Union Peace and Security Council at its recent
Heads-of-State meeting in Nouakchott. In that regard,
I am grateful to my sister Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed, who met our envoy President
Buyoya in Nouakchott, where they agreed to coordinate
two strategies so that we can avoid duplication and,
more important, assist the people in the Sahel.

Allow me to recall that the African Union
has consistently advocated for predictable and
sustainable financing through United Nations-assessed
contributions for African Union-led peace operations.
In 2015, the African Union Assembly of Heads of
State and Government decided to finance 25 per
cent of the cost of the African Union's peace support
operations. In order to deliver on that objective, in 2016
the African Union Assembly decided to endow the
African Union Peace Fund with $400 million. The full
endowment level will be reached in 2021 and will be
achieved incrementally at the following annual targets:
$65 million for 2017; $65 million for the current year
and $90 million per year for 2019, 2020 and 2021. As
I address the Council, African Union member States
have already contributed $47 million out of the targeted
$65 million. That illustrates that, despite their limited
resources, African Union member States are committed
to assuming their share of responsibility to enhance
peace and security on the continent.

We hope that that will serve as impetus for the
Security Council to move forward in its considerations
to avail assessed contributions to African Union-led
peace support operations. It is our hope that today's
meeting will pave the way to achieve that objective
in line with the relevant provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations, including Chapter VIII. Flexibility
and innovation should guide our discussions to ensure
coherence across the various layers ofour global security
architecture. In that regard, I am pleased to note that
there has been progress with regard to the Secretary-
General's recent Action for Peacekeeping initiative.

In conclusion, I would like to stress once again
the strategic importance of the African Union-United
Nations partnership, particularly its positive impact
on peace and security in Africa. Our joint efforts are
already bearing fruit, and we look forward to building
a closer relationship that will deliver on our aspirations
for peace and security on the continent, including
silencing the guns by 2020. In the meantime, we are
receiving excellent news from Africa, as we heard
earlier with regard to developments between Ethiopia
and Eritrea and elsewhere. With such efforts under way
in Africa, together with our collective work, I believe
that we can achieve the noble goal of silencing the guns.

