Mr. Al-Attiyah (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Sir, on your country's accession to
the presidency of the Security Council and thank you
for presiding personally over today's meeting and for
the invitation to participate in this debate at a time when
the Middle East region is heading into an extremely
grave situation. We also wish to thank Spain for its role
in promoting peace in the region and Mr. Jan Eliasson
for his briefing.

The Council is meeting today to consider the
situation that is unfolding as a result of the serious
escalation in the activities of the Israeli Defense
Forces against the Palestinian people. Anyone who has
followed the situation knows that the situation is the
result of the occupation, with its illegal settlements,
its discrimination against the Palestinian people, its
violation of their rights and basic freedoms, its denial
of access to natural resources and its stifling economic
blockade. The Palestinians are currently the object of
crimes committed by Israeli extremists, who act with
impunity.

The Palestinian people have taken to the streets yet
again in order to express their rage for reasons that are
perfectly understandable. They are a people whose land
has been occupied and who are subjected to humiliation
daily. Their land is constantly being usurped and
confiscated in order to build settlements. We can all
bear witness to that, and today we are here to discuss
a question of major importance that weighs heavily
not only on the shoulders of the Arab and Muslim
peoples but that unites all the world's democracies. It
has been impossible to resolve the dispute, because
the international community is not prepared to impose
a just solution. The Palestinian people are being held
hostage to the balance of power between the occupying
Power and the occupied people.

Negotiations have therefore lost their value. Talks
have not been held on a continuing basis, and Israel has
adopted the practice of annexing forcibly occupied land
in Jerusalem and in the Golan. The Gaza Strip has been

under siege for years, and wars have been unleashed
against anyone who resisted. Finally, there are those
who are bent on blocking access to the holy sites in
Jerusalem, which could even lead to the division of the
space. Those groups are an integral part of the Israeli
Government.
The Palestinian people take to the street to be heard,
not because they seek mercy or pity. The Palestinian
people have dignity. They are the original population.
They take to the street to say that they reject humiliation
and occupation and that they do not accept the
international indifference that has allowed a just cause
to go without response for decades. Apartheid is over,
but in Palestine, for all intents and purposes, it is on the
verge of being restored. Here, I would like to point out
that the generation that has taken to the streets and that
is being subjected to summary executions is demanding
a solution based on the 1967 borders before it is too late.
The elements on the ground presage terrible results.

The people of the region are facing a new tragedy
that risks exacerbating the question of Syria, which is
an international question. Despite the suffering of the
Syrian people, the international community has not
attempted to resolve it. The international community
has proof of the use of chemical weapons and barrel
bombs, and there has been a mass exodus of people, yet
the regime remains in place, because no one has put an
end to its excesses.

We have discussed the matter many times but no
one has replied to the question of why we have not
provided protection to Syrian civilians or why we
have not succeeded in protecting them. I do not think
there is a convincing answer to that question. We
continue to speak about combating terrorism. We all
face that danger, and we must all work to combat it,
but the Syrians believe that the main problem is State
terrorism. Unfortunately, opposition to the Syrian
regime no longer rests simply on the fact that it is a
criminal regime that commits crimes against humanity.
Now it is a matter of seeing whether or not there is a
point in combating terrorism. That is exactly what the
Syrian people were afraid of. What we need to do today
is to agree again to implement the Final Communique' of
the Action Group for Syria of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex), establishing a transitional authority with the
executive power to address the demands of the Syrian
revolution while preserving that country's sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity. Such a solution would
spare the world the dangers of terrorism.

Now we must seriously address the task of finding
a solution to the destructive mechanism that has led
to the total destruction of Syria and turned its people
into refugees in our countries and all over the world.
We can testify to the gravity of the situation just by
counting the number of victims. The situation in Syria
is a tragedy that will remain etched in human memory.
Unfortunately, the international community has chosen
to respond based on self-interest. We used to believe that
the solution for Syria should, above all, be a political
one, but have we asked ourselves what we have done to
improve the situation and whether we have acted with
courage to protect those who need our protection? By
that, I mean the Syrian people and none other.

