Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): The United
Nations turned an important comer 10 years ago. The
year 1999 was one of profound changes for
peacekeeping operations as well as for international
peace and security. The reports on Srebrenica, the
operations in Rwanda and the monumental failure of
the United Nation Operation in Somalia led to great
introspection and, ultimately, to new ways of thinking
about peacekeeping. That undertaking was in great part
possible thanks to the report (S/2000/809) of the High-
Level Panel on United Nations Peace Operations,
known as the Brahimi report, which was published in
2000.

A surge in peacekeeping operations in 2000
resulted in an increase in personnel from 14,000 to
about 40,000. This growth has been ongoing and
continues today, exactly a decade later, with over
112,000 personnel deployed and many more to come
with the strengthening of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), the ongoing development of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and the authorization of an
enlarged mission in Chad. These numbers will continue
to increase in the coming weeks. As Council members
know, planning and preparation for a potential new
mission in Somalia is also under way.

Today, we are more numerous and widely spread
than at any time in our history, with mandates that are,
as members know, both more complex and more robust
than ever. These Council mandates reflect, of course, a
better appreciation by the international community of
the complexities of current conflicts, as well as the
desire for more comprehensive peace settlements by
the various parties to the conflicts.
09-21747

The last decade has also, as I mentioned, been a
time to rethink United Nations peacekeeping
operations, undertake reforms within the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and gradually
strengthen the professionalism of our operations. We
have seen many improvements. We have clarified our
thinking on peace operations and strengthened the
institutional capacity of the United Nations to support
them. Nevertheless, as we can all see, much remains to
be done.

The growth in United Nations peacekeeping over
the past years clearly reflects its success and its
necessity. These operations can indeed provide the
international community with a credible response to
assist in the implementation of peace agreements; they
can also provide a platform for a wide range of
assistance and support to help countries move from
conflict to stability; and they can, of course, bring the
legitimacy of the United Nations and its neutrality to
bear, so it can serve as an honest broker in many
instances. Ultimately, they have proven to be a flexible
and resilient tool in the maintenance of peace and
security.

(spoke in English)

Yet, as Council members are well aware, the last
10 years have not always brought good news. We have
faced operational challenges in almost all of our
theatres of deployment and the reform at Headquarters
has not always resulted in as much improvement as is
needed. The implementation of the Brahimi
recommendations, the Peace Operations 2010 reform
agenda, and most recently, the Secretary-General's
initiatives to create two strengthened departments -
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support (DFS) - have all been a
manifestation of our desire to strive constantly to do
the job of peacekeeping better.

The Council has been our partner in this ongoing
process and we want to assure members of our
continued commitment to this agenda for
professionalization and improvement. We are open to
new ways of tackling persistent challenges and to new
ways of doing business in partnership with the Security
Council, the General Assembly and our operational
partners.

I believe that 2009 is a pivotal year for
peacekeeping. A number of our missions face risks that
are so significant that there is a potential for mission
3
failure, with terrible consequences for the entire United
Nations.

In the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the parties recently brought the country to the brink of
catastrophe and MONUC was hard-pressed to manage
the crisis. The mission was called upon to support the
Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo in combat even as it crumbled and at the same
time protect hundreds of thousands of civilians spread
across a vast area.

In Darfur, UNAMID continues to face difficulties
in deploying, while the parties on the ground are
increasingly belligerent and the political negotiations
move slowly. Even at full strength, UNAMID will
continue to face daunting challenges. Over 2.5 million
refugees and internally displaced persons look to
UNAMID for protection. At the same time, as members
know, the Mission still lacks the helicopters that would
provide the mobility essential to carry out its important
mandate.

As I speak, our DPKO and DFS colleagues are on
an assessment mission looking at the situation in
Somalia. The Security Council's resolution on the
intention to establish a future United Nations
peacekeeping operation is clear. In the interim, our
colleagues in DFS now face the dual challenge of
continuing to prepare and plan for a mission that will
undoubtedly face tremendous operational hurdles while
simultaneously strengthening and supporting the
African Union Mission in Somalia. As members know,
there remains no peace to keep in Somalia.

It is clear that United Nations peacekeeping is
overstretched. We face operational overstretch and, I
would argue, political overstretch too. With 18
operations deployed in five continents and with 78,000
military, 11,500 police and 23,500 civilians deployed,
the operational challenge of maintaining full support to
all our missions and mounting new ones is far beyond
what the Brahimi reforms envisaged. They were scaled
to allow the United Nations to launch one
peacekeeping operation per year. Only last week, the
Security Council voted through two new mandates for
Chad and for a potential mission into Somalia.
Meanwhile, we are still in the deployment phase in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Darfur. That
represents four operations at the same time for DFS in
particular.
At the same time, our missions carry out
mandates that represent much more than the
deployment of uniformed personnel. Many are
fundamentally political operations supporting complex
transitions to peace within deeply divided countries.
Even with well-crafted mandates, these missions need
continuous and concerted international support as they
manage constant tactical and political adjustments on
the ground. Even after the adoption of a resolution, this
support is clearly badly needed. Yet for many of our
missions, there is no consensus in the international
community regarding the optimal political direction.

Therefore, we face three sets of fundamental
questions. First, is peacekeeping being developed
beyond its capabilities? Is the current model of
peacekeeping up to the challenges of these new
mandates? Does it have the right resources? Are there
sufficient troops of requisite capabilities? Can we find
the air assets essential to meeting these robust
mandates with mobility and deterrence? In too many
cases, the answer is no. There is now a constant strain
between mandates and resources and between
expectations and our capacity to deliver, and there is a
strain on Secretariat resources to plan, manage and
support our current pace and scale of operations. My
colleague and friend, Susana Malcorra, will speak
more about the operational challenges that lie
immediately ahead.

Secondly, is the United Nations properly
configured to manage the complexity of the
peacebuilding challenges that are at the heart of
resolving internal conflict and civil war? Many of our
peacekeeping missions are early peacebuilding
missions, but do we have the expertise and resources
necessary to rapidly deploy and plan the complex and
long-term assistance required to support national actors
in rebuilding their States? The linkage of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council in
aligning political direction, aid strategies and donor
support is an important issue. The linkage of the
missions, the United Nations country teams and
international financial institutions and bilateral donors
on the ground is, of course, equally important. We are
working hard on these partnerships, and we have done
a lot to integrate the United Nations response on the
ground. However, there is much left to be done if,
together, we are to provide a comprehensive
peacebuilding response. I am conscious that this is an
issue that will be addressed in an upcoming report of
09-21747
the Secretary-General in March, so I will not dwell
extensively on it here.

The third type of question - and probably the
most fundamental for peacekeeping - is the question
of where peacekeeping fits into the overall political
response of the international community to complex
crises. Are the political and regional dimensions which
drive the crisis being adequately addressed, and is
peacekeeping the right tool to do that? Is there even, in
many cases, a peace to keep? Peacekeeping, however
well resourced, will simply not be sufficient where the
parties are not willing to achieve peace. Indeed, over
the past few years we have seen increasing signs of
non-cooperation from host Governments and increased
resistance from some parties to conflict to our presence
and actions.

Many of these questions were of course raised in
the broad Brahimi process, and we would do well to
return to take a look at how recommendations have, or
have not been implemented. Some of the issues we
face have arisen since the Brahimi reforms. Indeed,
United Nations peacekeeping as a whole also faces
questions of a more systemic nature: a deepening world
economic crisis that will further limit our resources and
our flexibility to respond to crises and changed
circumstances on the ground, normative and legal
developments in the fight to end impunity and ensure
justice that have repercussions for peacekeeping
operations, and increased demand for the
implementation of protection of civilian mandates,
among other questions.

The very fact that we are engaged in this dialogue
now, and not after a catastrophe, is an important
indication of the seriousness of our collective intent to
strengthen United Nations peacekeeping. If we act in
concert, together we can ensure that peacekeeping does
not falter, as it did in the 19905.

United Nations peacekeeping has proven
remarkably resilient and has established a good track
record. It is a uniquely universal burden-sharing
arrangement and enjoys a high degree of legitimacy
when used appropriately. It combines military response
within an integrated civilian approach, a critical
attribute that gives it a niche role in the spectrum of
options for the maintenance of peace and security. But
it is not a tool for all situations. When used
inappropriately, its failures can tarnish not just the
image of the operation in question, but the credibility
09-21747

of the Organization as a whole as the guarantor of
peace and security that saves succeeding generations
from the scourge of war.

Yet, there are also areas of potential opportunity
which we should bear in mind as we consider the
challenges. There is an increased engagement of
regional organizations as instruments for the
maintenance of regional peace and security. How best
should they, and the United Nations, fit into an overall
international capability? There is an increased
recognition by international and regional financial
institutions of the need for early engagement in fragile
post-conflict countries. The new Chairman of the
World Bank was very clear on this issue. And of
course, we now have an increased interest by Member
States to support United Nations peacekeeping. We,
collectively, must transform these opportunities into
structural supports for United Nations peacekeeping.

United Nations peacekeeping is a unique
partnership, in which we all have a stake. It is an
endeavour of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, of contributing nations and host nations, of
the Secretariat and the field missions, of individual
peacekeepers and the populations where they are
deployed, who hope for security and a better future. We
all need to work together to protect the investments we
have made and the successes we have achieved. That
calls for a renewed consensus on the state of
peacekeeping, its challenges and its way forward.

In order to move together to face our new set of
challenges as one, I feel that there are some
fundamental questions we must ask ourselves, for
which we must find solutions together. Do we share a
common vision of what United Nations peacekeeping
can and cannot do? Do we have a common vision of
how United Nations peacekeeping differs from other
options for peace and security? Can better conflict
prevention avoid demands for peacekeeping? Do we
understand the limits of peacekeeping and its
comparative strengths? Have we entered an era where
we appreciate that United Nations peacekeeping is the
institution of first resort for some situations but is ill-
suited for others? What other tools can be called upon
reliably when United Nations peacekeeping is not the
best instrument?

Within DPKO, we have struggled with some of
these questions in the enunciation of our internal
publication - the so-called capstone doctrine - on
5
principles and guidelines for United Nations
peacekeeping, which sets out our views, from the
implementation perspective, about what modern
peacekeeping is doing and what it is able to do. It
builds upon the Brahimi review process and captures
internal lessons and good practices that we have
learned. This effort to arrive at a common vision is not
easy, even internally, and it would surely be even more
difficult across a partnership as diverse as the United
Nations peacekeeping partnership. But it is this sort of
intellectual endeavour that will be at the heart of
establishing a common vision for the future. We can
then construct solutions to impediments through an
honest exchange on what is working and What is not.

To ensure that United Nations peacekeeping
remains a viable and indeed a stronger instrument for
the future, I believe we need to follow two
simultaneous tracks this year. First, we must survive
the current operational workload and the looming
challenges in the months ahead. This demands concrete
and practical action on several fronts. For example, we
must find short-term measures to close the gap between
the troops and material we are able to raise and the
authorized levels needed to meet our mandates. At the
same time, we must begin to find new potential
contributors to the peacekeeping endeavour.

To deploy at high pace into remote territories, we
must find innovative ways to draw on support which
only Member States can provide. The recent support in
moving materiel for UNAMID is an example of the
sort of assistance that, on a larger scale, may be needed
to establish fully and quickly those underdeployed and
expanding missions.

We need on-hand capacities to reinforce missions
from the strategic level if a crisis erupts. Contingency
plans for those likely crisis spots must begin to emerge
immediately. In missions where we have stabilized the
peace process, but where lack of peacebuilding
investment is threatening gains - such as in Haiti,
Liberia and Afghanistan - critical resources need to
flow to shore up peacekeeping efforts. And we need, of
course, to find ways to intensify and sustain political
efforts - a political surge if you will - to support
peace processes or to help realize peace where it has
not yet been realized.

I will dwell for a minute on that last point of
political support. Too often, missions are launched only
to find themselves later being tested on the ground as
6

they pursue their mandates. When these missions are
tested, as we recently were in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo or as we were with the United Nations
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea and as we are
continually in Darfur, it is not just the mission that is
being tested. It is a test of the will of the international
community and of the Security Council.

In those situations, the mission, while needing to
play its part, must also act knowing that the political
response will also come from the strategic level. In
those situations, the unified voice of the Security
Council - an unequivocal political message - and
behind-the-scenes political pressure from key players
in the Council and countries in the region are critical.
Peacekeeping and political leverage must work
together. Political support from the Security Council
can assist in other ways too, for example in mobilizing
troops and other resources through demarches and
bilateral engagements with prospective troop and
police contributors.

The Secretariat needs continuous support from
the Security Council and Member States after a
resolution is adopted. At the same time, we are, of
course, ready to work with the Security Council to
ensure that it has the information it needs to craft
mandates with relevant benchmarks and to engage with
the Council in monitoring and evaluating them.

That leads me to the second track of work: we
may need to tackle larger, systemic challenges. We
need to bolster - and, in some instances, mend - the
global partnership that we need for a healthy and well-
functioning United Nations peacekeeping system.
United Nations peacekeeping is effective only if all
actors have a shared vision of what that instrument can
and cannot achieve.

Much needs to be done to achieve a better
convergence of views. Peacekeeping, although owned
by all, is not commonly understood by all. Today we
find ourselves looking at a very complex puzzle from
different angles and with differing assumptions and
expectations. The Secretariat, the troop and police
contributors, the Fourth and Fifth Committees of the
General Assembly and, of course, this body, the
Security Council - each of us carries a fragment of
the puzzle that is peacekeeping. Those puzzle pieces
must be brought closer together than they are today.

I hope that we can harness our intellectual
energies and our capacity to come together to solve
problems in order to address some of the persistent
challenges we face. For that reason, I am extremely
grateful for the debate that is starting today. It marks
the beginning of a process of reflection in the Security
Council.

The Council is, of course, a major part of the
equation, but others need to act as well. Several weeks
ago, Susana Malcorra and I initiated an internal process
of introspection and stock-taking to review how far we
have come in the Brahimi process and to consider how
to meet new challenges on the horizon even as we
grapple with today's urgent issues. We need to look at
our own house and to find new and innovative ways to
tackle the challenges of modern peacekeeping. We will,
of course, share our findings with the Security Council
and the General Assembly with a view to building
consensus on the way forward and sharing our
reflections.

The General Assembly, the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee are
absolutely pivotal actors in that partnership. The
Secretariat looks forward to continuing its ongoing
dialogue with the Special Committee and the Fifth
Committee in the coming session on many
peacekeeping issues that lie squarely within the
Assembly's remit. I hope that 2009 can be a decisive
moment for re-energizing our thinking on how we can
better support United Nations peacekeeping. With
troop contributors, police contributors and those who
fund capacity-building efforts, we need to build a fully
functional dialogue on What is needed. The first step in
strengthening our partnership is to work together
constructively to develop a more shared appreciation of
what United Nations peacekeeping is today and can be
tomorrow.

(spoke in French)

Too often, changes in attitudes and operational
changes come only after crises. It is our fervent hope
that this time we will not need to have a new
generation of reports on regrettable operations and
major failures - such as those that followed the
tragedies in Rwanda and Srebrenica - before we seek
solutions to the new challenges besetting us.

The year 2009 needs to be a year of both new
ideas and success on the ground. Obviously, it must be
a year of cooperation and tangible solutions. Now is
the time to reinvigorate our thinking about partnership
as it relates to peacekeeping operations. For our part,
we in the Secretariat are fully mobilized to engage in
such reflection with the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the contingent contributors and all actors in
order to come up with recommendations and very
specific solutions as soon as possible.

Obviously, we consider this debate to be an
essential first step on that path. We recall that, for all of
us, success requires a clear vision of the instrument
that we want to have and, of course, the need to
achieve it by consensus. To that end, we need both
determination and unity.

