Ms. Thompson (Barbados): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on this matter
of the utmost gravity. I also thank Under-Secretary-
General DiCarlo for her briefing.

The Heads of State and Government of the following
members of the Caribbean Community - Antigua
and Barbuda, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Jamaica,
Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad and
Tobago - together with the Foreign Ministers of
Grenada and Suriname, met by video-conference on
24 January and issued the statement that I today have
the honour to deliver to the Security Council. This
statement was subsequently endorsed by the Republic
of Guyana. I will now read the statement verbatim:

"Heads of Government are following closely
the current unsatisfactory situation in the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, a neighbouring
Caribbean country. They expressed grave concern
about the plight of the people of Venezuela and
the increasing volatility of the situation brought
about by recent developments, which could lead to
further violence, confrontation, breakdown of law
and order and greater suffering for the people of
the country.

"Heads of Government reaffirmed their guiding
principles of non-interference and non-intervention
in the affairs of States, respect for sovereignty,

adherence to the rule of law and respect for human
rights and democracy.

"Heads of Government reiterated that the long-
standing political crisis, which has been exacerbated
by recent events, can be resolved peacefully only
through meaningful dialogue and diplomacy.

"In that regard, Heads of Government offered
their good offices to facilitate dialogue among all
parties to resolve the deepening crisis.

"Reaffirming their commitment to the tenets of
Article 2, paragraph 4, ofthe Charter of the United
Nations, which calls for Member States to refrain
from the threat or the use of force, and article 21
of the Charter of the Organization of American
States, which refers to territorial inviolability, the
Heads of Government emphasized the importance
of the Caribbean remaining a zone of peace.

"Heads of Government called on external
forces to refrain from doing anything to destabilize
the situation, underscored the need to step back
from the brink and called on all actors, internal and
external, to avoid actions that would escalate an
already explosive situation to the detriment of the
people of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
that could have far-reaching negative consequences
for the wider region."

That concludes the statement, as issued on
24 January. The Heads of Government of the Caribbean
will continue to monitor and engage on this very serious
matter, as appropriate.

