Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We warmly congratulate
the Plurinational State of Bolivia on acceding to the
presidency of the Security Council and express our
appreciation to you, Madam, for your skilled leadership
of the Council.

I thank Special Coordinator Nikolay Mladenov
for his briefing to the Council today. I also extend
our thanks to Mr. Hagai El-Ad, Executive Director of
B'Tselem, for his presentation, further exposing the
dismal realities of the situation and sharing the concerns
of civil society as they witness the distress ofa people
whose human rights are being so grossly violated and
the destruction of the chances for peace and stability
for Palestinians and Israelis alike.

Against that backdrop and in view of the many
regrettable developments since our last debate (see S/PV.8316), including escalating punitive measures
against the Palestinian people and leadership, it is
necessary to clarify certain matters.

Standing up for oneself and one's rights should never
be equated with disrespect of anyone or misconstrued
as a provocation. It is in fact an utmost expression of
respect for one's rights and dignity, regardless of the
consequences. When the American patriot Patrick
Henry declared "give me liberty or give me death", he
was not disrespecting or provoking anyone, but rather
insisting on his right to live freely. It was considered
an act of heroism, moral courage, and reverence for
the liberty due to all humankind. The Charter of the
United Nations has affirmed that right of all peoples to
self-determination.

As Palestinians continue to be deprived of this
right, it has been affirmed and called for in countless
resolutions and declarations endorsed by a vast
majority of States and peoples worldwide. Our right
to self-determination and to live freely is a legitimate
and inalienable right - a right we will never forsake; a
right that we will not negotiate with anyone, nor will we
ask permission to exercise it from anyone. It is the right
of the Palestinian people to exercise it and they will
exercise it alone, as has been the case with all peoples
who have exercised the right to self-determination. Why,
after all these years, considering humankind's progress
and the understandings reached on the universal desire
and right to freedom, why would the Palestinian people
be expected to be any different? Why would they be
expected to forever submit to foreign occupation and
colonial domination?

Also affirmed in these Halls, year after year,
is the fact that peace can never be realized in the
absence of human rights and can never be built on
the dehumanization of others. That has been proven
repeatedly throughout history. We therefore agree with
a statement made in the recent past by the United States
Permanent Representative, Mrs. Haley, before the
Council on Foreign Relations, that

"peace and security cannot be achieved in isolation
from human rights Desperate people subject
to humiliation and abuse will inevitably resort
to violence."

It is true that such a situation can never be a path to
peace, and a peace so imposed will never be viable. The
situation of Palestine is no exception. Yet, despite the
extreme human rights crisis being endured, our people
continue, more often than not, to choose non-violence
and peaceful protest.

What we are witnessing, however, are precisely
such short-sighted, inhumane policies as Israel, the
occupying Power, always chooses violence, brutalizing
the Palestinian civilian population and colonizing its
land, with zero consequence, supplemented by the
recent United States decisions contravening United
Nations resolutions, pressuring and vilifying the
Palestinian leadership, and politicizing desperately
needed humanitarian aid, including for more than
5.4 million Palestine refugees.

As part of an attempt to impose a so-called peace
deal, such policies do nothing to help overcome the
political impasse but rather harden it and cause more
mistrust, which is already at an all-time high. Moreover,
such policies prejudge and undermine just solutions to
the core issues, prolonging the conflict and ensuring
only more instability, insecurity and hardship.

We categorically reject these policies and the
distorted, punitive, negative narratives accompanying
them, which demean the legitimacy of Palestinian
national aspirations and dismiss our rights, including
those of our refugees. We also refute attempts to
discredit the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which operates
on the basis of a strong General Assembly mandate
and has been consistently lauded by host countries
and the international community - including the
United States - for its exemplary humanitarian and
development programmes and proven contribution to
regional stability over the decades.

We refuse to accept such policies and rhetoric
and respectfully stand up for our rights, as enshrined
in universal covenants and countless United Nations
resolutions, including those of the Security Council.
We do so peacefully and unwaveringly, committed to
all political, diplomatic, legal and civil means to secure
our rights. We reject the pretexts used to continue
denying those rights and exempting Israel from its
violations. We cannot accept continued appeasement
and hesitance to hold Israel accountable for its crimes,
even as it flagrantly breaches all obligations as an
occupying Power, threatening the very existence of our
people in their homeland and even boasting of this in
the most sinister of ways.

We cannot accept continued lip service to the
peace process while Israel keeps proving how empty its
commitment to negotiations and the two-State solution
actually is, all the while entrenching its occupation,
mocking the international community and still
demanding privileged treatment. Israel should not be
permitted to continue thwarting credible negotiations
aimed at achieving just solutions to the final status
issues - Jerusalem, refugees, settlements, borders,
security, water and prisoners - solutions which we
all know to be vital to establishing lasting peace and
security between the two peoples.

All who call for negotiations should make it
clear that these must be based on the long-standing
parameters and terms of reference set forth by the
relevant resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab
Peace Initiative. These are not preconditions; they are
the foundation and guarantees of a just peace, which
would inherently mean addressing the legitimate rights
and concerns of both sides. Trying to accommodate
illegitimate asks, claims and actions will never solve
the problem; it will only create new ones, as we have
seen over the 25 exhausting and futile years of the
Oslo process.

As affirmed by the late former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan in one of the last pieces he penned on
behalf of The Elders, regarding the conflict:

"[A] people deprived of liberty and dignity
will never be pacified. Nor will they meekly accept
a settlement imposed by outsiders that redraws
borders and redefines sovereignty without popular
consent. Any fresh approach to peacemaking must
be welcome in principle Yet, ifit does not address
the root causes of the conflict, including historic
dispossession, illegal settlement expansion, the
status of Jerusalem as a shared capital and the
rights of Palestinian refugees, the deal will be
doomed to failure."
Those words ring alarmingly today. We have
continually called on the international community to
uphold its collective responsibility to bring an end to
the Israeli occupation and this 70-year injustice. We do
so again today, urging the Security Council to uphold
its duties under the Charter of the United Nations and
to act in conformity with its own resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016), to address the root causes
and tangibly contribute to a solution that will be just,
comprehensive and lasting. We have also continually
affirmed our commitment to the two-State solution as
the path to peace, insisting, however, that it be a just
peace - not one stripping our people of their land and
rights. We do so again today.

How can those seeking to make peace condone,
support or excuse the violations being perpetrated every
single day against the Palestinian people by Israel and
its destruction of the prospects for peace? They must
not condone or excuse the savage killing of innocent
civilians who have been cruelly denied protection
for decades by an international community that has
appeased and armed the occupation to the maximum
with little remorse. While they may be seen as statistics
by some, the Palestinian men, women and children
who have been killed - including over 200 peaceful
protesters, among them at least 45 children, since the
Great March of Return in Gaza began, and including
the mother of eight children, Aisha Mohammed Rabi,
who was killed last week in the West Bank by Israeli
settlers, as well as the tens of thousands who have been
injured by the Israeli occupying forces - are not just
numbers to us, but our sisters and brothers whose pain
and losses we grieve for and weigh heavily on us, not
least on our collective belief that justice and peace
are possible.

They must not condone or excuse attempts to clear
away people - human beings - like rubbish, with no
regard for rights and dignity, or the demolition of their
homes and lives. The forced transfer of people, as is
happening in the Bedouin village othan Al-Ahmar and
witnessed so many times before in occupied Palestine
over the years, constitutes ethnic cleansing. This is not
a mere decision by Israel's so-called judiciary, which
has proven to serve and subsidize the occupation and
where the chances for minimal justice for Palestinians
are nil; this is a war crime.

They must not condone, excuse or in any way
support the colonization of a people's ancestral
lands, as is being committed flagrantly in occupied
Palestine, including East Jerusalem, where the Israeli
Government not only persists with illegal settlement
activities in all their manifestations - in flagrant
breach of resolution 2334 (2016) and countless other
resolutions - but openly declares its intent to annex
our land, with officials, including the so-called Justice
Minister, leading the charge in flat-out contempt of
international law and the international community.

They must not condone or excuse the imprisonment
of2 million Palestinians in Gaza under the occupation's
illegal blockade, by which Israel has caused
humanitarian and socioeconomic devastation and
exploited and deepened the Palestinian division, which
regrettably remains a dark stain on our national history
that has not been expunged despite many attempts at
reconciliation, including the important effort of our
brothers from Egypt, which we appreciate immensely.

Nor must they condone or excuse the imprisonment,
detention and abuse of thousands of Palestinians,
including hundreds of children, by the occupying
Power, or its deceitful distortions of social welfare to
the families of prisoners and martyrs as it persists in its
attempts to undermine and weaken all of our institutions.

They must not condone or excuse religious
extremism, incitement and hatred; pitting one religion
against another threatening the sanctity of holy sites,
including Al-Haram Al-Sharif; or the legislation of
racism, discrimination and segregation, with racist
laws that deem one people superior to another and grant
them exclusive rights to the land, including to self-
determination and return, while simultaneously denying
those rights to the indigenous Palestinian people in a
situation that can only be classified as apartheid.

The fact that an occupying Power should feel
immune from accountability, even as it kills innocent
civilians and violates all norms and principles of
international law, only deepens cynicism about the
potential for a just peace, especially among our young
people, whose hopes are evaporating. The fact that the
illegal occupation should last for more than a half-
century, with no concrete action to bring it to an end,
risks not only the future of our people and region, but
also destroying the credibility of the international
system and its laws, which the world has gone through
wars and colossal human and material sacrifices to
build, assert and defend.

What we demand - an end to the occupation and
historic injustice - is not only a call for respect and
the realization of the Palestinian people' inalienable
human rights and national aspirations, but also a call
on the international community to respect and defend
the universal principles and moral standards that it has
itself developed and accepted as basic canons, all of
which are in grave jeopardy at this critical moment.

