Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We
welcome and congratulate Her Excellency Mrs. Ellen
Johnson-Sirleaf on her election as President of the
Republic of Liberia. Her assumption of the leadership
of Liberia is the dawning of a new era for Africa and
for Liberia after more than a decade of violent conflict.

While celebrating her victory, we are mindful of
the major challenges facing her new Administration.
First and foremost among those is to lay a stable
foundation for a new Liberia emerging from civil wars,
anarchy and suffering - which has affected every
family in Liberia. A firm and stable foundation will be
built by addressing a number of priorities. Among
them are working towards national reconciliation,
strengthening security, building administrative and
judicial institutions, restoring law and order, creating
an effective programme for the reintegration and
rehabilitation of ex-combatants, fighting impunity and
rebuilding mutual trust and national esteem among the
Liberian people. In that regard, we are encouraged by
President Johnson-Sirleaf's resolve to address the long-
standing issue of Charles Taylor.

We equally strongly support President Johnson-
Sirleaf 's commitment to promote national
reconciliation. We therefore welcome the inauguration
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, which
will provide an important forum for establishing a
record of past abuses and determining how to deal with
them. Over the years of civil conflict, Liberia produced
one of the highest ratios of refugees and internally
displaced persons in Africa. The return of displaced
persons ought to be integral to the reconstruction and
reconciliation strategies.

The international community has to remain
focused to assist Liberia in its priority areas of political
stabilization, economic and social reconstruction and
good governance.

Lastly, we pay tribute to the men and women
serving with the United Nations and to the members of
the Economic Community of West African States for
their tireless efforts and sacrifices to help Liberia
emerge from its 15-year-old crisis, which has finally
come to an end.

