Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, Mr. Antonio Guterres, the Secretary General
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, and the Secretary
General of the European External Action Service of the
European Union, Ms. Helga Schmid, for their briefings.

The Security Council has a very ambitious mission,
namely, to evaluate the entirety of the threats to
European security and propose solutions thereto. It is
a difficult mission, because each situation that we are
discussing today has its own particularities, including
historical ones. At the same time, there are unifying
factors. First and foremost among them would be the
failure of efforts to implement plans to create a single
Europe. Secondly, in many of those conflicts, there have
been clear attempts by the West to intervene from the
outside, which has necessarily led to the exacerbation
of crises. Thirdly, there is the concept that the solution
for conflicts in Europe cannot be military in nature.

At the end of the Cold War, there was a real
possibility that the European security space could be
unified. I would quote the Charter of Paris for a New
Europe, of 1990, which set forth that "relations will
be founded on respect and cooperation and equal
security for all ...". The European representatives in
this Chamber have heard many times about the need to
ensure indivisible security from Lisbon to Vladivostok,
where the security of one State cannot be ensured at the
expense of the security of others.

For its part, Russia actively attempted to assist in
the implementation of the single Europe concept. We
would like to remind the Council of the Russian- German
initiative of 2010, which sought to create a European
Union-Russia committee on matters of foreign policy
and security as a forum for discussing a comprehensive
agenda. Unfortunately, the European Union decided
not to follow through on that promising idea. We are
pretty confident that had that initiative been developed
further, many conflicts on the continent could have
been avoided, including in Ukraine.

Instead, we are seeing an extension of NATO to
the East. Russia continues to oppose such an approach,
because NATO expansion creates a superficial feeling
of security while leading, instead, to an unprecedented
level of tension in Europe in the past 30 years. The
intention to create equal security for all was the
basis for the Russian proposal for a comprehensive
agreement on European security. That proposal was
presented during the sixty-fourth session ofthe General
Assembly, at which time we also did not get positive
reactions from our partners. We are convinced that
the reckless refutation of that comprehensive security
policy became the root cause for the current situation
in which old conflicts have remained frozen and new
conflicts have emerged in Europe.

One of the most pressing issues is the situation
in Ukraine, which continues to be difficult and
unpredictable, as can be seen from the clashes that
took place at the end of January and the beginning
of February in Avdiivka. At that time, the Council
unanimously called upon the sides to restore the
ceasefire and to implement the Package of Measures
for the Implementation of the Minsk Agreements,
which continues to be the recognized necessary basis
for a peaceful solution. The Agreements must be
implemented, as should agreements reached during the
talks, including at the level of the Normandy leaders
format. Otherwise, the conflict could become frozen.

Unfortunately, our concerns were well founded
with respect to the Ukrainian delegation and the
use of the Security Council for furthering political
propaganda. It is unfortunate that this is happening on
the very day of the third anniversary of the signing of an
agreement by the former President of Ukraine, Viktor
Yanukovych, and the opposition. If the implementation
of that document had not been rejected the very next
day and had it not been condoned by the Governments
of Germany, Poland and France, it could have saved the
country and its people from upheaval.

Ukraine is in the throes of a far-reaching crisis.
Kyiv is unable to resolve the crisis. They are afraid
of losing power because there have been attempts to
resolve the situation through military misadventures.
The goal is to distract people from the pressing social
issues and demonstrate the alleged inability of the
Minsk agreements to work. We think that the words
of President Poroshenko were particularly cynical. On
16 February, he restated the position that he and his team
have long held that we must restore those territories to
Ukraine via political and diplomatic means alone. There
is no alternative to the Minsk package. Kyiv must begin
to implement those agreements, which are required
for a political solution. The failure to implement the
agreements hinders the settlement process. We were
not surprised that the statement of the Ukrainian
delegation did not contain even one reference to the
Minsk agreements.

With respect to allegations that the Russian decision
to recognize certain documents from the Donetsk and
Lugansk regions allegedly runs counter to the Minsk
agreements, I stress that they do not run counter to any
of our country's international obligations. They were
adopted in the interest of people to ensure that they
enjoy their rights and freedoms, in a context in which
it seems that the Government of Ukraine is attempting
to achieve the opposite. The recent thematic report of
the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) reports
conflict-related difficulties encountered by civilians
in eastern Ukraine during the period from May to
September 2016. First and foremost, the main problems
discussed as a result of Kyiv's special regime for the
territories not controlled by the Government are linked
to the difficult procedures for crossing the contact line,
as well as to the use of State services and the suspension
of the payment of pensions and benefits.

We note that the United States and France, like
other members of the Security Council, allow citizens
of Taiwan, who they do not officially recognize, into
their countries. A similar situation obtains with regard
to the Turkish area of Cyprus. Kosovo highlights
another such instance. We continue to be guided by
the idea that the only basis for any settlement of this
that matter is resolution 1244 (1999). We believe that
high-level dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina,
with European Union mediation, is a mechanism for
normalizing relations between the sides. Implementing
the agreement is of key importance, first and foremost,
for the creation of the Community of Serb-mahority
Municipalities in Kosovo. We are against Kosovo
becoming a member of international organizations; the
right to represent Kosovo in the international arena
belongs exclusively to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.

With regard to the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we underscore the need for full compliance
with the Dayton Peace Agreement. We are in favour of
internal Bosnian dialogue without outside interference,
curtailing the presence of a protectorate, through the
apparatus of the High Representative. We believe that
it would be destructive to exacerbate the situation
with respect to the Republika Srpska in relation to the
celebration of Republic Day on 9 January. We think that
United States restrictive measures against Bosnian-
Serbian leaders are unjustified and baseless. They are
unilateral sanctions.

Russia's position on Cyprus has not changed. We
would like to see an equitable, comprehensive and
viable settlement on the island. In the interests of all
of its people, we would support Cypriot-led solutions
and the inclusion of Security Council members in
the discussion of political solutions on the matter of
security guarantees. We think that guarantees from
the Security Council would be best, rather than from
separate countries.

The situation in Transnistria remains complicated.
We welcome the resumption of international talks in
the 5+2 format, as well as bilateral contacts at various
levels, including the first meeting in eight years
between the President of Moldova and the leader of
Transnistria. Our approach to Moldova and its borders
as they stood on 1 January 1990, with the guaranteed
status for Transnistria, has not changed. We stand ready
to act as a mediator and to uphold security guarantees.

The conflict in the Caucasus was addressed
in August 2008, in particular with respect to the
misadventures of Mr. Saakashvili and the emergence
of the two independent States of Abkhazia and South
Ossetia. What matters now is not the settlement of the
conflict but rather a normalization of relations between
Georgia and the two young Republics. That issue was
also addressed during the Geneva discussions.

The conflict in the Nagorno Karabakh is the
most difficult and has the most destructive impact
on the Commonwealth of Independent States. The
military phase concluded in 1994 with the signing of
the ceasefire agreement by the two sides. Since then,
to conclude a peace agreement, there have been talks
mediated by the OSCE Minsk Group, co-chaired by
Russia, the United States and France, drawing upon
its relations with Baku and Yerevan to identify agreed
approaches. That has to happen on the political and
diplomatic tracks exclusively and through dialogue
between the sides on the basis of the standards and
principles of international law.

Once again, we call on our colleagues to set aside
confrontational approaches to ensuring their own
security by undermining that of others. Instead, we
should seek mutually acceptable solutions to the crises
in Europe. Russian policy is based on establishing a
shared security and stability space, the basis of our
relations with Europe, our good neighbourliness and
reciprocal benefits. We are part of a unified continent.
We have written history together and achieve success
when we work together for the prosperity of our peoples.

