Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to welcome Baroness
Catherine Ashton, High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and
Vice-President of the European Commission.

This Security Council meeting takes place just a
few days after the conclusion of the Munich Security
Conference, which provided a good opportunity to
discuss informally current issues of international
security. On the margins of the Conference, there was a
broad range of important events that also have a direct
impact on the maintenance of international stability.

I hope that colleagues will not mind if we deem
the most important event to have been the exchange of
instruments of ratification of the Treaty between the
United States of America and the Russian Federation
on Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation
of Strategic Offensive Arms, signed on 8 April 2010 in
Prague by the Presidents of Russia and the United
States of America. That document became a reality
thanks largely to the understanding that unilateral
approaches to security are counterproductive.

We are pleased that the resolve to improve
international relations, including in the Euro-Atlantic
region, is supported by our European partners.
Recently, they put forward a whole range of ideas that
are basically in line with the initiative of Russian
President Dmitry Medvedev to conclude a treaty on
Euro-Atlantic security. In particular, German
Chancellor Angela Merkel proposed the establishment
of a Russia-European Union committee on foreign
policy and security issues that would raise cooperation
between Moscow and Brussels to a completely new
level.

A priority of our cooperation with the European
Union (EU) and the United Nations, including as part
of the Quartet of leading international mediators, is the
topical issue of a Middle East settlement. The most
recent ministerial-level meeting of the Quartet took
place on 5 February in Munich, at Russia's initiative.
During the meeting, there was a substantive exchange
of views on the situation in the Middle East, including
in the light of recent events in Egypt and other
countries in the region.
Russia commends the efforts of the EU to support
the Middle East peace process. Our positions on that
issue are broadly the same. EU support for Palestinian
State-building and the restoration of normal trade and
economic links between the Gaza Strip and the outside
world are important. We consider it necessary to
bolster those efforts in active pursuit of intra-Palestine
unity. We, in turn, are also striving to solve this issue
by acting in coordination with regional and other
partners.

We count on continuing fruitful cooperation with
the EU on an entire range of issues linked to the
Iranian nuclear programme.

The Sudan also represents an important area of
our productive cooperation with the EU and the United
Nations. We welcome the successful holding of the
referendum on self-determination in Southern Sudan.
That demonstrated the resolve of the Sudanese parties
to fully implement the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). It is important that both parties to
the Agreement recognize the referendum results. The
priority now is to settle the remaining obstacles with
constructive international assistance in a mutually
acceptable way, as part of the CPA.

In her statement, Baroness Ashton also mentioned
the issue of Cote d'Ivoire. The situation in that country
remains tense. Action that could further exacerbate the
situation must be avoided. We support the diplomatic
efforts of the African Union and its high-level panel of
mediators to develop options for a political settlement,
to bring about national reconciliation in the country
and to create the conditions to overcome its long-term
de facto schism.

The international community needs to support
those efforts by believing that there is no reasonable
alternative to a peaceful solution to the crisis. Any
interference using force is the quickest path to the
long-term destabilization of the situation in the Cote
d'Ivoire and the entire subregion.

We agree with Baroness Ashton's assessment of
the situation in Haiti. Currently, the top priority for
Haitians is to conclude the electoral process peacefully
and to elect the leadership of the country
democratically. Given the scale of Haiti's problems,
comprehensive international assistance to that country
must continue. Nevertheless, the main responsibility
for Haiti's recovery should be borne by the people of
the country.

The Russian Federation has consistently
supported comprehensive development and better
cooperation with the United Nations, the Security
Council and regional and subregional mechanisms.
Cooperation should be on the basis of the United
Nations Charter, in particular Chapter VIII. As a
regional mechanism, the European Union has
established fruitful and close cooperation with the
United Nations on a wide range of key areas. We
support further strengthening of that cooperation.

