Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank France for having convened this meeting
of the Security Council. I also wish to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his statement and Executive
Director Costa for his briefing.
The 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) emphasizes that drugs,
transnational crime and terrorism have negative
impacts on global development, peace, security and
human rights, and calls for collective responses by the
international community. In recent years, the

international community has made unremitting efforts
to prevent and combat drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime, and has achieved
positive results. However, at the same time,
international terrorist activities, transnational organized
crime and the production and trafficking of drugs have
become interwoven and increasingly globalized, cartel-
controlled, cyber-based and diversified.

The global fight against drugs remains a daunting
challenge. In some countries in conflict or in post-
conflict situations, there have been increased flows of
illegal funds and weapons for drug trafficking and
related transnational organized crimes. As channels of
financing for terrorist organizations, they jeopardize
the social stability and economic development of these
countries.

Strengthening international cooperation on the
basis of broad participation and shared responsibility is
the most effective way to combat drug trafficking and
related transnational crimes. It is precisely the
undiminished demand for drug consumption in some
developed countries and the colossal profits involved
that drive international drug cartels to unscrupulously
organize the production and trafficking of drugs.

Since economically underdeveloped regions are
most often the points of origin in drug production and
of transit in drug trafficking, the international fight
against drugs must control drugs in a more balanced
way so as to reduce the demand for them and the harm
they cause.

Helping developing countries to develop their
economies and generate jobs is the only approach that
can address the drug problem at its roots. Drug
trafficking and related transnational crimes often grow
rampant in societies that are economically backward
and impoverished. Some countries emerging from
conflict are plagued with difficulties in economic
development, youth unemployment and inadequate
legal institutions, thereby becoming major victims of
international drug trafficking.

Helping those developing countries to achieve
economic development is particularly important to
eliminating the root causes of drug trafficking and
other crimes. The international community must help
such countries to develop alternative economies,
generate job opportunities, improve people's
livelihoods so that they have other ways of earning a

living, and enhance their awareness and capacity to
resist the temptation to use drugs.

The fight against drug trafficking involves social
development and many other factors, and needs
national Governments, regional organizations and
United Nations agencies to fully exploit their
respective advantages and expertise for effective
international cooperation. The primary responsibility in
the fight against drug trafficking and related
transnational crime lies with national Governments.
International cooperation in that field must adhere to
the principles of respect for sovereignty and equal
mutual benefit. Regional organizations must be
mobilized and their leading role brought fully into
play.

At the international level, the United Nations
should play a greater coordinating role. The United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the International
Narcotics Control Board and other related international
treaty bodies must continue to play a significant role in
promoting international cooperation and in helping
developing countries to enhance their capacities. We
support United Nations operational bodies in
continuing to address the problem of drug trafficking
and transnational organized crime.

The Security Council shoulders the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. Therefore, it should focus its attention on
issues that threaten international peace and security
brought about by armed conflict. The Security Council
can continue to be engaged in the fight against drugs
and related transnational organized crime from its own
perspective, but the focus should be on the drug
trafficking and related transnational organized crime
faced by countries in conflict or in post-conflict
situations so as to help address the problem of armed
conflict.

Meanwhile, we hope that the Security Council's
deliberations on this issue will contribute to the global
fight against drugs and transnational organized crime.

