Mr. Kehoe (Ireland): Let me begin by thanking
Minister Le Drian for chairing this important debate on
preventing and combating the financing of terrorism.

Nearly one year ago, Ireland was one of the 70 States
that convened in Paris for the high-level International
Conference on Combating the Financing of Da'esh and
Al-Qaida, on the theme "No money for terror". I thank
France for its continued leadership in that critical area.

I would also like to acknowledge the leadership
of the Financial Action Task Force and to thank
Mr. Billingslea for the challenging but important work
that his organization is undertaking. The Task Force
recommendations have become the global standard for
countering money laundering and terrorist financing.
Its evolution into a committed public and political tool is
welcome. We now need to work together internationally
to ensure that its recommendations are applied.

As others have said, the financing of terrorism is a
complex and evolving phenomenon. Money launderers
exploit complicated financial structures to mask their
funding sources and avoid punitive sanctions regimes.
Given the borderless nature of the threat, Ireland
strongly believes that multilateral engagement and
collaboration are critical if we are to effectively counter
the financing of global terrorism.

That is why we see a central role for the United
Nations in leading the coordinated and inclusive
response ofMember States to the financing ofterrorism.
We need to continue to make a concerted effort to
increase the visibility and effectiveness of United
Nations counter-terrorism activities. As a candidate
for a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for
the 2021-2022 term, Ireland believes that the Council
has a central role to play in preventing and countering
the financing of terrorism. We therefore welcome
resolution 2462 (2019), adopted today, which represents
another important step in that evolving fight.

Ireland's response to the issue of money laundering
and terrorist financing is multifaceted and brings
together a range of Government departments and
agencies, including the Central Bank of Ireland, the Irish
police force, our Criminal Assets Bureau and the Irish
Revenue Commissioners. That coordinated approach
is key to effectively tackling money laundering and
terrorist financing in Ireland.

Ireland also participates actively at the international
level in developing the most effective and appropriate
standards to apply in countering the financing of
terrorism, including at the Financial Action Task Force
plenaries. As co-creators ofthe Task Force standards, we
are not only actively improving our domestic Financial
Action Task Force framework but we have also been
at the forefront in developing international standards.
Ireland is also an active participant in the European
Union's work to combat the financing of terrorism.

We believe that our efforts to dismantle the
transnational and borderless financial mechanisms
used by terrorists should include appropriate sharing
of information across sectors and across borders.
Aside from our enhanced communication, concrete
steps must also be taken to ensure transparency and
clarity around the ownership of legal companies, trusts
and organizations. Obscuring ownership allows for
easy manipulation of the system and is an open door
for the channelling of funds around the world for
terrorist means.

Importantly, we also believe that counter-terrorism
measures should never undermine our obligations
under international law, including human rights and
international humanitarian law. Ireland acknowledges
and welcomes the significant impact that civil society
participation can have in countering the financing of
terror and we encourage further efforts to strengthen
that partnership. Building and maintaining trust among
public, private and non-governmental organizations is
the bedrock upon which we must take that fight forward.

To conclude, let me once again thank you, Madam
President, for the opportunity to speak here today and
to underline Ireland's firm commitment to counter
terrorist financing in all its forms and our readiness
to actively contribute to United Nations efforts in
this area.

