The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

At the outset, I would like to welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mr. Jan
Kubis and thank him for his briefing on the situation
in Afghanistan. We appreciate his efforts and his
effective leadership of United Nations efforts in that
country. We also appreciate the role of the Afghan
Ambassador, Mr. Zahir Tanin, in our discussion today
and his explanation of Afghanistan's achievements and
ambitions and the challenges it faces.

The report of the Secretary-General before the
Council (S/2012/907) is being presented in a very
delicate regional and international climate, two years
before international forces are set to leave Afghanistan
and at the beginning of the transformation decade,
which will start in 2015. The period covered by the
report witnessed a profound domestic dialogue on the
elections set for 2014, which will be the cornerstone of
the political transition in Afghanistan. In preparation
for those presidential and provincial elections, we
welcome the ongoing consultations in the parliament
concerning a new electoral law to be submitted to the
Cabinet.

We express our satisfaction with regard to the
gradual transition of responsibility for security from
the international forces to the Afghan authorities,
which now cover areas inhabited by over 75 per cent of
the Afghan population. This coincides with a reduction
in the number of security incidents compared to last
year, by virtue of the effective role of the international
and Afghan forces in combating insurgents, despite
the increased number of casualties. We hope that all
forces will increase their efforts to limit such incidents
in order to preserve the safety and security of civilians.

At the regional level, during the reporting period a
number of meetings were held between Afghan officials
and officials from neighbouring countries in order to
expedite cooperation on various fronts, including in the
economic, security and energy sectors. With respect to
financial cooperation, we appreciate the efforts of the
Afghan Government to implement the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, and the detailed work plan
it has put together, and we welcome the recent decision
of the Afghan Cabinet in this regard.
Afghanistan has taken considerable steps recently
towards stability, but still faces many challenges that
must be met in close cooperation with the international
community, which has frequently reiterated its readiness
to support the efforts of the Afghan Government in this
regard.

I cannot fail to highlight the effective role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in coordinating international efforts and cooperation
aimed at achieving stability and sustainable development
for all Afghan constituencies. Afghanistan is a very
important country in the region, and its stability
and security are of vital importance to neighbouring
countries and to its many partners. We wish Afghanistan
every success in addressing its security challenges and
in its efforts to achieve stability, national reconciliation
and development in order to maintain its unity and
territorial integrity.

In conclusion, I thank our colleague Ambassador
Wittig for his extraordinary and sincere efforts in the
service of peace and stability in Afghanistan through
his chairmanship of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), and to promote the
implementation of Security Council resolutions on
Afghanistan.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Japan.

