Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, we should like to wish you, Sir,
and your delegation, every success during your
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. We should also like to thank Ambassador
Mahbubani of Singapore and his delegation for their
work during Singapore's presidency last month.

I should like to welcome President Joseph Kabila,
and I extend to him our condolences on the tragic death
of his father, the late President Laurent-Desire Kabila,
one of those who was present at the beginning of the
struggle for independence in Africa. The Russian
Federation wishes President Kabila every success in his
high office, which was entrusted to him by his
compatriots at a very difficult and trying time for the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

Russia's principled position in support of a
political settlement in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on the basis of the Lusaka Agreement, as soon
as possible, remains unchanged. In resolutions 1304
(2000) and 1332 (2000), the Security Council sent the
parties to the Congolese conflict a clear signal about
the need for an immediate cessation of hostilities, the
withdrawal of foreign forces from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the steady implementation
of commitments undertaken under the Lusaka
Agreement, without any backing away. Russia hopes
that the very tragic events in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will not in any way jeopardize the hopes
for a political settlement to the protracted Congolese
crisis on the basis of the preservation of the territorial
integrity of the country, in accordance with the Lusaka
Agreement, subsequent agreements and Security
Council resolutions.

We call on all the parties to the Congolese
conflict to resist the temptation to take advantage ofthe
present situation for their own ends. We believe that it
is extremely important for all parties to cooperate fully
with the United Nations Mission in implementing the
Lusaka Agreement, the resolutions of the Security
Council and the decisions of regional summits. We
attach great importance to the actual launching of the
Congolese national dialogue, with the participation of
all political forces in the country, through international
facilitation as provided for in the Lusaka Agreement.

We welcome the declaration by President Joseph
Kabila that he is committed to the goal of national
reconciliation. We call on all the parties to the conflict
not to allow any violations of human rights or norms of
international humanitarian law. We call on them to
cooperate in the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation of members of illegal
armed groups with a view to establishing conditions of
security for all countries ofthe subregion.

This month, there will be a review of how the
parties to the conflict are implementing their
commitments with regard to the ceasefire and
disengagement. If the results of the review show that
genuine political will exists on the part of the parties
for implementing these tasks, that will certainly help
the Security Council when it takes up the question of
deploying phase II ofthe peacekeeping operation to the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

