Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Guatemalan presidency of the Council
for convening this meeting to hear a briefing on the
current status of the work of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone and the completion of its mandate. We are grateful
to the President of the Special Court, The Honourable
Justice Shireen Avis Fisher, and the Prosecutor,
Ms. Brenda Hollis for their presentations. I would
also like to welcome Her Excellency Mrs. Ebun Jusu,
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Sierra Leone to the Council.

Azerbaijan commends the Special Court for
its efforts to end impunity for serious violations of
international humanitarian law, thus contributing
to national reconciliation and the restoration and
maintenance of peace in Sierra Leone and the region
and advancing the rule of law in the country. We agree
with the report's assessment that the Special Court has
achieved unprecedented success in delivering on the
ambitious goals set for it by the Government of Sierra
Leone and the United Nations. Indeed, the establishment
of the Special Court was the first partnership between
national authorities and the United Nations to create
a credible system of post-conflict justice that met
international standards of justice. It was the first hyrbid
tribunal created to assist a State that desired post-conflict
justice, and it was the first tribunal to carry out its work
in the territory where serious violations of international
humanitarian law had been committed.

The Special Court's constribution to the development
of the jurisprudence of international criminal law
particular to the law of war crimes and crimes against
humanity can obviously benefit other national efforts
to pursue post-conflict justice, especially in those
situations where the prevailing culture of impunity for
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community represents a considerable obstacle to peace
and reconciliation.

We take note of the Special Court's approach to
victims, especially children and women who suffered
from displacement, recruitment as soldiers, sexual
abuse and other crimes. We also note the Special
Court's contribution to gender justice and commend the
development of a special programme for the protection
of women victims. I would also like to commend the
Government of Sierra Leone for the cooperation and
assistance it rendered to the Special Court during the
course of its operation.

While encouraged by the commitment ofthe Special
Court to complete its remaining work as expeditiously
and efficiently as possible, and to ensure a smooth and
successful transition of responsibilities to the Residual
Special Court, the Security Council, Member States and
the international community should continue to support
the Court during the final phase of its work. In the same
spirit, it is important to extend to the Residual Special
Court the international community's encouragement
and financial assistance.

