Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this public
meeting, which gives us an overview of the activities
of the Security Council in the fight against terrorism. It
indicates the cooperation that exists among the Council
Committees that are following up the Council's
resolutions regarding terrorism. This cooperation is
necessary in order to coordinate the work undertaken
by the Council. Exchanges among the Committees for
the pooling and sharing of information and of
experiences could indeed contribute to improving the
coherence of the Council's action, which is
indispensable to ensure the effectiveness of the fight
against terrorism.

I want to thank Ambassadors Mayoral, Loj and
Motoc for their briefings, which clearly show that
concrete action has been undertaken in that direction,
and that it will continue in order to enable the United
Nations to remain in the forefront of the fight against
terrorism.

Among the initiatives taken by the Council, the
visits by Committee Chairmen to Member States are, in
our opinion, a very productive practice. We favour the
continuation of such visits, and we appreciate the
careful planning efforts being made by the Chairmen of
the Committees in coordination with the Permanent
Missions of Member States.

We urge the Committees and their expert teams,
in particular the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, to step up efforts with a view to
enhancing the effectiveness of measures aimed at
drying up the sources of terrorist financing and at
preventing weapons, especially weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems, from getting
into the hands of terrorists. There can be no doubt that
the acquisition and use of such weapons by terrorists
could have incalculable consequences for the entire
international community.

It is essential that all States become involved in
the Council's work, especially with regard to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Whether or
not they possess weapons of mass destruction, all
States should contribute to preventing the acquisition
or the production of such weapons and their delivery
systems by non-State actors. International cooperation
in this area as well remains the best way to fight
terrorism.

Regular contact among Council Committees
should also facilitate the granting of appropriate
assistance to Member States that need it in order to
strengthen their national counter-terrorism capacities.
In the vast majority of cases, that means helping them
to draft appropriate national legislation and to establish
national structures to monitor implementation. Such
measures can represent a real challenge for some
countries in terms of human resources, equipment and
investment.

In addition to the individual mobilization of
States, Council action to promote cooperation in the
fight against terrorism must extend to regional and
subregional organizations and specialized agencies,
such as Interpol, the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, whose activities are decisive if our
objectives are to be achieved.
We welcome the advances that have been made in
this domain. They will make it possible for the Council
to broaden its field of vision, as well as its capacity to
mobilize the international community and keep it in a
state of constant alert in the face of the persistent threat
posed by terrorism.

In this context, we support the effective
implementation of the Declaration and Plan of Action
adopted at the fourth special meeting on cooperation
with regional organizations in the fight against
terrorism, held at Almaty in January 2005.

From another perspective, the global crusade
against terrorism must not be carried out to the
detriment of humankind's achievements in the field of
human rights, which our Organization has a
responsibility to defend and promote. In this regard, we
strongly support the proposal made by the Secretary-
General in his recent report on United Nations reform
(A/59/2003) to appoint a special rapporteur on the
question of the compatibility of counter-terrorism
measures and the international obligations of States
with respect to human rights.

In this context, it is important that the various
counter-terrorism Committees continue with and step
up the implementation of clear and transparent
guidelines in carrying out their mandates, in order to
ensure increased credibility.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) should, for its part, apply clear and
objective criteria in handling the list of individuals and
entities linked to Al-Qaida and the Taliban as regards
the inclusion and removal of names, as well as the
impact on the list of legal decisions taken by Member
States. That is indeed the substance of the question of
listing and delisting - a question that arises in general
terms with regard to the implementation of targeted
sanctions established by the Security Council. It is
important that that question be further considered at the
proper level in order to rationalize Council practice in
that regard.

In defining its action, the international
community cannot disregard the urgent need to resolve
problematic and dysfunctional situations within the
international system that serve as a pretext for
terrorism, because they are an obvious source of
frustration. The international community must tackle
social inequality, injustice, underdevelopment, dire
poverty and conflict, which fuel violence and
extremism.
At this time of debate about United Nations
reform, those questions must be accorded particular
attention as we assess threats whose elimination is
necessary if we are to arrive at genuine collective
security based on the rule of law in the service of
human dignity, peace and sustainable development of
all.

