Mr. White (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to address the Council today. I
would also like to thank the Chairs of the three
Committees, Ambassadors Wittig, Puri and Sangqu, for
their valuable and informative briefings and for their
leadership of the key subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council.

Unfortunately, as we know and have been
reminded today, terrorism remains a key threat to
international peace and security. Comprehensive and
coordinated action remains essential if we are to
address the threat of terrorism. To that end, Australia is
strongly committed to promoting the universal and
effective implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004). We have conducted numerous
outreach and capacity-building activities focused on
assisting countries in developing and strengthening
their legal frameworks and technical capabilities. In the
past two years, Australia has provided counter-
terrorism financing, capacity-building and technical
assistance to over 30 countries in the Pacific, South-
East Asia, South Asia and Africa. This is an area in
which Australia has particular expertise and which we
are committed to sharing with others.

In relation to resolution 1373 (2001), in June the
International Organization for Migration will hold a
border security workshop in Nigeria, which Australia is
sponsoring. We are also supporting a new United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime programme of
work on counter-terrorism financing and anti-money
laundering in Kenya and Somalia. This builds on a
workshop Australia presented for East African
Community countries last month on counter-terrorism
financing and anti-money laundering.

We were also pleased to have the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), Ambassador Sangqu, speak at the fourth
Association of Southeast Asian Nations Regional
Forum Inter-Sessional Meeting on Non-Proliferation
and Disarmament in Sydney in March. That meeting
was an important opportunity to raise awareness of the
work of the 1540 Committee and to share best
practices on strengthening resolution 1540 (2004) in
the Asia-Pacific region, and we would like to
acknowledge Ambassador Sangqu's important
contribution.

Australia remains committed to promoting the
implementation of the resolutions on counter-terrorism
and to assisting countries to build and develop their
capacities both in our region and beyond. More broadly
on the United Nations counter-terrorism agenda,
Australia looks forward to a constructive review of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in June, in which
we will engage actively. We welcome the suggestion
for the establishment of a new counter-terrorism
coordination position and see great benefit in greater
cooperation among United Nations entities to ensure
coordination and coherence in counter-terrorism efforts
of the United Nations system.
I now wish to make some comments on the 1267
Al-Qaida sanctions regime. Australia believes in the
importance of the United Nations setting an example
with regard to the principles it seeks to promote. As the
Secretary-General has noted recently in his latest
report entitled "Delivering justice: programme of
action to strengthen the rule of law at the national and
international levels" (A/66/749), the application of
basic rule-of-law principles is crucial to the legitimacy
of actions taken by the principal organs of the United
Nations, including the Security Council. This is a key
part of strengthening the rule of law at the international
level.

We strongly support efforts to improve the
fairness, transparency and effectiveness of United
Nations sanctions system procedures. To ensure that
only the appropriate people and entities remain listed,
it is crucial for individuals and entities to understand
the reasons for their listing and to be afforded the
opportunity to provide information so that delisting can
occur when appropriate. It is also important for the
Security Council sanctions system to be able to
withstand domestic legal challenge if it is to remain
effective.

We believe that the establishment of the
Ombudsperson for the 1267 sanctions regime has been
an important step forward in strengthening fair
procedures, particularly in relation to delisting requests.
In that regard, we wish to acknowledge and thank Ms.
Kimberly Prost for her tireless efforts, including her
active outreach activities and in keeping the Security
Council apprised of her Office's activities. The Office
has only been operational a short time and yet has
established a substantial caseload, resulting in 13
individuals and 23 entities being delisted. Without the
Ombudsperson's recommendations, such individuals
may well have remained inappropriately subject to the
effect and stigma of sanctions.

Australia was particularly pleased with the
strengthened role of the Ombudsperson provided by
resolution 1989 (2011), which served to increase the
transparency of the listing and delisting processes. In
terms of delisting, the changes ensure that greater
weight is given to the Ombudsperson's
recommendations through the Committee process. That
strengthens the independence of the Office and also the
ability of the petitioner to be heard. Due process is also
strengthened by the emphasis given in resolution 1989
(2011) to the provision of reasons by the Committee,
such as when the Committee has decided to reject a
delisting request.

As a practical matter, Australia believes that the
delisting process can work effectively only if the
Ombudsperson has the relevant information needed to
enable her to make an informed recommendation to the
Committee. Recommendations should be made on the
basis of complete information. Providing a petitioner
with detailed reasons as to why their delisting request
was accepted or denied is fundamental to ensuring that
due process is followed. Australia has, along with a
number of other States whose representatives spoke
today, concluded arrangements with the Office of the
Ombudsperson to share confidential information. We
urge all Member States to consider entering into
similar arrangements and to cooperate fully with any
requests for information by the Ombudsperson.

Finally, as recommended by the Secretary-
General last year in his report on strengthening and
coordinating United Nations rule-of-law activities
(S/2011/634), Australia considers that further
consideration should be given to extending the
mandate of the Ombudsperson across other sanctions
regimes. We recognize the role of the delisting focal
points in relation to the other regimes, and we also
recognize that the Al-Qaida sanctions regime is of a
different nature from the others. However, in our view,
we should consider extending the level of protection
provided by the Ombudsperson to the other regimes.
Greater uniformity across the regimes could serve to
improve the overall effectiveness of the United Nations
sanctions system.

