Mr. Annabi: There were two specific questions
from our colleague from the United Kingdom. The first
question related to the issue of parallel structures. As I
indicated in my briefing, parallel structures offering
administrative and other services to Kosovo Serb
residents continue to operate in certain parts of Kosovo
with the support of Belgrade. Efforts to strengthen the
institutional links between Belgrade and those parallel
structures in Kosovo have been most evident in the
areas of health and education.

Although Belgrade has agreed that the parallel
structures should be disbanded, there continue to be
areas - mostly in northern Kosovo - which, for
example, still have parallel courts, even if those courts
play only a marginal role. Nevertheless, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has been able to establish a minor offences
court and a municipal court in the municipality of
Zubin Potok, in the Mitrovica area.

In Mitrovica itself, UNMIK continues to provide
the Kosovo Serbs in the north of the city with a number
of administrative services. As I indicated in my
briefing, Mr. Steiner has also appointed a multi-ethnic
advisory board that is intended to act as a forum for
cooperation among the communities. The board's first
meeting was held on 13 May. The Kosovo Serbs
participated, but they then expressed reservations about
the board's composition, wrongly claiming that there
had been some kind of understanding that it would
include only Kosovo Serb members.

UNMIK is in the process of developing a
comprehensive action plan and policy to address this
problem of parallel structures, and Belgrade's
cooperation will, of course, be essential in that process.

The second question related to UNMIK's
downsizing and to how, in that context, the Mission
intends to proceed with the shift from executive to
advisory functions as it transfers chapter 5
responsibilities to the Provisional Institutions.

UNMIK's downsizing plans, of course, have to be
seen in the context of its budget, which has been
established at the level of $315 million for the fiscal
year beginning on 1 July this year. That planning is
being developed in a manner which will ensure that, as
powers are transferred, UNMIK retains an overall
capacity in all areas to effectively discharge or exercise
its authority under resolution 1244 (1999) and to
discharge its powers and responsibilities, including
those in the Constitutional Framework.

As UNMIK gradually transfers the non-reserved
competencies listed in chapter 5 of the Constitutional
Framework to the Provisional Institutions, it will retain
sufficient staff to have the capacity to monitor and
advise the Provisional Institutions and municipalities,
as well as to intervene whenever that becomes
necessary, to ensure that those bodies exercise their
responsibilities in compliance with resolution 1244
(1999) and the Constitutional Framework.

UNMIK also takes into account in its planning
the fact that at a later stage there will be increased
involvement on the part of the Provisional Institutions
and the people of Kosovo in the administrative and
operational functions in specific reserved areas
identified in chapter 8 of the Constitutional
Framework. This process will naturally involve a
reallocation and reduction, in some cases, of UNMIK's
resources from the transferred areas to the reserved
areas, in line with UNMIK's budget.

