Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
Kuwait on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council in February, as this is the first time I am taking
the floor during its mandate.

I am pleased to take part in today's Security
Council meeting in order to, first, thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) for his briefing, and, secondly, to
sincerely thank the Mission for its ongoing efforts to
restore peace to a country struggling to recover after
such a protracted crisis. I also thank all who spoke for
their important statements.

The end of the political transition and the
organization of credible and democratic elections
granted us the freedom to hope. Life began again. We
all welcomed the noteworthy progress observed in
various areas but then, as if by magic, inter-community
and ethnic violence broke out almost all over the
country. After reading the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/l25), I said to myself that the country
was not far from the relapse into conflict we all feared.
We concluded that 2017 was the most critical year, with
threats that could have led to a tipping point.

We welcome the joint operation carried out by
MINUSCA and the Forces armees centrafricaines,
which reduced the number of armed groups in areas
around Paoua. We encourage such military action in all
areas where it is needed, as it could ease tensions among
the warring parties and reduce the threat posed by them
over the long term. It is clear that rivalries between
armed groups and self-defence militias exacerbate and
sustain violence.

Opportunistic political leaders do not desire an end
to the crisis. They use all means at their disposal, such
as manipulation, to encourage armed groups and self-
defence militias, who are paid by them, to commit all
kinds of abuses against the civilian population and the
Blue Helmets and to spread hate speech, with the sole
aim of dividing Central Africans in an effort to better
control the situation.

My delegation welcomes the fact that incitement
to violence and inflammatory rhetoric were included
as designation criteria in resolution 2399 (2018) on
extending the sanctions regime against the Central
African Republic. We hope that such measures will
have the desired effect. To that end, the Central African
Government and MINUSCA must implement resolution
2399 (2018) without delay so that troublemakers know
they will be brought to justice.

Resolution 2387 (2017) of 14 November 2017 confers
other major duties on MINUSCA, such as providing
support to local peace initiatives and to consultations
conducted by the panel of facilitators of the African
initiative with the main armed groups, civil society and
other actors in the Central African crisis. The Council
must ensure that the Mission has substantial means
commensurate with the ever-increasing number of
duties entrusted to it.

In conclusion, given that we do not have enough
time to address the other aspects of the situation, I
would like to reiterate my delegation's gratitude for
the excellent cooperation between the Government of
the Central African Republic and MINUSCA in their
attempts to manage this complex situation. We sincerely
thank the Head of the Mission, Mr. Parfait Onanga-
Anyanga, for his commitment and determination to help
the Government and the people of the Central African
Republic to emerge from this protracted nightmare. We
also thank all of our bilateral and international partners
for their unwavering support.

