Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation wishes at the outset to congratulate you
sincerely, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We are confident that your
experience and skill will guarantee the success of the
Council's work. My delegation must also thank His
Excellency the Permanent Representative of Kenya for his
exemplary work in guiding the work of the Council last
month.
It was with grave concern that my country noted the
decision of the Israeli authorities to build a 6,500-unit
settlement in the J abal Abu Ghneim area of south-east Al-
Quds, with the objective of completing the ring of
settlements encircling Arab Jerusalem.

The fact that Israel has taken a step of this nature is
but a continuation of the illegal policies it pursues in the
occupied Arab territories. These policies are in Violation
of all internationally binding resolutions and conVentions
pertaining to the ' demand that no settlements be
constructed in these territories and that Israel should
respect the legal status and the demographic composition
of the city of Jerusalem.

It is noteworthy in this regard to recall the Hague
Convention of 1907 and the provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, as well as the General
Assembly resolutions that are relevant to the question of
the Middle East and of Palestine. The fact that Israel has
insisted on keeping the tunnel in Al<Haram Al-Sharif
open is yet another clear example of its disregard for
Security Council resolution 1073 (1996).

The city of Jerusalem has a very special character
that distinguishes it from all other places in the world: its
spiritual importance for all divinely revealed religions.
The policy pursued by the Government of Tel-Aviv in
altering the character of the city and its legal status is
proof of the total disregard of the occupying Israeli
authorities for the feelings of those who live in the city.
With this policy, these authorities are attempting to
complicate the legal status of the city in order to impose
a fair accompli that would benefit them in the final-status
negotiations on the city. One of the means of imposing
such a fait accompli is through the establishment and
expansion of settlements.

My delegation believes that any attempt by Israel to
provide pretexts that would justify its measures will not
affect the will of the international community nor its
demand that Israel reverse these measures, which
contravene the rules of international law and violate the
relevant international resolutions. These resolutions
explicitly proscribe the construction of settlements,

Security Council 3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty»second year 6 March 1997

because this constitutes an alteration to the character of the
city.

The other important consideration is the fact that these
settlements are built on expropriated Palestinian lands. The
pretext put forward by the Government of Tel-Aviv that
such measures do not fall geographically within the city of
Jerusalemis hardly convincing, because it is incompatible
with the tangible geographical facts. To say that the Arabs
in the area in which Israeli settlements are to be built will
benefit as well is an unacceptable justification. A benefit
cannot flow from an unjust and erroneous measure.

It is high time for Israel to honour its obligations
under internationally binding instruments and under the
relevant United Nations resolutions. Its Government must
deal wisely and with clearsightedneSS with matters
pertaining to the occupied Arab territories.

The Security Council must take a clear stance on the
question of the continued establishment by Israel of
settlements in the occupied Arab territories in general and
in the city of Jerusalem in particular. The Council should
demand that Israel reverse its recent decision to construct
more settlements, in view of the fact that the establishment
of such settlements is a threat to international peace and
security because it hinders the achievement of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East,

We call upon the sponsors of the peace process to act
so as to bring Israel to put an end to its settlement activities
in the occupied Arab territories in general and Jerusalem in
particular. Needless to say, the establishment of settlements
directly and adversely affects the peace process in the
Middle East. At a time when the Palestinian National
Authority is called upon to show restraint and to stop all
acts of violence in order to safeguardvthe peace process, the
entire world is shocked by Israel's intention to build new
settlements in the Holy City, thus provoking negative
feelings and causing violence.

The negotiations continue to be frozen on both the
Lebanese and the Syrian tracks with the continued
occupation by Israel of the Lebanese and Syrian Arab
lands. In view of the continuation of this unnatural
situation, it is inexplicable that the Palestinian side .should
be called upon to show restraint while the Israeli side
continues its provocations, which do not at all encourage
such restraint. Furthermore, this is setting back peaceful
negotiations, if not bringing them to a complete standstill.
All these considerations make it necessary to call

upon Israel to rescind its decision to establish a settlement
in Jabal Abu Ghneim and to desist from building further
settlements, if the peace process is to regain its vitality.
The Security Council bears a special responsibility in all
this because it is the source of the internationally binding
resolutions that have formed the basis for the peace talks,
starting with the Madrid Conference and ending with the
redeployment inHebron and all actions that remain to be
taken, foremost among which are the negotiations on the
status of the city of Jerusalem - the city that is the focus
of today's attempts to stop the construction of any further
Israeli settlements.
