We welcome your personal participation, Madam President, in this video- teleconference as President of the Security Council. This reaffirms the importance of the topic under discussion today: security-sector governance and reform, in particular for African countries. Security-sector reform, of course, is one of the main components of international assistance in the area of peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Such efforts are particularly needed in a post-conflict period, when countries that are emerging from or have recently overcome the worst part of a crisis have limited resources for ensuring security and as a result risk encountering insurmountable challenges such as terrorism and crime. In that regard, restoring State authority and ensuring control in all sectors, including the armed forces and law-enforcement agencies, is a prerequisite for ensuring lasting peace and stability as well as strengthening the rule of law at the national level in the post-conflict period. Changes in this area lead to enhancing people's trust in the State and to the creation of favourable conditions for a return to normal life. When citizens lend broad support to the authorities' comprehensive reforms and to the security forces, it can play a decisive role in the process of national reconciliation. A transition from weak security bodies to effective and professional ones is never going to be easy. That is why international assistance, including through the United Nations, is particularly important. We believe that the State bears the main responsibility for ensuring security on its territory, and that therefore it is the Government's sovereign right to determine and implement its own national approaches and priorities in the area of security-sector reform, taking account of the needs of the population. When providing international assistance to national security-sector reform efforts, it is crucial to respect fundamental principles such as the consent of the State receiving help and respect for its national sovereignty and political independence. When proposing support to post-conflict countries in implementing security- sector reform, there is a need to be constantly guided by the principle of national ownership. Consultative assistance should be provided based on full respect for the needs of the relevant countries and those countries' own experience and culture. That will help build States' national capacities. As we know from experience, taking into consideration the specific characteristics of States when providing them with assistance is crucial. However, such assistance should not be perceived as the imposition of blanket solutions, as we have often reiterated. Attempts to apply a universal approach to such important and sensitive areas as security will undoubtedly lead to failure and can actually provoke a resumption of conflict. We should also understand that security-sector reform cannot be a panacea. In and of itself it is unable to fundamentally change the situation in a given country. In order for the process to be successful, its implementation must be accompanied by other peacebuilding efforts and by a political process that includes national reconciliation and the strengthening of State institutions. An important role in providing assistance to post-conflict countries is played by United Nations peacekeeping missions, many of which also carry out peacebuilding tasks. Peacekeepers, where mandated to do so, play an important role in assisting security-sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, as well as restoring law enforcement and the rule of law in general. The Peacebuilding Commission also plays a key role in post-conflict recovery, and in particular in security-sector reform. Assisting it in developing a balanced strategy and a comprehensive approach to providing advisory and financial assistance to the countries on its agenda will also help to ensure the sustainability of national security structures. Inter-State cooperation within regions and coordination and interaction with regional and subregional organizations are also crucial for security sector reform. The exchange of best practices allows us to address current and emerging problems more effectively. The African Union is a vivid example of regional interaction. We appreciate the efforts of the South African delegation to coordinate the work of the Security Council in its negotiation of a draft resolution (S/2020/1158) regarding security sector reform, and we support its adoption.
