Mr. Ka (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow me
first of all to express to you, Madam President, our
great appreciation for the Council's initiative, under
your dynamic presidency, to hold a public debate on
the issue of children and armed conflict. The Council's
increased attention to this matter should be resolutely
welcomed and encouraged.

My delegation welcomes the outstanding work
carried out by the Secretary-General's Special
Representative on Children and Armed Conflict, Mr.
Olara Otunnu. My delegation is also pleased at the
important campaign undertaken by the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) and its Executive Director
to end the use of child soldiers, protect children from
the effects of sanctions and to draw up special codes of
conduct on the rights of the child for all civilian,
military and peacekeeping personnel.

It is true, as Mrs. Graca Machel noted in her 1996
report on the impact of armed conflict on children, that
armed conflicts cause more deaths and injuries among
children than among military personnel. According to
available statistics, since the beginning of the 1990s
over 2 million children have been killed and over 6
million have been wounded or maimed in the course of
armed conflicts. In nearly 60 countries children are
living in mine fields, and over 10,000 of them are
killed or maimed every day largely due to anti-
personnel landmines. Beyond these statistics, we
should also take into account traumas of all types
affecting children impacted by war and the impact of
those traumas on them, their families and society as a
whole.

Africa is paying the heaviest price in this regard
as a result of the resurgence of domestic armed conflict
and regional conflicts. The situation has become even
more serious with the emergence of armed bands that
are different from regular armed forces. These bands
are proceeding systematically and without
consideration for ethnicity, morals or international
norms to recruit, train and use children in hostilities,
even beyond national boundaries. This situation cries
out to our universal conscience, to the world's political
leaders, to the international community, to the United
Nations and to the Security Council in particular.

It is gratifying that this issue has been directly
taken up by our Organization, which continues to call
for respect for the provisions of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. My delegation therefore welcomes
the adoption by the General Assembly of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention concerning the involvement
of children in armed conflict. The Protocol demands
that all States parties see to it that members of their
armed forces under the age of 18 do not participate
directly in hostilities and that they are not the object of
obligatory recruitment.

It also raises - and it is important to emphasize
this - the principle of voluntary enrolment before the
age of 18, a principle that is subject to a number of
strict conditions designed to guard against forced
recruitment, including such recruitment by non-State
armed groups.

In Africa, the question of child soldiers remains a
major concern of the Organization of African Unity
and of subregional organizations.

In April 2000, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) held a conference in Accra,
Ghana, on war-affected children, in cooperation with
the Canadian Government. That conference adopted a
Declaration and Plan of Action that deserve the support
of the entire international community. An appeal has
been launched to all Member States to respect the
provisions of Security Council resolutions 1261 (1999)
and 1265 (1999); the four Geneva Conventions and
their Protocols; the African Charter on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child; the Convention on the Rights of
the Child; and in particular the International Labour
Organization Convention (No. 182) on the Elimination
of the Worst Forms of Child Labour.

The Accra conference drew up a set up measures
dealing with the demobilization, disarmament,
rehabilitation and reintegration of child soldiers. It also
elaborated measures on education; preventive
measures; measures aimed at raising the awareness of
the media; and measures on early-warning systems.
Among the planned regional initiatives, I should
like to emphasize here the integration of the child
protection dimension in ECOWAS peace initiatives and
peacekeeping operations; the appointment, within
ECOWAS missions in the field, of a Child Protection
Adviser; the establishment within ECOWAS of an
office for the protection of war-affected children; and
the establishment in all States members of ECOWAS of
a West African week of truce for war-affected children.
That week coincides with 16 June - the Day of the
African Child - and is aimed at raising public
awareness of the terrible plight of children and African
children affected by war.

These regional and subregional initiatives deserve
support from the United Nations system, development
partners, international institutions, non-governmental
organizations and other interested actors from civil
society.

I am familiar with and welcome the outstanding
work done by Mr. Otunnu in this area. He should be
further supported, encouraged and backed by the
United Nations and in particular by the Security
Council.

In fact, we should give further thought to the
question of the reintegration into society of child
soldiers. This question, naturally, must be an integral
part of post-conflict rehabilitation strategies - an area
in which, it must be emphasized, United Nations action
is not yet sufficiently visible and is still characterized
by various weaknesses and even by reprehensible
shortcomings. We must all give thought on how to cope
with this issue. In that way it will be possible to avoid
the resumption of conflicts and the re-emergence of
hotbeds of tension that had been thought to be
extinguished.

In this respect, my delegation welcomes the
holding in September in Winnipeg, Canada, of an
international conference on war-affected children, as
well as the offer made by that country to cooperate
with ECOWAS in the establishment of a unit for the
protection of children. That unit would be entrusted,
inter alia, with monitoring the status of children in
conflict situations; rehabilitating and reintegrating
them during the peace-building phase; and
safeguarding their fundamental rights, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child.

Peace, it has often been reiterated, is not merely
the absence of war. It also means development, as
many conflicts are the result of extreme poverty and
underdevelopment. Therefore today more than ever it is
important to find the necessary solutions to the
numerous constraints that are hampering the
development of Africa. Those constraints are well
known. They have been recalled here on several
occasions. I refer in particular to the crushing debt
burden, to tariff and non-tariff obstacles to the access
of African exports to the international market, and to
the drastic decline in official development assistance.

All of these issues have negative repercussions on
political and social crises in Africa and on the
resurgence of domestic or regional armed conflicts, and
therefore on the peace and stability of the African
continent.

In conclusion, my delegation is hopeful that this
debate will produce bold and innovative responses to
the difficult question of how to protect children from
the scourge of war, so that tomorrow those children, in
the springtime of their lives, can be educated and
trained to become active participants in the
development of their countries.

