Ms. Nl'ifiez de Odreman (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in
speaking today on the subject of terrorism, would like
to reiterate its condemnation of that perennial global
scourge. We have expressed our categorical
condemnation of such acts, whether acts of State
terrorism or other types of terrorism committed by
non-State actors. Likewise, we have made clear our
firm position of making a distinction between terrorism
and the legitimate resistance of peoples to invasion and
foreign occupation.

In accordance with our resolute commitment to
fight terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has ratified many
multilateral, regional and bilateral agreements on the
subject, and has implemented resolutions adopted in
the framework of the United Nations.

At the national level, we have developed a broad
set of laws to combat terrorism and created a special
administrative institution, as the national authority in
this field, headed by the Deputy Minister of Citizen
Security, within the Ministry of the Interior and Justice.
We have done so in order to fulfil the commitments
undertaken by the Republic to combat terrorism.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is
participating in today's Security Council meeting in
order to highlight one act of terrorism that shocked the
world, in particular the people of Latin America and
the Caribbean: the shooting down in 1976 of a Cabana
de Aviacio'n aircraft. As we know, that crime was
committed against 70 young Cuban athletes and people
of other nationalities. They boarded the flight in
Venezuela, but never reached their final destination,
Cuba, because they fell victim to a terrorist attack.
Many years have passed since that horrendous act, yet
one of those responsible - Luis Clemente Posada
Carriles, a Venezuelan national - remains unpunished.
The Venezuelan justice system found that terrorist,
Luis Clemente Posada Carriles, guilty of homicide,
arms production and treason. He escaped from the
Venezuelan prison where he was serving his sentence,
later resurfacing in the Republic of Panama. The
Government of Venezuela requested his extradition,
but to date it has been denied by the Panamanian
Government. Subsequently, after having been pardoned
in 2004 by that Government, the terrorist left the
country.

Now, statements to the press made by the
terrorist's lawyer, Eduardo Soto, make it clear that the
terrorist is in the United States of America and that he
has requested political asylum from the United States
Government. Providing political asylum to that
terrorist is not permissible under international law. It
would also constitute non-compliance with paragraphs
2(c) and 3(g) of resolution 1373 (2001) of 28
September 2001, which prohibits States from offering
refuge to those who commit acts of terrorism and
which does not recognize political motivation as
grounds for refusing requests for the extradition of
terrorists.

The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela hopes that the extradition requests made by
our Government will be given due attention and
processed by the Government of the United States, in
accordance with the extradition treaty between the
United States and Venezuela and in conformity with all
other applicable norms of international law. In this
regard, we hope that justice will be done with regard to
the handing over of Luis Clemente Posada Carriles to
the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, so that he can continue to serve his
sentence in accordance with the Venezuelan penal
code.

