Mr. Kyaw Tin (Myanmar): First of all, my
delegation wishes to express its appreciation to the
United States presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this important open debate. Our thanks also
go to Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative ofthe
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, for
her briefing and her dedication to protecting children in
armed conflict. We also extend our appreciation to all
other briefers for their presentations.

My delegation shares the international community's
concern over the suffering of a growing number of
children affected by armed conflicts unfolding in
many parts of the world. Myanmar therefore welcomes
the noble undertakings of the United Nations to end
grave violations against innocent children through a
cooperative approach, especially the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign.

We also thank the Secretary-General and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the annual report (S/2014/339) describing global
trends in the impact of armed conflict on children.
With regard to the assessment of Myanmar, we feel
that it needs greater balance, as it mainly focuses on
reported isolated incidents of individual violations and
complaints received from various sources. It should have
provided adequate space for the response taken by the
country concerned to those complaints. As the report's
coverage is for 2013, some of the its contents have been
overtaken by the recent positive developments in the
country.

In Myanmar, we have a long-standing, sound legal
basis and directives that prohibit forced conscription, as
well as the recruitment of minors under 18. Yet, in the
past, there have been unfortunate incidents of minors
finding their way into military service for various
reasons, including a lack of proper documents to verify
age and weaknesses in recruitment procedures, minors'
own relationship problems and the lack of employment
opportunities in rural areas.

But Myanmar today is different. Those issues are
being addressed more seriously and are being rectified.
Soon after embarking on the democratic transition in
2011, Myanmar took bold steps to address the issue
with strong commitment by signing a plan of action.
Myanmar is one of the few countries that is making
important progress in implementing its plan of action,
as highlighted by the Special Representative in her
statement this morning. I thank her for that. Among
the concrete actions taken are the establishment of a
complaint mechanism, a public awareness-raising
campaign against child recruitment, including erecting
billboards across the nation. Human rights education
training for trainers has been organized for senior-level
military officials. The number of complaints, which
include both factual complaints and some fabricated
ones, has of course risen owing to the rising public
awareness and greater media freedom. Those who
commit underage recruitment are punished according
to the law. Since the launching of the action plan,
legal action has been taken against a total of 229
military personnel, including 40 officers, for wrongful
recruitment of underage individuals into the military.

The Myanmar Government army is fully committed
to preventing underage recruitment and has indicated its
firm determination to finalize the full implementation
of the action plan during the six-month extension period
in order to be delisted from the report of the Secretary-
General. To that end, Myanmar's committee to prevent
underage recruitment in the military is meeting more
frequently every month with the country task force on
monitoring and reporting of grave violations of child
rights in armed conflict. The list of suspected recruits
received from the complaint mechanism is being
jointly verified fortnightly. That led to the release, on
1 August, of another group of 91 underage soldiers
from the military services, bringing the total number
of discharged underage recruits to 363 since the launch
of the action plan. Even before the signing of the
action plan, 597 underage soldiers had been released
since 2004 through our own voluntary verification
procedures.

Myanmar has taken many other tangible steps
this year to prevent underage recruitment. Access for
monitoring visits is now granted for visits not only
to Government armed forces, but also border guard
forces. To prevent underage recruitment, infantry
units are no longer allowed to recruit directly. Only
recruitment centres are tasked with recruitment duties.
Procedures for proper recruitment have also been
strengthened and improved by introducing new layers
of scrutiny. More than 3,000 seminars and lectures on
the prevention and protection of children in conflict
have already been conducted for military personnel
throughout the country. The controversial directive
exempting matriculated students over the age of 16
from recruitment to non-combat training has also been
abolished, as recommended by the Security Council
Working Group.

One of the major developments contributing to
our efforts to protect children in conflict has been the
unprecedented progress of the Government's peace
negotiation process to end the six decades-long ethnic
conflict. A nationwide ceasefire agreement is now
within arm's reach. The return of peace and stability
to every corner of the country augurs well for the
Government's efforts to achieve rural development, as
well as for the efforts to protect children in areas of
conflict.

Myanmar believes that enhanced cooperation
through a clear work plan between the country task force
on monitoring and reporting of grave violations of child
rights in armed conflict and the Government armed
forces will eventually pave the way for its delisting
by the Office of the Special Representative. We are
therefore prepared to collaborate with the country task
force on monitoring and reporting of grave violations
of child rights in armed conflict and the Office of
the Special Representative to review the progress on
the implementation of the action plan and to identify
remaining key areas requiring further progress for full
compliance and delisting. Our aim is to reach that goal
even before the targeted date set by the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign. We are also hopeful that our serious
effort to address the issue will receive encouragement,
fair assessment and an equally positive response from
the United Nations. Through our collective efforts, we
can achieve our shared goal of making our Government
armed forces free of underage recruits before 2016.
Such an achievement will also serve as a good example
for the remaining non-State actors to follow.

