Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia has consistently advocated in favour
of the speedy achievement of a just Palestinian-Israeli
settlement on the basis of agreed international law,
including the implementation of the Madrid principles,
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, the Arab
Peace Initiative and previously reached agreements.
Mutually acceptable agreements are required to ensure
the establishment of an independent, contiguous and
viable Palestinian State coexisting in peace with all of
its neighbours. We believe that this would represent not
only the realization of the aspirations ofthe Palestinians
but also an excellent guarantee of security for Israel.

Negotiations must resume as soon as possible. We
believe that the measure of their success would be the
parties' abandonment of unilateral actions that prejudge
the outcome of the final settlement. This concerns first
of all the Israeli settlements in the occupied territories.
We will continue to help to facilitate the resumption of

negotiations through bilateral channels and in various
international forums, first and foremost through the
Middle East Quartet of international mediators. We
deem important the intensification of new contacts of
special representatives in regional capitals. The United
Nations International Meeting in Support of Israeli-
Palestinian Peace, held in Moscow in July, was most
useful.

The Security Council could also play a substantive
role in promoting a settlement. We are convinced that
the international community can shift the situation
relating to Palestinian-Israeli affairs and stop the drift
towards a one-State reality. This is something that
neither the Israelis nor the Palestinians want to see.

The situation in the Middle East and North Africa
is, without exaggeration, catastrophic. The region is
in the throes of large-scale bloody conflicts, in Syria,
Yemen, Iraq and Libya, which fuel one another and
create conditions for the overflow of instability into the
neighbouring countries in Africa, the Mediterranean
and Central Asia. A number of States in the region are
on the brink of losing their territorial integrity. There
have been migratory flows on an unprecedented scale,
with hundreds of thousands of refugees. Many countries
that up until recently had seemed prosperous are now
facing the consequences of these conflicts. Also
unprecedented is the scale of terrorism in the region.
Terrorist acts resulting in dozens of casualties erupt in
one part of a region and then another, reaching all the
way to Europe. What can neighbouring countries do if
even other continents have to deal with the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters who go to the Middle East?

The result of, first, the invasion of Iraq and then the
external interference in the conflict in Syria, including
flirting with the armed opposition, was the emergence
of a new threat, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
which, having firmly established itself in these two
countries, has now basically started its march across
the planet.

We are convinced that we can effectively counter this
scourge only if we act together, taking a comprehensive
approach that is free of double standards and based on
international legality, relying on the prerogatives of the
Council. All of the countries of the region must now
set aside their differences, which have always existed
and probably will remain on certain issues, so that they
can ensure that all efforts are geared to fighting the
common threat.

An important contribution in that respect
is the series of Security Council resolutions on
counterterrorism. Pride of place should be accorded
to resolution 2199 (2015), which is aimed at stopping
financial flows to ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusa, especially
those from the oil trade. We call on all Member
States to responsibly implement this approach and to
take decisive steps to stop this criminal activity. We
commend the recommendations put forward by the
Al-Qaida Monitoring Group in this regard.

Criminal proceeds are in turn used in the
commission of new crimes. Terrorists have already
been working on how to synthesize, manufacture
and use chemical warfare agents. The danger of this
was mentioned by the Russian delegation as early as
November 2014, when we proposed that the Security
Council adopt a presidential statement on the subject
of chemical weapons in the hands of terrorists. News
of the development of chemical weapons by ISIL and
other terrorist groups in Syria and in Iraq indicates that
this trend is on the increase. Perhaps we should go back
to the idea we expressed last year.

The unprecedented increase in the terrorist threat
is something that can be explained not only by the
financial support of the caliphate and its allies but also
by the fact that their fighters are ideologically highly
motivated. Ofcourse this problem has many dimensions.
But we believe that a key factor in this regard is the
unresolved Palestinian-Israeli conflict, which creates
the conditions and arguments for recruiting new people
into terrorist entities.

Today we can speak about joint actions to combat
terrorism in the Middle with a certain amount of
optimism. Very recently the world witnessed a major
diplomatic achievement: the signing of an agreement
on the situation surrounding the Iranian nuclear
programme, which was supported by a unanimously
adopted Security Council resolution. This demonstrated
that when there is political will, when we are realistic
and respect one another's legal interests, we can resolve
the most difficult issues.

Secondly, we hope that this will help countries
in the Middle East and the Persian Gulf refrain from
taking destabilizing steps, prevent the region from
becoming involved in an arms race, make it possible
to jointly seek solutions to security issues, and improve
the situation in the wider region.

