Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): I should like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his briefing,
which provided a useful update on the situation in and
around Kosovo and the activities of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

The first issue on which I would like to focus is
the ongoing preparations for the Kosovo-wide elections
to be held in November. We are pleased to note some
positive developments in that process. However, we
recognize that there are a number of challenges ahead.

We strongly believe that the full participation of
all communities in the political process is essential to
ensure democratic, transparent and fair elections and to
regain stability in multi-ethnic Kosovo. In this regard
we welcome the continued contacts by the head of the
United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo,
Mr. Haekkerup, with Serbian leaders towards
encouraging Kosovo Serbs to participate in the
province's elections.

Against this background, we are gravely
concerned by reports of violent acts of ethnic
intolerance that continue to take place in Kosovo. We
maintain that these developments are extremely
dangerous and destabilize the ongoing efforts towards
creating an environment conducive to all-inclusive
elections.

Another important challenge is the overall peace
process in Kosovo and the creation of safe and secure
conditions for the successful and sustainable return to
their homes of Kosovo Serbs displaced by the conflict.

The issue of missing people still remains high on
the Kosovo agenda as an important aspect of
reconciliation.

Among the most recent developments in Kosovo,
we were very much disturbed by the report that
international peacekeepers patrolling the Kosovo side
of the border with Macedonia were attacked by ethnic
Albanian rebels who were trying to cross the border
illegally. We would be grateful if the Secretariat could
give us any information available concerning this
incident. Unfortunately, the incident further
underscores the regional repercussions of the situation
in Kosovo.

We are particularly concerned about the
continued insecurity in neighbouring Macedonia. In its
recent Presidential Statement welcoming the signing of
the Framework Agreement, the Security Council
reaffirmed the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Macedonia and expressed its support for the actions of
the President and the Government of Macedonia aimed
at resolving the crisis. Being a strong supporter of the
peaceful political means of settlement in that country,
Ukraine remains committed to support the legitimate
aspirations of the Republic of Macedonia to protect its
sovereignty and territorial integrity against those who
follow the dangerous path of forceful resolution of the
problems. Since the Framework Agreement on the
settlement of the crisis was signed, its full
implementation remains a priority.

We welcome the efforts made by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the European
Union (EU) in assisting the Macedonian Government
to ease the situation, and we commend their
commitment to support the security, stability and
territorial integrity of the country. Now, with the
launching of NATO's disarmament mission operation
"Essential Harvest", we very much hope that the
security situation there will improve.

In addition to NATO's effort, there are reports
that the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) is contemplating a monitoring role in
the peace process in Macedonia. It would be useful to
have more information on this matter.

