Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I have had
the honour this year to serve both as the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), on sanctions on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, and as the Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), on Iran.
I thank the Council very much for this opportunity to
share my reflections on the past year, as we prepare to
pass the baton to my German and Belgian colleagues.

We have built our work on the excellent work and
efforts of Italy, which we succeeded as part of the split
Council term between our two countries in 2017 and
2018. Let me pay tribute to the work of Sebastiano
Cardi as Chair of the 1718 Committee and Facilitator of
the 2231 format in 2017.

I will use this occasion to highlight three issues:
the work of the 1718 Committee, the work of the 2231
format, and, adding to that, some personal reflections on
the system of the subsidiary organs in the improvements
we see as advisable for the Council. In line with the
representative of Bolivia's recommendation just now,
they will be of a practical nature.

Let me start with the first issue, the 1718 Committee.
With the significant expansion of the sanctions regime
based on resolutions adopted at the end of last year,
the scope, relevance and magnitude of the work of
the Committee increased this year immensely. I will
briefly highlight three major aspects of the work we
performed in the Committee.

First, the Committee continued the ensure the
implementation of the sanctions regime. That in
itself proved to be a tremendous challenge given the
complexity of the sanctions regime, which is of a very
comprehensive nature. We try to provide guidance to
Member States, held open briefings for the wider United
Nations membership and held outreach meetings for
the five regional groups. We are convinced that those
efforts will continue to lead to greater implementation
of the sanctions.

Secondly, this year the Committee facilitated
diplomatic efforts to find a peaceful solution to
the situation on the Korean peninsula. We granted
exemptions to the sanctions regime to allow the
participation, for instance, ofofficials ofthe Democratic
People's Republic of Korea officials in diplomatic talks
in Pyongyang, Panmunjom and Singapore. Of course,
the Committee also supported the implementation
of the Panmunjom declaration by granting several
exemptions, such as for an inter-Korean railway survey.

Thirdly, the Committee made efforts to further
mitigate adverse humanitarian consequences of the
sanctions, which is something that was ofimportance to
all of us in the Committee. We connected with various
humanitarian actors, including the United Nations
Resident Coordinator in Pyongyang, and provided
humanitarian actors with further guidance on obtaining
humanitarian exemptions. The Committee also granted
various humanitarian exemptions for humanitarian
aid to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and
continues to consider further exemptions.

I now turn to my second issue, the facilitation of
resolution 2231 (2016). We all know, as we discussed
last week in the Council (see S/PV.8418), this
resolution endorsed the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) and marked a fundamental shift on
the Iranian nuclear issue. As Facilitator this year, we
have aimed to support and improve the implementation
of the resolution through the facilitation of talks,
transparency and trade: talks through engagement with
all the relevant parties and discussions on possible
violations of the resolution, transparency through
comprehensive and balanced reporting and trade by
encouraging the use of the procurement channel. As we
also discussed last week, the JCPOA faced challenges
following the withdrawal by the United States and the
re-imposition of United States sanctions against Iran.
But the unanimously adopted framework of resolution
2231 (2016) remains in place, and the procurement
channel is operational and effective. I mentioned last
week the numbers we are considering this year. Let me
conclude on this point by saying that resolution 2231
(2016) and the JCPOA enjoy broad support among the
wider United Nations membership.

That brings me to my third point, concerning some
personal reflections. I will mention seven points this
time, not three.
First, a look at the work of the 1718 Committee
will reveal that it has concrete impact on the ground by
preventing further evasion of the sanctions, facilitating
the diplomatic process and working towards mitigating
adverse humanitarian consequences.

Second, the importance of the unity of the Council
cannot be overstated. When the Council is united it
wields enormous power and has great impact on peace
and security. It is crucial that unity be maintained,
especially on the issues under consideration by the
1718 Committee.

Third - I think this is a wider observation - the
Panels of Experts, and in particular their reports, are
the cornerstone of United Nations sanctions regimes.
Their reports are essential for the decision-making
of the Committee, the Council and Member States.
Panels should be able to do their work in an effective
and secure manner, while safeguarding their integrity.
Additionally, we feel very strongly that the selection
process for Panel members should be based on merits.
All candidates with the required expertise and skill
sets should be taken into account, regardless of their
nationality. In general, the Panels that are functioning
under the Council would profit from having more
experts from the wider United Nations membership.

Fourth, the effective implementation of sanctions
is a challenge for many Member States, especially
those that are unaware of their obligations or are unable
to meet their obligations owing to a lack of capacity.
The world of the sanctions committees is sometimes
a subterranean universe for the wider membership, as
our Indian colleague called it during a Council debate
under the Kuwaiti presidency earlier this year (see S/PV.8175). Further outreach from the Council therefore
remains essential, including through an informative
website, as some of the other members mentioned as
well. The Council cannot underestimate the workload
of the accumulated reporting and implementation
requirements that other Member States face. That
is certainly a challenge for the smaller Member
States. Further streamlining and harmonizing of the
reporting and implementation requirements among
the Committees would be useful and helpful, because
currently there is a challenge in implementation for a
large part of the membership.

Fifth, when it comes to chairing a subsidiary organ,
it can also be challenging. We commend Sweden for
the initiative to start a best practice guide outlining
the Committee working methods of the committees.
Together with Belgium and Australia, we are supporting
Sweden's efforts and look forward to the result. We
hope that tool will contribute to the effectiveness of the
Security Council and its subsidiary organs.

Sixth, returning to the Committee pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), the workload ofthat Committee
far exceeds that of any other Committee, as the
Security Council Affairs Division has informed us
through its statistics. The Committee received more
than 337 notifications and requests for guidance, while
649 formal notes have been circulated to members of
the Committee so far this year. Those numbers show
the significant burden of a chairmanship on the Chair's
team, the Secretariat and the Panel of Experts. It is just
an enormous amount of work.

That brings me to my seventh, and last, point,
namely, the system around the sanctions committees.
The total number of all subsidiary organs under the
Council significantly increased since 2000, from 10 to
30. If the Council continues the practice of allocating
chairmanships exclusively to elected members, it will
continue to put a disproportional strain on the Permanent
Missions of the elected members, especially those with
smaller teams. Frankly, that is not sustainable. In our
view, therefore, it is essential that the Council agree to a
new system. Let me give some potential characteristics
of a new system.

First, it could be a system that ensures a fair
distribution of chairmanship among permanent and
elected members alike. Secondly, it could be a system
that allows for a two-year rotation of chairmanships
taken up by permanent members. It could be a system
that would allow Deputy Permanent Representatives to
fulfil the mandate of the Chair. Lastly, it could be a
system that allows Chairs, if they want, to also serve
as co-penholders on draft resolutions relevant to the
subsidiary organ they chair. We think that the discussion
on such a new system would best be further conducted
in the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
other Procedural Questions, under the able guidance of
our Kuwaiti colleague.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
gratitude for the professionalism and dedication
of Secretariat colleagues, whose support has been
invaluable. We would also like to especially mention
the Panel of Experts of the 1718 Committee. Let me
also thank the experts of the 1718 Committee and those
of the Iran format for their contribution to the work
of the committees. Of course, we wish every success
to our successors - Ambassador Christoph Heusgen
of Germany, at the 1718 Committee, and Ambassador
Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve of Belgium, at the 2231
Committee. We have already been working closely
with their teams to ensure a smooth transition and
will remain at their disposal in the days of transition
and beyond.

I want to conclude by thanking my own team,
especially Mrs. Lila DelColle and Mr. Joost van Dieren.
They have worked incredibly hard this year, served the
Facilitator and the Committee, and have served the
Council, but certainly they have served the cause of
peace and security above and beyond the call of duty.

