Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): First, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also wish to thank you for convening this important
debate. My thanks also go to Under-Secretaries-General
Le Roy and Malcorra and to Force Commander General
Agwai for their comprehensive and informative
briefings this morning.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Morocco
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. In addition, I
wish to briefly highlight certain points that we believe
to be important.

United Nations peacekeeping operations have
experienced many difficult situations in terms of their
legitimacy and modus operandi. It is necessary to
adjust their modes of operation while retaining the
basic and guiding principles agreed upon by Member
States. Many initiatives have been accomplished, some
have not, and some are ongoing. I would like to
mention the necessity of crafting clear, credible and
achievable mandates.

The Security Council, in its resolution 1327
(2000) on the Brahimi report (S/2000/809), resolved to
give peacekeeping operations such mandates. Given
the increased complexity of the mandated tasks of the
missions, there is a need for well-defined and
unambiguous mandates.

The Security Council, in its resolution 1327
(2000), noted the need to address the root causes of
violent conflict through the promotion of sustainable
development and democratic society. I wish to stress
that the Security Council should be able to address
those causes of conflicts effectively and that further
action should be taken to bridge the institutional divide
between peacekeeping operations and post-conflict
reconstruction.

I would also stress the need for further
harmonization and consolidation of United Nations-led
initiatives, whereby lessons learned from Council-
mandated integrated peacekeeping missions could be
taken into account. We also emphasize the need for

greater synergy between peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding activities.

Regarding consultation with troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), my delegation has spoken of this on
a number of occasions. I would like to mention here
that all necessary steps on such matters should be taken
in compliance with resolutions 1327 (2000) and 1353
(2000).

It is imperative and logical to benefit from the
experience and expertise of the troop-contributing
countries while planning, implementing, extending or
adjusting peacekeeping mandates. The TCCs can
undoubtedly contribute to the planning process of the
Security Council in arriving at appropriate decisions on
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Given the scale and complexity of peacekeeping,
there is a lack of adequate human, financial and
logistical resources. Although peacekeeping is one
component among a range of overlapping and mutually
reinforcing activities that include peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, it is undeniably the
critical building block and a crucial transitional phase
that paves the way to lasting peace. It is therefore
necessary to make all resources available to ensure the
maintenance of peace and security in a conflict area.

We also believe in a wider partnership in
peacekeeping. We emphasize that the contributor base
should be expanded to ensure collective burden-
sharing. Bangladesh welcomes the complementary role
played by regional organizations in United Nations-
mandated peacekeeping operations. Their role,
however, must not be seen as a substitute for that of the
United Nations. United Nations peacekeeping forces
must maintain a true international character in order to
uphold their universality, impartiality and neutrality.

Turning to the New Horizon non-paper, we take
note of the Secretariat's efforts to put these
assessments and recommendations together.

