Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, may I at the outset congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February. I am certain that,
under your enlightened guidance, the work of the
Council will be carried out in a constructive spirit and
with all due efficiency. I should like also to avail
myself of this opportunity to commend your
predecessor, the Ambassador and Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, for the
exemplary manner in which he led the work of the
Council during the month of January.

I am grateful to you, Sir, as well as to the other
members of the Council, for having given me the
opportunity to participate, in my capacity as Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, in this important
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.

We are gathered here today in the Council to
provide a response to the disturbing events that
continue to take place in the occupied Palestinian

territories, including East Jerusalem. The Committee
remains extremely concerned at the situation in the
territory, which is a dangerous one in terms of security
and disastrous in humanitarian terms. That situation is
the direct result of the Israeli occupation. The stringent
restrictions imposed on freedom of movement within
the territory, as well as border closings, seriously
hinder the delivery of humanitarian assistance as well
as economic recovery and development. Frustration is
increasing, which in turn fuels extremism.

At this sensitive juncture, it is truly extraordinary
that the Israeli Government should have authorized
excavation and repair work on a site that includes the
Al-Aqsa mosque. As the Council is aware, there is
great tension between the peoples who live in
Jerusalem because of what the city represents to
various religions. The excavation work done several
years ago in the area of the Al-Aqsa mosque had
already violated the sanctity of the third holiest site in
Islam and given rise to indignation throughout the
Muslim world.

The Security Council has consistently reaffirmed
the fact that the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
applies to all territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
including East Jerusalem, and has repeatedly called on
Israel to comply with the provisions of that
Convention. It has stated in several resolutions that all
steps taken by Israel to modify the status of Jerusalem
are null and void, and it has asked Israel to rescind
such measures and to refrain from any actions that
might alter the status of Jerusalem. The excavation and
the work under way today not only undermine the
foundations of the mosque compound; they also alter
the character of the city, thereby triggering a dangerous
resurgence of tension in the Middle East that could
doom to failure any peace talks between Israel and the
Palestinians.

We are encouraged by the agreement recently
concluded in Mecca between the leaders of Fatah and
Hamas. We welcome that initiative and the assistance
given by the regional parties, especially the
Governments of Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Jordan. We
look forward to the formation of a new government of
national unity - one that is determined to shoulder its
responsibility for the maintenance of order and to put
an end to the violence in the territory under its
authority. That will mean putting an end to the firing of
rockets against Israel and to all other attacks targeting
innocent civilians. We hope that the formation of a
government of national unity will enable the
international community to lift the financial
restrictions, which are preventing well-disposed
Governments, organizations and individuals that wish
to release their financial aid.

The Committee welcomed the November
ceasefire in the Gaza Strip. The ceasefire must now be
extended to the West Bank, and it must be reinforced
by specific political measures to enable the parties to
engage in real political dialogue. The international
community should create a credible and effective third-
party monitoring mechanism in order to help to
maintain the truce.

We appeal to Israel, the occupying Power, to
immediately end its military operations and its use of
excessive force so that its actions comply with the
Fourth Geneva Convention. We appeal to both parties
to immediately put an end to all acts of violence, to
show the greatest restraint and to foster a return to
calm. The Committee believes that the Security
Council must live up to its responsibilities and help to
put an end to the violence and the dire poverty in the
occupied Palestinian territories.

For its part, the Committee will continue to work
with the legitimate representatives of the Palestinian
people, first and foremost the President of the
Palestinian Authority. The Committee hopes that a new
18
government of national unity will endeavour to restore
unity among Palestinians and that it will be able to take
the courageous steps necessary to improve their living
conditions.

The Committee furthermore believes that peace
can be achieved only through a negotiated settlement
to the conflict - one that would lead to the birth of
viable Palestinian State on the basis of the pre-l967
borders. The resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict will be based on the Madrid terms of
reference, the principle of land for peace, resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003)
and the Arab Peace Initiative, including the acceptance
of Israel as a neighbour, living in peace and security
within the framework of a comprehensive settlement.

