Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like to start by thanking France for having
organized this debate on a topic that affords us an
opportunity to take stock of the progress achieved and
the best practices, so that we may together identify
areas in which additional efforts are necessary to
guarantee better protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I would also like to pay tribute to the valuable
contributions to this debate by Ms. Amos, Mr. Le Roy
and Mr. Simonovic'.

The Security Council has been considering for
over a decade the question of the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. This ongoing commitment by the
Council has led to progress in terms of norms, which
should be welcomed, and to progress on the ground,
which needs to be consolidated. The Secretary-
General's report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, of November 2010 (S/2010/579), underscores
the importance of adopting a comprehensive approach
combining the legal, humanitarian and security aspects
of dealing with the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

This is a complex, multidimensional task. To
better protect civilians and relieve their suffering, we
must collectively strengthen respect for international
law, especially international humanitarian law, and
provide those peacekeeping operations that have a
mandate for the protection of civilians with the
necessary resources to better implement that mandate.

In this context, the Security Council is called to
develop clear and realistic mandates for peacekeeping
operations. This is particularly necessary when the
protection of civilians is mandated. These mandates
must, furthermore, take into account the financial and
logistical resources provided to peacekeeping
operations as well as the operational command
structure of the operations, in consultation with
Member States.

Seven peacekeeping operations have a mandate to
protect civilians. This is a significant development that
needs to be underscored and welcomed while
mainstreaming the use of optimal practices for the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations with
such mandates.

Training for peacekeeping operations leadership
is also an important aspect that we need to focus on.
We welcome the ongoing development by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations of
predeployment and in-mission training modules for
blue helmets in close cooperation with troop-
contributing countries. However, and along with these
achievements, we should not forget that the protection
of civilians is but one aspect of the complex mandates
of certain peacekeeping operations. The main task of
these operations is to facilitate a peace process and
ensure transition to a lasting peace.

One of the fundamental items for the success of
mandates for the protection of civilians is programmes
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of combatants. My delegation believes that additional
efforts should be undertaken to finance the crucial
reintegration phase and to enhance States' capacities in
post-conflict situations. When it is mandated, the
protection of civilians often gives rise to excessive
expectations in terms of public opinion and among the
population of the host country. However, simply
looking at the numbers of peacekeeping troops and
comparing them to the population to be protected
amply demonstrates that the blue helmets cannot
guarantee protection for all.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
requires strict respect for international humanitarian
law, as I said, by the parties to the conflict. We must
note that in many situations, the militarization of
refugee camps - which often makes it hard to
distinguish between combatants and non-combatants -
thus prevents humanitarian actors from discharging
their mission and providing assistance and care to
vulnerable populations in these camps.

The control of civilian populations by non-State
actors operating either in connivance with the host
country's authorities or without their knowledge is a
challenge that the international community must meet.
This control over entire civilian populations sometimes
even leads to a rejection of a basic requirement,
namely the counting and registering of the population,
without which it is pointless to speak of protection,
much less of the right of return. Moreover, it is
precisely that lack of protection and of distinction
between civilians and combatants in refugee camps
that leave the door open for opportunistic terrorists to
abuse some refugees, use them in hostage-taking
actions and even destabilize entire regions.

I cannot conclude my remarks without properly
honouring the work of United Nations blue helmets
and humanitarian workers, who are prepared every day
to make the ultimate sacrifice to protect civilians in
conflict zones. The increasing dangers they brave in
carrying out their noble work command our admiration
and more than justify all the praise they regularly earn
from the United Nations.

