We welcome this discussion on the linkages between pandemics and security. With the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on the ascending curve, today's debate may be long overdue but nevertheless remains extremely timely. For one thing, the world is only beginning to come to grips with the new reality, and there is no clear indication what the post-COVID-19 political, economic and security landscape will look like. The implications are numerous, and we have barely started to scratch the surface. The scope of the pandemic's humanitarian impact, although profound, is yet to be calculated properly and in full. Most likely, any current estimates and assessments are on the conservative side of the spectrum and will have to be readjusted in future. The immediate economic fallout is already visible, with many industries and businesses, small and large alike, around the globe feeling the pain and balancing on the brink. The long-term effects are utterly unclear, and recovery prospects still very much a guessing game. Moreover, a huge question mark hangs over current development plans and expectations. The social consequences are only starting to take shape, and there is no definite answer as to how interactions within societies and between societies and States will evolve. It leads us to wonder what kind of social progress we can count on achieving under these circumstances, and how the primacy of human rights will be upheld. The dynamics of interaction between and among States in the international arena are also being determined to a large degree by how each State views the COVID-19 challenge and endeavours to deal with it. Even though there have been some remarkable examples of international collaboration with States trying to help each other individually and collectively, we have also witnessed examples of power competition and attempts to manipulate the current health crisis in pursuit of political and economic gains. Then there is the potential undermining of the operational capabilities of regular armed forces in the light of the spread of COVID-19. As we all know, United Nations peacekeeping operations had to adopt to the new reality and make significant adjustments in their day-to-day functioning. Nevertheless, there is still no consensus as to how much pandemics constitute an immediate threat to international peace and security. Be that as it may, there is hardly anyone who would sincerely question the existence of a correlation between severe health crises and a deterioration of the security environment. Even though a health crisis per se may not necessarily trigger a security crisis, in any security crisis it would definitely be an exacerbating factor, complicating conflict-resolution efforts. That point is illustrated rather vividly by the most recent example of the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire resulting in an almost universal expression of support, which was not reciprocated by actual developments on the ground. Moreover, actors bent on escalating and exploiting the current crisis did exactly that. The monitoring activities of international organizations in conflict zones have been significantly, and sometimes critically, impaired by various restrictions on freedom of movement and on access to areas of hostilities or to civilian population. The delivery of humanitarian assistance, which had never been easy, has in many instances been deliberately jeopardized even further, with new barriers and impediments denying access for humanitarian actors to those in need. In that regard, the Council's adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), on COVID-19, includes, in paragraph 2, a clear and unequivocal call for parties to armed conflicts "to engage immediately in a durable humanitarian pause" for 90 days to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid is a welcome and long-awaited development. This document has been long in coming. We recognize the efforts of the primary drafters and other Council members, whose determination proved to be a decisive factor behind the ultimate success of the collective endeavour that was put in motion by Estonia as early as March. As one of the first States to express support for the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire, Ukraine is also heartened to see the Security Council demanding "a general and immediate cessation of hostilities in all situations on its agenda". Our expectation is that one well-known non-elected Council member will finally start walking the walk, as opposed to just talking the talk, and that the relevant provisions of the Minsk agreements pertaining to establishing a ceasefire in Donbas will be implemented at long last. Instead of expending energy under the false pretence of caring for those in need via manipulative initiatives aimed at undermining sanction regimes established in response to gross violations of international law and human rights, that non-elected Council member would do well to abandon its adventurist, extreme nationalist and aggressive policies against other countries, thus removing the core reason for the imposed sanctions. One of the lessons drawn from the COVID-19 experience is that the lack of a single unified multilateral response to a crisis only exacerbates the situation. What is important to remember, however, is that piling the blame on multilateralism and international institutions for the lack of such a response, in addition to being simplistic, is also misleading. We should never forget that the ultimate power lies with sovereign States, and not with international civil servants. When international institutions fail, it is a sign of not only a lack of transparency, accountability or effectiveness on the part of respective secretariats, but also of a lack of leadership, direction and control that should be coming from Member States. To paraphrase a famous statement by Georges Clemenceau about war and soldiers, we can definitely say that international crises are too important to be left to professional international bureaucrats. It means that States' leadership and engagement are indispensable for achieving genuine international cooperation. Formulating a joint strategy, following up with coordinated efforts and concrete steps at both national and international levels, ensuring fair burden-sharing and engaging in regular and full exchanges of information are all necessary elements of proper international cooperation. The recent experience should have taught us that, in an interconnected world, unrestrained competition for limited resources, attempts to hoard up medicines and equipment, and disruptions to supply chains only deepen crises, heighten tensions and divert time and resources from formulating a truly global response. Without such a response, stopping the spread of the virus in time, preserving the ability of national health-care systems to deal with the medical fallout, ensuring the continuity of international travel and cross-border transportation or averting a global economic crisis become hardly attainable goals. The jury may still be out on whether the current COVID-19 pandemic constitutes a threat to international peace and security. However, not many other events can reshape and shake up people's lives on a global scale. The world would be wise to realize that the impact and consequences of a global pandemic is akin to a world war or a natural disaster of biblical proportions. From that perspective, a virus that can wipe out a large proportion of humankind, cause severe fluctuations of the global economy, overwhelm national health-care systems, disrupt the provision of services by national Governments, sow the seeds for civil unrest and aggravate existing security challenges definitely deserves attention as a potential threat to international peace and security. It is up to us to learn the lessons from our response to COVID-19, draw the necessary conclusions and start preparing for the next challenge of this kind, which will come. Our level of preparedness will determine whether humankind will be facing an existential challenge, with all its related consequences, or whether the emergence of a new deadly virus can be effectively contained and curtailed.
