Ms. Kang: On behalf of the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Valerie Amos, I have the honour to
deliver this monthly statement on the implementation
of resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) on the
humanitarian situation in Syria.

Armed Violence continues to escalate throughout the
country, the humanitarian situation in Syria continues
to deteriorate, and the level of Violence, death and
destruction remains unrelenting. Millions of Syrians
are forced to live in appalling conditions where there
is no safe refuge within their borders; where their basic
needs for protection and survival are unmet; where their
fundamental rights are trampled upon with impunity;
and where their futures and that of their country look
increasingly desolate. High numbers of civilians were
killed in September following indiscriminate attacks in
densely populated areas, including attacks on schools
and medical structures. Tens of thousands of Syrians
have been forced to flee their homes again this month,
many of them for the second or third time.
Children continue to suffer the brunt ofthis conflict.
On 1 October, a twin bombing close to Al-Makhzoumi
School in Homs resulted in 50 people - including
29 children - losing their lives and dozens more
being injured. On 27 October, two more schools in
Government-controlled parts of Aleppo were hit. In
one incident, three rockets landed near a school in
Aleppo city, killing 3, including one child, and injuring
25 more. Mortars fired on another Aleppo school later
in the day killed 6 people, including 4 children, and
injured 30 more.

There continue to be gross violations of international
humanitarian law, which should be universally
condemned. So long as the parties to conflict continue
to disregard their international legal obligations, I
regret that we will continue to report on more and more
senseless tragedies, despite the demands of resolutions
2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014).

In the past month, nearly 200,000 people have
fled the brutal advance of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and sought refuge in Turkey. Nearly
14,000 of them have subsequently sought refuge in
Iraq, adding to the numbers of refugees and internally
displaced persons already seeking refuge there. ISIL
and all other parties to the conflict in Syria are killing
and injuring people and destroying villages, towns and
cities with impunity. Armed opposition groups have
intensified their attacks and the Government's aerial
bombardments, including with barrel bombs, have
continued.

Just yesterday, a small settlement of internally
displaced persons in Idlib was reportedly struck by
barrel bombs, killing a number of people, including
women and children. On 9 October, some 250 people
were reported wounded in the bombing of a crowded
market in Arbin, a town in the besieged area of East
Ghouta, where a hospital supported by international
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) is treating
hundreds of trauma patients, many of them children,
following other attacks in the town. Medical facilities
and personnel also continue to be attacked and are
otherwise impacted by the conflict. Nine medical staff
were killed in September and seven facilities were hit.
Twenty-four percent of hospitals are reported as not
functioning.

Despite these challenges, the United Nations and
partners continue to deliver life-saving assistance to
millions ofpeople in need. In the past month, more than
3.9 million people have received food aid; medicines
and supplies for 1.6 million treatments have been
dispatched; and hundreds of thousands have received
relief items and other support, all delivered in extremely
difficult circumstances.

Cross-border assistance has also allowed us to
reach more people in need. Supplies for over half a
million medical treatments have been delivered since
the adoption ofresolution 2165 (2014). Food for 160,000
people and non-food items for 240,000 people, among
other assistance, have also been delivered. Cross-border
operations remain a crucial delivery mechanism for
the United Nations, especially given the development
of the joint operational plan agreed under resolution
2165 (2014), which better coordinates the delivery of
assistance by the United Nations and NGOs working
from within Syria and across the borders.

We are still unable to deliver sufficient quantities of
aid to people in the hardest-to-reach areas. Fighting and
insecurity continue to hamper our ability to respond.
The World Food Programme (WFP) was once again
unable to reach the nearly 600,000 people targeted in
ISIL-controlled Deir ez-Zor and Raqqa governorates,
which were last reached in May and July, respectively.
Violence and insecurity in the north have also cut in
half WFP's cross-line deliveries in Aleppo and Idlib.

In addition to insecurity, the parties to the
conflict continue to place other obstacles in the way of
delivering assistance. The Government's bureaucratic
hurdles continue to delay or deny the delivery of aid.
For example, despite prior approval for the delivery of
medical supplies to Tir Mala and Ghanto in rural Homs,
Syrian Government security forces on the ground
removed all injectable medicines, antibiotics and
surgical supplies from an inter-agency convoy before
it was allowed to depart, denying people nearly 10,000
people of much-needed medical treatment.

Some 241,000 people remain besieged, mostly by
Government forces. In the past month, and despite
frequent requests, the United Nations has been allowed
only limited access to Yarmouk. Some 8,500 people
have received food support, 1,100 have received
medical treatments, and 2,100 have received non-food
items. This is just a fraction of the needs in Yarmouk.

The requests ofthe United Nations to reach besieged
areas in Rural Damascus, including Duma, Zamalka
and Arbin, have gone unanswered by the Government
of Syria. An increasing number of wounded have been
reported, and people are in desperate need of help.
Assistance is also ready to be delivered to the besieged
communities of Nubul and Zahra, in Aleppo, but the
opposition groups in control have yet to give us access
to reach some 45,000 people in need. Food, medicines
and other assistance are just a short distance away
from those who desperately require it. If the parties
grant access, we can deliver. We can save lives. But
our requests have so far gone unanswered, and that is
wholly unacceptable.

A lack of funding is also severely compromising our
operations and remains a major obstacle to our ability
to reach more people in need. At this point last year,
the $1.4 billion appeal for activities inside Syria was
57 per cent funded. Today, we have received only 39 per
cent of the required $2.3 billion. The consequences
are stark. Food assistance will be reduced for over
4 millions Syrians; 1 million will not receive blankets,
warm clothes or fuel ahead of the winter. We appeal to
the international community to redouble its efforts so
that we can respond to the ever-growing needs.

The human suffering in Syria is worsening. The
numbers ofpeople killed and injured in nearly four years
of conflict are staggering. The collective punishment
inflicted upon civilians is appalling, and so too is the
callous disregard of the parties to the conflict for the
people of Syria, for their safety and dignity, and for the
country's future. The parties must comply with their
international legal obligations to protect people. They
must allow us the access required to help those in need.
And we need the international community's continued
financial support to help expand our reach.

While we in the humanitarian community continue,
to the best of our abilities, to work hard to deliver aid
to all who need it, ultimately the answer to the crisis in
Syria and the region will come only through a political
solution that truly addresses the root causes of the
cr1s1s.

