The President: In accordance with the decision taken
at the 4067th meeting, I invite the representative of Burundi
to take a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nteturuye
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council notes with concern the
recent outbreaks of violence in Burundi and the delays
in the peace process. It calls on all the parties to put
an end to this Violence and pursue negotiations
towards the peaceful resolution of Burundi's ongoing
cr1s1s.

"The Security Council reiterates its support for
the Arusha Peace Process and for the efforts to build
an internal political partnership in Burundi. It notes
with great sadness the death of Mwalimu Julius
Nyerere, while at the same time rededicating its
efforts to the cause of peace he served. The Council
firmly believes that the process chaired by the late
Mwalimu Nyerere offers the best hope for peace in
Burundi and should be the foundation for all-party
talks leading to the conclusion of a peace agreement.
The States of the region, in close consultation with the
United Nations, need to act quickly to appoint a new
mediation team that is acceptable to the Burundian
parties to the negotiations.

"The Security Council commends those
Burundian parties, including the Government, that
demonstrated their commitment to continue
negotiations, calls on those parties that remain
outside the process to cease hostilities and calls for
their full participation in Burundi's inclusive peace
process.
"The Security Council condemns the murder of
United Nations personnel in Burundi in October. It
calls on the Government to undertake and cooperate
with investigations, and for the perpetrators to be
brought to justice. The Council urges all parties to
ensure the safe and unhindered access of
humanitarian assistance to those in need in Burundi
and to guarantee fully the security and freedom of
movement of United Nations and humanitarian
personnel. The Council recognizes the important role
of the States of the region, in particular Tanzania,
which is host to hundreds of thousands of Burundian
refugees and home to the Julius Nyerere Foundation,
which has provided outstanding support to the talks.

"The Security Council calls on States of the
region to ensure the neutrality and civilian character
of refugee camps and to prevent the use of their
territory by armed insurgents. It also calls on the
Government of Burundi to halt the policy of forced
regroupment and to allow the affected people to
return to their homes, with full and unhindered
humanitarian access throughout the process. It
condemns the attacks by armed groups against
civilians and calls for an end to these unacceptable
incidents.

"The Security Council recognizes Burundi's
dire economic and social conditions and affirms the
need for the donor community to expand assistance
for Burundi."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1999/32.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

