The Secretary-General: I welcome this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the crisis
in Myanmar.

On 2 September, I wrote to the Council urging
concerted efforts to prevent further escalation of the
crisis in northern Rakhine state. I am encouraged that
the Council has discussed the situation four times in
less than a month.

The reality on the ground demands action - swift
action - to protect people, alleviate suffering, prevent
further instability, address the root causes of the
situation and forge, at long last, a durable solution. The
following briefing is based on our reporting from the
ground and is our best sense of what has happened,
what is still happening and what needs to be done.

The current crisis has steadily deteriorated
since the 25 August attacks by the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army on the Myanmar security forces. I
repeat my condemnation of those attacks today. Since
then, the situation has spiralled into the world's fastest-
developing refugee emergency and a humanitarian
and human rights nightmare. I continue to call on the
Myanmar authorities to take three immediate steps:
first, to end the military operations; secondly, to allow
unfettered access for humanitarian support; and thirdly,
to ensure the safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable
return of the refugees to their areas of origin.

Let me now review what we know about the military
operations that have taken place since 25 August.
While there have been competing narratives in
a highly complex environment, certain elements are
clear. At least 500,000 civilians have fled their homes
and sought safety in Bangladesh. Although the total
number of those displaced is unknown, it is estimated
that 94 per cent of them are Rohingya. The devastating
humanitarian situation is not only a breeding ground for
radicalization, it also puts vulnerable people, including
young children, at risk of falling prey to criminal
elements, including trafficking. We have received
bone-chilling accounts from those who fled, mainly
women, children and the elderly. These testimonials
point to excessive violence and serious violations of
human rights, including the indiscriminate firing of
weapons, the presence of landmines and sexual violence.
This is unacceptable and must end immediately.

International human rights law and standards are
clear: any use of force by the authorities must respect
Myanmar's human rights obligations under international
law and comply with well- established human rights
standards. Above all, these actions must fully respect
the human rights of those affected, regardless of
ethnicity or religion. The use of lethal force, even in
situations of emergency, must be commensurate with
the threat to the public order, and utmost care must be
taken to minimize injury and loss of life, especially for
unarmed people and communities.

The authorities have claimed that security
operations ended on 5 September, following major
displacements in northern Rakhine, where Rohingya
were the majority. However, displacement appears to
have continued, with reports of the burning of Muslim
villages, as well as looting and acts of intimidation. The
Myanmar authorities themselves have indicated that at
least 176 of 471 Muslim villages in northern Rakhine
have been totally abandoned.

In Rathedaung township, three quarters of the
Rohingya population has fled. Most villages and
all three of the former internally displaced-persons
camps have been burnt to the ground. Just five
isolated Muslim communities remain in Rathedaung.
Elsewhere too, a majority of the abandoned villages
were majority Muslim.

There seems to be a deeply disturbing pattern to
the violence and the ensuing large movements of an
ethnic group from their homes. The failure to address
that systematic violence could result in a spill-over into
central Rakhine state, where an additional 250,000
Muslims could potentially face displacement. They
are outnumbered by the Rakhine communities, some
of whom have engaged in violent acts of vigilantism
against their Muslim neighbours.

The violence in Rakhine - whether by the military
or by radical elements within communities - must end.
The Myanmar authorities must fulfil their fundamental
obligation to ensure the safety and security of
all communities and to uphold the rule of law
without discrimination.

Let me now turn to the question of humanitarian
access. It is imperative that United Nations agencies and
our non-governmental partners be granted immediate
and safe access to all affected communities. I am
deeply concerned by the current climate of antagonism
towards the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations. Indeed, that can lead to unacceptable
violence, such as the recent attacks against the
International Committee of the Red Cross by Rakhine
villagers in Sittwe.

The Myanmar authorities have said repeatedly
over the past few days that it is not the right time for
unhindered access to resume. Given the enormous
needs, that position is deeply regrettable. The United
Nations should be allowed to reach the affected areas
without delay.

I would also like to address the issue of the safe
return of refugees to their places of origin. I ask
members of the Security Council to join me in urging
that all those who have fled to Bangladesh be able to
exercise their right to a safe, voluntary, dignified and
sustainable return to their homes. Myanmar authorities
have committed to using the framework established in
the 1992 Joint Statement by the Foreign Ministers of
Bangladesh and Myanmar to facilitate such returns.
While that may be a useful starting point, it is not
sufficient in the present circumstances.

Notably, the framework does not refer to resolving
the root cause of displacement. Moreover, it requires
documents that the fleeing Rohingya may not be able
to provide. The United Nations is committed to a plan
for voluntary return and calls upon the international
community to support such an effort. That should include
development assistance to the villages of those who
return home, and the implementation of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State's recommendations
regarding verification and citizenship.

Voluntary repatriation also requires, as a critical
first step, the registration of refugees in Bangladesh,
using internationally accepted standards. The United
Nations is ready to support Myanmar and Bangladesh
in all stages of this important process. Ensuring
the safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees
to Rakhine - in line with international refugee
law - will require the restoration of mutual trust
among the communities.

Improving intercommunal relations is a critical
part of a sustainable resolution to the crisis and one
of the essential recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, led by Kofi Annan.
In this highly complex environment, the Myanmar
authorities must work to defuse tension and uphold
and protect the rights of all communities, including the
respect for property rights. Those who fled should be
able to return to their homes in peace and not have to
face yet another cycle of violence. It will be especially
important to avoid relocating those displaced yet again
to camp-like conditions.

In Bangladesh, the United Nations continues
to step up its humanitarian response. The High
Commissioner for Refugees visited just days ago. In
the next two weeks, the World Food Programme, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), the International Organization for Migration
(IOM) and UNICEF will visit the Bangladesh border
area. On 9 October, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, OCHA and IOM. will
convene a donors' conference.

In my meeting last week with Bangladeshi Prime
Minister Hasina, I expressed great appreciation for
the care being provided to refugees. I commend
the countries that are supporting Bangladesh in its
response. Let me also stress the need for strengthened
cooperation between Myanmar and Bangladesh. In
that regard, I welcome the coming high-level visit of
Myanmar officials to Bangladesh

The crisis has generated multiple implications for
neighbouring States and the larger region, including
the risk of intercommunal strife. We should not be
surprised if the decades of discrimination and double
standards in the treatment of the Rohingya create
openings for radicalization.

In moving forward, we need an effective partnership
with the Myanmar authorities, especially the military.
All involved parties should refrain from any actions
that could exacerbate the precarious situation on
the ground. I welcome the participation here today

of National Security Adviser U Thaung Tun - as
well as the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh,
Mr. Masud Bin Momen. I appreciate the National
Security Adviser's efforts to engage in dialogue with
various stakeholders during the high-level week of the
General Assembly.

In addition to discussions with the Secretariat
on future cooperation, the Myanmar delegation has
reached out to Bangladesh to revive dialogue. Myanmar
has also called on the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations for desperately needed humanitarian assistance.
I look forward to an effective and credible follow up to
the authorities' stated commitment to greater access,
including for the international community, the media
and humanitarian actors. Regional cooperation with
Myanmar will also be essential, and the United Nations
fully stands behind it.

I welcome the important role played by Foreign
Minister Marsudi of Indonesia in that respect. She has
been advocating an approach that echoes the three steps
that I have been emphasizing and that is also what many
countries have been seeking.

The crisis has underlined an urgent need for a
political solution to the root causes of the violence. The
core of the problem is protracted statelessness and its
associated discrimination. The recommendations of
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State provide a
blueprint for the longer-term future.

The Muslims of Rakhine state should be granted
nationality. The present Myanmar citizenship legislation
only allows partial citizenship. We encourage Myanmar
to revise that legislation in line with the international
standards. In the interim, an effective verification
exercise, as previously foreseen, should enable those
so entitled to be granted citizenship under the present
laws. All others must be able to obtain a legal status that
allows them to lead a normal life, including freedom
of movement and access to labour markets, education
and health services. I appeal to the leaders of Myanmar,
including military leaders, to condemn incitement to
racial hatred and violence, and to take all measures to
defuse tensions between communities.

We have taken good note of declarations by the
Myanmar authorities that no one is above the law.
There is a clear need to ensure accountability for the
perpetrators of human rights violations, to curb the
current violence and to prevent future abuses.

The United Nations will remain a close partner to
Myanmar in addressing those urgent issues. We have no
agenda other than to help Myanmar advance the well-
being of all the country's people. We have no interest
other than to see all communities enjoying peace,
security, prosperity and mutual respect. And we are
committed to nothing less than easing the heart-breaking
suffering of so many vulnerable people - while forging
a lasting solution that affirms shared values, promotes
mutual respect and upholds human dignity. I call on
the Security Council to stand united and support our
efforts to urgently end this tragedy.

