Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Madam President, for convening this important
debate. It is indeed good to see you back here in New
York. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Patriota and Ms. Leymah Gbowee for their
important and inspiring comments this morning.

This year the United Kingdom celebrates the eight
hundredth anniversary of the signing of the Magna
Carta, in 1215. That was a ground-breaking moment in
the history of my country's inclusive development. The
Magna Carta introduced the concept of a fundamentally
different relationship between the State and individuals.
In essence, the monarch agreed for the first time that
his power could not to be exercised in an arbitrary and
unconstrained way, that the State was answerable to its
citizens and that there should be due process. It was the
beginning of the rule of law - the most important of
the principles that underpin inclusive institutions and
accountable Government.

History teaches us that where there is an absence
of inclusivity, the rule of law and political pluralism,
instability and possibly conflict will inevitably ensue.
Conflicts erupt for many reasons, but there is growing
evidence that the social, political and economic
marginalization of specific groups in society can be a
major driver of conflict.

In 2004, the Arab Human Development Report
warned us of "an acute deficit of freedom and good
governance" in the Arab World, and predicted that
it could lead to instability. Six years later, in 2010, a
street vendor in Tunis named Mohamed Bouazizi
set himself on fire in response to police harassment,
triggering seismic upheavals across the Arab World,
the consequences of which the Security Council is still
dealing with today. Our collective failure - as it is so
often in the Council - was not one of prediction, but
the lack of political will to take early action.

The United Kingdom's Prime Minister, David
Cameron, has consistently argued that inclusive
institutions, open societies and economies, and the
rule of law what he calls the "golden thread of
development" - are essential for countries to thrive
economically and to avoid conflict. Governments
should be the servants of their citizens, not their
masters or the servants of a narrow, powerful clique.
The Security Council should therefore reflect on how it
can support countries in developing inclusive national
institutions. I believe that there are four key challenges.

 

First, we need to be patient. There are no short-cuts
to building inclusive national institutions. The World
Bank estimates that, in a best-case scenario, making
meaningful improvements to institutions takes between
10 and 17 years. Sustained political and financial
support to institution-building is therefore critical.
The United Kingdom will do its part. Uniquely among
Group of 20 countries, we have kept our promise to
spend 0.7 per cent of our gross national income on
overseas aid, at least 30 per cent of which will be spent
in conflict-affected States. And we are now the second-
largest overall financial contributor to the United
Nations system.

Secondly, where national political institutions are
not inclusive, we must recognize that the potential for
conflict increases. In August last year, when the Council
adopted resolution 2171 (2014), on conflict prevention,
I said that the Council was designed to be a smoke
detector, not just a fire extinguisher (see S/PV.7247).
Too often we are trying to manage crises and failing
to take seriously our conflict-prevention role. We need
to do better at monitoring situations in which political
processes or institutions exclude or marginalize specific
groups. And we need to have the political will to take
appropriate early action, if necessary. We welcome
the Secretary-General's "Human Rights Up Front"
initiative, which seeks to ensure the United Nations
does all it can to help protect people at risk and those
subject to serious violations of human rights before
events escalate into armed conflict and mass atrocities.

Thirdly, the relationship between violent extremism
and the absence ofinclusivity is complex. We have seen
already this year shocking and deadly attacks in France,
Yemen, Nigeria, Iraq, Syria and Pakistan. Extremists,
by their very nature, are opposed to inclusivity. Their
narratives tend to be revolutionary, uncompromising,
elitist and exclusivist in nature. They foster a world
View based on "them" and "us". And they often seek
to exclude women and persecute minorities. We cannot
allow these ideas to take root. They are the antithesis
of fundamental United Nations values and must be
confronted.

But we must also understand better the drivers
of extremism. In some cases, marginalization and
exclusion can play a part in radicalization. In addition,
weak, fragile and conflict-affected States create a
permissive enabling environment within which violent
extremism can flourish. Effective United Nations
peacebuilding interventions can play an important role
in promoting inclusive political institutions, democratic
processes and accountable security andjustice services.
This is the best way to choke off extremist narratives.

Finally, inclusivity is meaningless without women's
active participation in political institutions, peace
negotiations and policymaking. Without women, we will
only achieve unbalanced and unsustainable peace that
ignores the needs of halfthe population. It is now nearly
15 years since the adoption of landmark resolution 1325
(2000), which for the first time recognized the unique
impact that conflict has on women, as well as the
significant contribution women can make to conflict
prevention, resolution and peacebuilding.

There has been some progress since then, but
much more needs to be done to ensure the meaningful
participation of women in all the different processes
needed when building an inclusive society. This should
include women's greater participation in elections,
peacebuilding processes and mediation. It should mean
more women in the police and security services, and
better training for armed forces and rule-of-law actors
in gender and women's rights. In that context, we
welcome the United Nations decision to commission a
global study on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which will feed into the high-level review in
October.

