Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for her briefing. The climate of violence and
impunity continues in Darfur. That is why we believe
that the Council should adopt a more active stance with
regard to follow-up of that situation in the context of
the ICC.

Chile condemns the serious crimes described in the
report of the Prosecutor of the ICC, which continue to
be investigated. Those include aerial bombardments;
attacks on civilians; sexual and gender-based violence;
attacks on human rights activists, members of civil
society and community leaders; and the kidnapping
of and attacks against those providing humanitarian
assistance and those involved in peacekeeping
operations.

The referral of this information to the Court and the
periodic reports to the Council are not sufficient. We
urge the Council to strengthen its channels for dialogue
with the Court and with the Prosecutor to enable them
to respond to the requests made of them. We reiterate
that the success of the investigations and proceedings
of the ICC require the cooperation of States in their
capacity as States parties to the Rome Statute and in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, which are the documents that underpin
resolution 1593 (2005). Unfortunately, in the case of
Darfur, the Prosecutor has repeatedly indicated to the
Council that the Sudan has failed to cooperate. Chile
reiterates its call on all States involved to cooperate
with the Court to implement its rulings.

Equally worrisome is the fact that, as the
Prosecutor has indicated, grave violations continue
to be committed within the area of competence of the
Court, in violation of the Rome Statute. It is essential
that efforts be redoubled to achieve a system in which
the rule of law and human rights are respected, while
allowing for full compliance with the obligation to
cooperate with the Court and the Prosecutor in order to
put an end to all cases of impunity.

The Council has addressed the humanitarian
situation in Darfur on many occasions. We call for the
implementation of the relevant resolutions that followed
resolution 1593 (2005), which referred the situation to
the Court and highlighted the need for a cessation of
violence against civilians, in particular women and
children. We reiterate our call for all ofthose resolutions
be fully implemented.

We would like to conclude by reaffirming the value
of the work of the Court, in particular the work of
Prosecutor Bensouda.

