Mr. Kolby (Norway): Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
have again presented a thorough and detailed report of
the work of the weapons inspectors and their findings.

It is positive that Iraq is now cooperating more
actively and that there has been some progress in the
inspections. The destruction of the Al Samoud 2
missiles is encouraging. This progress is a result of a
united and firm stand by the international community.
It confirms that the pressure on Iraq must be
maintained.

We deeply regret, however, that Iraq has not been
cooperating with the inspectors, as required by
resolution 1441 (2002). The Iraqi cooperation with the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has not been
immediate, unconditional and active. The inspectors
have not received the information necessary to draw
conclusions about Iraqi possession of weapons of mass
destruction.

In this situation, the inspections should continue,
as long as they can produce meaningful and concrete
results. At the same time, it is important to set a time
limit and clear criteria for Iraq to comply with
resolution 1441 (2002). The inspections cannot go on
indefinitely. The time limit must be short and precise,
but achievable.

There is still a possibility to achieve the peaceful
disarmament of Iraq. That is what Norway will
continue to work for. Much is at stake. The onus is now
on Iraq. This is the last opportunity to reach a peaceful
outcome. Iraq must not miss this opportunity.

We know that the United Nations agencies are
preparing for a possible humanitarian crisis in Iraq in
the event of a military conflict. Norway stands ready to
fully contribute to those efforts. In such humanitarian
operations, the United Nations must be given a leading
and coordinating role.

In the present situation it is essential that the
Security Council stands united in its efforts to disarm
Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction. We urge all
members of the Council to stand up to their
responsibility. This is crucial for the role of this
Council, for the people of Iraq and for the maintenance
of international peace and security.

