Mr. De Gucht: First, I would like to thank all
representatives that intervened in the debate for their
support for the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and for my country's
chairmanship this year.

Slovakia had a question concerning the frozen
conflict in Kosovo. With respect to frozen conflicts,
the OSCE is certainly in the driver's seat with respect
to South Ossetia. We hope that our initial judgement -
that this frozen conflict may be ripe for treatment - is
correct.

The same is probably true of Nagorno-Karabakh,
where the OSCE is present through the Minsk Group.
It is foreseen that the Presidents of Armenia and
Azerbaijan will meet in the course of February. Even
before that meeting, I will go to the region and hold
meetings with the Presidents of both countries to
prepare their discussion.

The frozen conflict of Moldova-Transdniestria is
very complicated. What the OSCE should attempt to do
there is twofold. First, we should have a road map for
how to include Transdniestria in a federal set-up of
Moldova. Second, we should create the conditions that
allow for the removal of all foreign troops from
Transdniestrian soil.

As for Kosovo, the Security Council has
appointed Mr. Martti Ahtisaari as the chief negotiator
for the status of Kosovo. I have already met him, twice,
and will continue to do so after my visit to the region
later in February. We met on Friday in Vienna.
Mr. Ahtisaari put a lot of emphasis on the role of the
OSCE from now until an eventual agreement on status,
as well as afterwards. In addition, in the intermediate
period, the role of the OSCE will be very important,
because it is the organization with the most
representatives and the most people on the ground. We
are represented down to the level of the smallest
village in Kosovo and in those parts of Kosovo where
the problem of the Serb minorities is very prominent.
We are working very closely with Mr. Ahtisaari and his
people. And we are of the opinion that it would be very
welcome if the OSCE were given all the tools to fulfil
that very important task.

With respect to frozen conflicts, there is not only
the question of their resolution, as such. There is also
the environment. In that connection, the economic
dimension, for example, surfaces again. Cross-border
cooperation and economic development are very
important. That means that if those conflicts are to be
resolved, the OSCE should be there for the long term
to establish fully fledged modern societies in those
regions.

Another question came from Greece, on the
unequal treatment of the three baskets within the
OSCE. That remark has been made repeatedly. I think
it is to the benefit of the OSCE that we should try to re-
equilibrate the relations between the three baskets.
That is why we will strengthen OSCE action in the
economic basket, also at the demand of several
participating States with very concrete proposals such
as the promotion of regional cooperation in the field of
transportation. In particular, we would like to introduce
the cooperation dynamics of the Stability Pact of the
Balkans at the OSCE level.
Then there was a question by the representative
of Argentina on the future role of the OSCE. The
future role of the OSCE depends, of course, on the
participating States, at least to the extent that they give
us opportunities to play that role so that we will be in a
position to do so. Sometimes there is hesitation. What
we would like to do during our chairmanship-in-office
is to create an environment that allows all participating
States to cooperate fully within the OSCE. That also
means that the OSCE should acquire more political
prominence than was the case in the recent past.

With regard to the question by the representative
of the United States of America regarding the Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
(ODIHR), we are of the opinion that the monitoring of
elections is a very valuable contribution to peace,
stability, modernization and democracy in the region.
Recently, there has been much discussion on the role of
ODIHR. That is why, by means of negotiations in
Ljubljana, which took quite a long time, we came to an
agreement on a road map for how to evaluate ODIHR
in the year to come. On the basis of that document,
ODIHR will present a self-evaluation and will put
questions to all participating States. On the basis of
that, a report will be elaborated that will be discussed
openly at the next ministerial meeting, in Ljubljana.
In preparing the discussion for that ministerial
conference - which will in fact be centred on ODIHR
and the chairmanship-in-office - I intend to create
conditions that will give ODIHR every opportunity to
carry out its very important task, as well as to strive to
achieve a consensus among all participating States on
how to put this into practice effectively.

