Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Ijoin other speakers in
thanking the Secretary-General for his statement to the
Council this morning. I also wish to welcome to the
Council the President of Timor-Leste and thank him for
his comprehensive address.

The comments of the Secretary-General as well
as those of President Ramos-Horta point to two
important facts: the fact that steady progress is being
made in Timor-Leste but that a lot more remains to be
done, and the fact that the unwavering support of the
international community, particularly the United
Nations, is still necessary. While we have to do more,
we have to consolidate the success achieved so far.

We are pleased to note that progress has been
made in the most critical aspects that will speed up
self-governance and administration in Timor-Leste,
especially the continued stabilization of the security
situation. There is no doubt that the completion of
security sector reform will be an important springboard
for the long-term stability and socio-economic
development of Timor-Leste.

We particularly welcome the success achieved in
the area of national dialogue and reconciliation. It is
encouraging to note that the issue of internal
displacement has been addressed with the priority it
deserves, leading to the accelerated return of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) to their homes, and without
incidents affecting their reintegration. We are happy to
note that the remaining IDP camps will be closed soon.
Uganda, as a country in the process of resettling IDPs
and reconstructing the northern part of the country
after the brutal insurgency of the Lord's Resistance
Army, attaches great importance to the issue of
resettling IDPs so that they can lead normal and
productive lives.

Uganda appreciates the personal interest in and
commitment of President Ramos-Horta to establishing
a framework for dialogue. The signing of a
memorandum of understanding between the Office of
the President and the Centre for Humanitarian
Dialogue, with a view to establishing a formal dialogue
process for achieving consensus on important national
matters, is an important cornerstone of the future
stability of the country.

We believe that real stability in the country will
not be realized until there is meaningful progress in the
law and order sector, with the Government and people
of Timor-Leste assuming full law enforcement
responsibilities. In this regard, every effort should be
made to speed up the capacity development and
empowerment of the Timorese police, as well as its
institutional capacity to undertake this responsibility.
We note that benchmarks have been agreed upon for
the gradual transfer of policing activities to the
Timorese National Police. We hope that, with
continued support from the international community,
these benchmarks will be achieved in timely manner.

The completion of the development of the
medium-term strategy and its benchmarks is a very
welcome development. The execution of the strategy
will require the commitment of all parties involved,
including the international community. We welcome
the active participation of Timorese authorities in its
development, and trust that it will receive the support
of all the parties and people of Timor-Leste.

In conclusion, Uganda is convinced that the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend
UNMIT's mandate for a further 12 months, at the
current composition and strength, is a reasonable one.
Uganda is ready to support it.

