Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix and Ms. Pramila Patten,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, for their briefings to the
Security Council today. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Wronecka for her briefing and for her
professional leadership of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning
South Sudan.

Three months have passed since the signing of
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, which was
a watershed moment in returning South Sudan to a
path to peace and stability. We again commend the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
facilitators for that achievement. We are now seeing
promising steps being taken to implement it, albeit
behind schedule, and progress being made on the
various pre-transitional institutions and mechanisms.
We are also encouraged by signs that the ceasefire
has been upheld in most parts of South Sudan. I note
the assessment by the United Nations that the security
situation has significantly improved. The efforts by the
South Sudan People's Defence Forces and the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition to
open direct communication lines have contributed to
important confidence-building measures.

What is needed now is sustained political will on the
part of the parties to implement what has been agreed
on, including making progress on a comprehensive
agreement on security arrangements and engaging in
genuine peacebuilding and reconciliation. We agree
with the point made earlier today by the representative
of Ethiopia that it is now important to ensure that
the Council remains actively engaged in support of
the region, acting firmly on shortcomings but also,
and importantly, recognizing and acknowledging
progress when it is made. The Council can do better
at recognizing progress as a means of contributing to
further progress.

The peace process remains fragile, however, and
fighting has continued in some parts of the country, with
unacceptable consequences for civilians. A complete
cessation of hostilities by all parties, the Government
and armed groups alike, must be unconditional in order
to enable a meaningful political process as we move
forward. There must be consequences for violations
of the Agreement. We welcome the region's continued
engagement in monitoring its implementation and hope
that a new Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission will be appointed soon. Holding the parties
to account will be vital, and the United Nations and the
African Union must continue to support and engage in
the regional effort. As we advance the political process,
it will be essential to ensure the effective participation
of all stakeholders, including women, young people
and civil society. Gender issues are central to peace
and security, and we call on the parties to ensure that
the 35 per cent quota for women outlined in the peace
agreement is met, not just at the national and State level
but for all pre-transitional and transitional structures.

We welcome Special Representative Patten's
engagement on South Sudan and thank her for her
efforts to break the cycle of impunity for sexual and
gender-based violence. I almost choked listening
to her moving accounts of the heinous sexual and
gender-based attacks on women near Bentiu in recent
weeks, which must be condemned in the strongest
terms. We very much welcome the Council's swift and
clear statement (SC/13611) on those incidents, which
underline the critical importance of taking firm action
to advance accountability and bring those responsible
to justice, which in itselfis also a way to prevent further
such attacks. The transitional justice mechanisms of
the peace agreement, including the Hybrid Court, are
important in that regard, and the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) must be given access to
investigate alleged human rights violations and abuses.
In the face of such horrific acts of sexual violence
against women and girls as reported from Bentiu, the
Council must also act and consider targeted measures
against those responsible, in line with the stand-alone
sanctions criteria on sexual and gender-based violence.
We fully agree with Special Representative Patten
that we must raise the costs and consequences for
committing, commanding and condoning such crimes,
so as to end the prevailing impunity, which is a driver
of sexual violence today.

We remain very concerned about the grave
humanitarian situation, which is affected directly
and indirectly by the conflict. We call on the parties,
particularly the Transitional Government of National
Unity, to address the dangerous conditions facing
humanitarian workers. All impediments to the rapid,
safe and unhindered delivery of relief across South
Sudan must be removed. We commend the efforts of
UNMISS, the World Health Organization and other
humanitarian partners to conduct Ebola preparedness
contingency planning in response to the outbreak in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Attacks on health
care continue to be reported from South Sudan. We
must redouble our efforts to implement the UNMISS
mandate and resolution 2286 (2016). The Arria Formula
meeting to be held on Friday will be an opportunity to
further discuss the matter with representatives of the
Sudan and other affected countries.

We fully agree with Ambassador Wronecka's
assessment of her visit earlier this year, which is very
similar to the conclusions that Ambassador Skoog
arrived at following his Visit last month in his capacity
as Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. We also very much appreciate her efforts
to ensure the immediate release of all child soldiers,
as the conflict in South Sudan has had a devastating
effect on children there. The shocking recruitment and
use of children by armed groups or forces must come
to an end. Only today the Working Group adopted its
conclusions on children and armed conflict in South
Sudan, in which we welcomed the peace Agreement as
an opportunity to turn a corner and make the protection
of children a priority as the country moves forward.

In conclusion, as the implementation of the
Agreement is now heading in the right direction,
upholding that momentum will be crucial. All parties
must sustain their political will and make every effort
to translate commitments into reality. That also holds
true for the Security Council, which must remain
closely and constructively engaged and continue to
offer its united and active support to regional efforts.

