Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, on behalf of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, I thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for having illustrated for us the chaotic and
dangerous situation currently prevailing in the Middle
East by providing a detailed overview of every one of
the conflicts in that vulnerable region, from Libya to
the desolate and devastating crisis in Syria, which,
as all evidence suggests, runs the imminent risk of
dramatically deteriorating.

In line with the statement of the Secretary-
General, we reaffirm Equatorial Guinea's firm
belief that in confronting such situations we must
always have recourse to dialogue and establish and
respect mechanisms intended for achieving the
peaceful settlement of conflicts until such options are
exhausted. A unilateral military response could be
counterproductive, and, far from solving the problem,
it would lead to more suffering and chaos than already
present, as the Secretary-General indicated - and
additional disorder as in case of Libya, with which we
are well familiar in Africa, and the consequences of
which affect the entire Sahel region and part of Central
Africa. We stand categorically against the use of force
with the sole exception that it be justified under the
conditions set forth under the Charter of the United
Nations Charter and that it be used as a last resort after
all other means have been exhausted.

We are concerned about the rhetoric that is
being used. It sounds dangerously familiar to us, and
we do not like where it might lead us. We appeal to
Governments' sense of responsibility, and in particular
to the permanent members of the Security Council, as
we believe that they have the additional responsibility
of defending the relevance of the Council.

We would like to ask the following questions. Who
benefits from the inability of the Security Council to
make decisions? Are we contributing to delegitimizing
the Council? Are we actively eroding the Council's
relevance in the international political arena? If the
Council is unable to take action, how long will it take
before the international community withdraws its faith,
hope and trust in the Council?

There is no military solution to the Syrian issue.
We must therefore continue to look for ways to solve
the problem through diplomatic channels. All Council
members must act responsibly and agree to establish
an independent and impartial monitoring mechanism
to ascertain what took place in Douma and ensure
accountability and that the perpetrators are brought
to justice.
The Secretary-General stated his disappointment
with the Council's failure to establish a mechanism
that would identify and attribute responsibility to those
using chemical weapons. We could not agree more with
that statement. Only a few days ago, our delegation
stated its frustration when the Council failed to adopt
three draft resolution put to the vote (see S/PV.8228).
The Secretary-General's offer concerning his good
offices must be considered, and we must provide him
with that opportunity.

In conclusion, we reiterate the position of
Equatorial Guinea in arguing against and condemning
the use of chemical weapons and other weapons ofmass
destruction regardless of who uses them.

