Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States welcomes and strongly supports the
extension of the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
Today's decision demonstrates the Security Council's
sustained support for the UNAMID peacekeeping
operation and for its mission to protect the vulnerable
civilians of Darfur.
The United States abstained in the voting because
the language added to the resolution would send the
wrong signal to Sudanese President Al-Bashir and
undermine efforts to bring him and others to justice.

This Council cannot ignore the terrible crimes
that have occurred throughout the conflict in Darfur
and the massive human suffering that the world has
witnessed. The Council addressed that tragic situation

when it adopted resolution 1593 (2005), and the United
States at that time noted the importance that we have
attached and that we continue to attach to the Council's
role in connection with investigations and prosecutions
of the International Criminal Court (ICC). As is well
known, the United States abstained in the voting on
that resolution in the light of our concerns about the
ICC, but, as we said when resolution 1593 (2005) was
adopted,

"We strongly support bringing to justice
those responsible for the crimes and atrocities
that have occurred in Darfur and ending the
climate of impunity there. Violators of
international humanitarian law and human rights
law must be held accountable." (S/PV.5]58, p. 3)

Having said that, I would like to make four points
concerning our continued strong support for UNAMID.

First, the United States is increasingly concerned
about the situation on the ground and will remain
vigilant to the situation in Darfur. We are prepared to
take additional measures as necessary to ensure that
UNAMID deploys rapidly and completely and is
empowered to fulfil its mandate.

Secondly, we deeply regret that, one year after
the adoption of resolution 1769 (2007), UNAMID has
barely begun to complete its vital mission. Deployment
now stands at just over 9,000 troops and police
officers - not even half of authorized levels.
UNAMID's slow deployment is seriously interfering
with its ability to protect itself and to fulfil its mandate
in Darfur. The Security Council has sought to end the
suffering of the people of Darfur, but we have fallen
far short of our responsibility to protect them. We
appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General, the
troop contributors and the donors that are assisting
them, but we must do better and we must do more. The
lives of United Nations peacekeepers and of millions
of innocent civilians depend on it. We urge all parties
to redouble their efforts to ensure UNAMID's prompt,
complete and effective deployment.

The United States is cooperating wholeheartedly
in that endeavour through our work to train and equip
peacekeepers to UNAMID's standards. We will
continue to seek new avenues for providing concrete
assistance to UNAMID's full and rapid deployment.
We urge the United Nations to redouble its efforts to
construct suitable infrastructure for rapid UNAMID
expansion and to ship contingent-owned equipment to

Darfur as quickly as possible. We urge the United
Nations to consider all options at its disposal to
improve performance on those key points, the slow
progress of which continues to hinder UNAMID
deployment and operations.

Thirdly, we call on the Government of the Sudan
to make every effort to facilitate UNAMID's
deployment. We demand that the Government of the
Sudan accept all troop contributions without
reservations and in the order in which UNAMID
commanders deem it feasible to deploy them. We
demand that the Government of the Sudan comply
fully with all Security Council resolutions, with the
terms of the status-of-forces agreement and with all
agreements pertaining to UNAMID. The Government
of the Sudan must ensure UNAMID's free and secure
movement in fulfilment of its mandate. All attacks on
UNAMID personnel are unacceptable and will not be
tolerated. We must hold the Government of the Sudan
responsible for the safety and security of UNAMID
and its personnel.

Fourthly, the United States will continue to keep
a constant eye on the peace process and take all
measures necessary to support it. We urge all of the
parties to the conflict in Darfur to reach a lasting
settlement. UNAMID must fulfil its mission in tandem
with a viable peace process if there is to be an end to
the terrible suffering in Darfur.

