Mr. Goren (Israel): Listening to some of the
speakers today, I am reminded of Winston Churchill,
who said, "A lie gets halfway around the world before
the truth has a chance to get its pants on". I will attempt
to give truth a fighting chance in my short reply.

I would like to emphasize that the delegations that
have praised the Abbas-Hamas unity agreement, which
in its essence has forsaken the Quartet principles,
have legitimized the path of terror over the path of
peace. May I remind everyone that those principles are
recognizing the State of Israel without prejudging what
various grievances or claims are appropriate, abiding
by previous diplomatic agreements, and renouncing
violence as a means of achieving goals.

In recent months, we have a seen a well-orchestrated
and dangerous political campaign on the issue of
Jerusalem on the part of a number of Arab delegations,
the League of Arab States and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation. The accusations made earlier
today by those delegations are a continuation of those
false charges and a distortion of the truth with no real
basis in reality. Let me be clear. Israel will respect and
grant full religious rights to people of all faiths, and
Jerusalem is an open city to all religions. With Sunnis,
Shiites and Alawites massacring each other, with
Christians fleeing the region year after year, Israel
remains an exception in a region that is embarrassingly
intolerant.

It is truly absurd to hear some of the world's most
oppressive regimes lecture the Middle East's only true
democracy. For example, Saudi Arabia's policy towards
women, gays and minorities is notorious throughout the
entire world. I do not think anyone in this Chamber can
take seriously any criticism by the Saudi representative
on the issues of human rights and intolerance.

The representative of Lebanon began her talk with
a poetic but wrong description of life in Jerusalem.
I would be happy to invite her for a visit to see the
real Jerusalem in all its beauty and freedom, but I am
worried that intolerance and bigotry in her own country
would not allow it. Perhaps Lebanon should consider
toning down its rhetoric and turning up the heat on the
Hizbullah terrorist organization, which has amassed an
arsenal of over 60,000 rockets in populated areas. That
is tantamount to a double war crime.

Finally, it is unfortunate that a major State in
our region, which is vying for a leadership role, has
decided yet again to adopt an unconstructive approach
and demonize the only democracy in the Middle East.
It takes a great deal of audacity on the part of that
country's representative to criticize Israel, given that
sectarian tensions, violence, killings and religious
intolerance in his country are on the rise. "Denial is not
just the name of a river."

