Ms. Loj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The countries
of Central and Eastern Europe associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta, Turkey, as well as the country of the
European Economic Area that is a member of the
European Free Trade Association - Iceland - align
themselves with this statement.

First permit me to congratulate you, Sir, on
China's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. Allow me also to commend the presidency of
the Security Council on convening this open meeting
on the important final report of the Panel of Experts on
the Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The EU would like to underline the importance of
discussing the economic aspects of conflicts in general
and especially the connections between political and
economic dynamics in conflict situations. We therefore
welcome an open and transparent debate regarding the
problems of resource exploitation. The European Union
welcomes the final report and commends the Panel of
Experts for its investigations and recommendations. The
EU is looking forward to the outcome of the debate in
the Security Council on the report.

The situation described in the report is most
disturbing. The economic aspects of the conflict, and
especially the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
have fuelled the conflict and increased the human
suffering. The conflict has dramatic consequences for
the civilian population of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, especially in the eastern parts. The
continuation of these illegal economic activities
constitutes a serious obstacle to a peaceful resolution
of the conflict. This is unacceptable by all moral,
ethical and political standards.

Parties to the conflict at all levels have, according
to the report, taken part in the illegal exploitation.
Governments, Government officials, including army
officers, local administrations, individuals, armed
groups and companies have been involved. The report
claims that elite networks continue the illegal
exploitation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
despite the positive political and military dynamic
created by the agreements of Pretoria and Luanda and
despite the two previous reports from the United
Nations Panel of Experts. We therefore welcome the
fact that the Governments accused of this can take the
floor here to defend themselves. If the claims are true,
however, this activity must be strongly condemned
from all sides and stopped.

Evidently, combating such well-organized
exploitation will not be simple. It will require
consolidated action by the international community and
national Governments, both in the Great Lakes region
and elsewhere, based on a process of thorough
consideration and analysis. The conclusions and
recommendations of the Panel's report will be an
important input into this process.

The report suggests the creation of forceful
incentives and disincentives to change the present
patterns of illegal exploitation. Investments and
exploitation of resources in a legal and sustainable way
should be encouraged, thereby contributing to the
economic stability of the whole region and benefiting
the population at large. The European Union agrees
that the international community must undertake efforts
to fight those illegal practices and put pressure on those
involved in these activities.

We must focus on how to control the utilization
of natural resources. Securing the national borders of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is an important
step in this regard. Furthermore, the European Union
will closely examine the recommendations listed in the
report regarding putting financial and technical
measures in place, the need for institutional reform and
ensuring a peace dividend. Full implementation of the
Lusaka Agreement will create an environment
conducive to international investments and further
development assistance.

The EU echoes the report's call on national
Governments of all countries where individuals,
companies and financial institutions involved in illegal
activities are based to assume their part of the
responsibility. They should ensure that those
individuals and entities are made accountable, while
ensuring them the right and the opportunity to defend
themselves against the accusations.

The European Union considers it important that
Governments urge private enterprises to adhere to the
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises.
The EU stresses the importance of the Kimberley
Process, which aims at organizing the certificates of
origin system in the diamond sector.

Restrictions on certain business enterprises and
individuals may be necessary to curb the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The European Union is ready
to assist the Security Council in that regard.

The European Union shares the analysis that the
establishment of an inclusive, transitional Government
in Kinshasa is very important. The EU has
continuously called upon all Congolese parties to reach
an all-inclusive agreement on power-sharing and
transitional institutions.

The EU also supports the conclusion that all rebel
groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
should be disarmed and all foreign forces withdrawn,
in accordance with existing peace agreements. The EU
has constantly reminded all parties to the conflict of
their obligations in that regard.

The EU is considering the Panel's call to hold an
international conference on peace, security, democracy
and sustainable development in the Great Lakes region.
Such a conference could provide a platform for
addressing a number of the cross-border challenges of
importance to the conflict. Furthermore, it could
address issues concerning the future stability and
development of the region, including strengthened
regional integration and cooperation. The European
Union stands ready to discuss cooperation with the
countries of the region, the United Nations and the
African Union on such a conference.

The EU supports the recommendation to establish
a monitoring mechanism.

Allow me to conclude by reaffirming the
commitment of the European Union to contribute to
bringing an end to the illegal exploitation of the
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The EU will continuously engage in cooperation with
the countries of the region and the international
community to secure peace, stability, democracy and
sustainable development in the Great Lakes region.

