Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, Jan Kubis, for his statement. Over
the past three years, Special Representative Kubis has
provided the leadership and the vision that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
has needed. We also appreciate his recent visits to
Pakistan. Let me also thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin
for his statement.

Pakistan supports a peaceful democratic transition
in Afghanistan. We have pursued a policy of neutrality,
stressing that the elections are an Afghan affair.
Members may recall that we enhanced security along
the border during the two rounds. The completion of
the electoral process in a credible and timely manner
will, we hope, bring about a stronger, more stable and
unified Afghanistan. We welcome all sincere efforts
aimed at promoting understanding between the two
presidential candidates. Pakistan has repeatedly
affirmed its commitment to working with whoever
emerges as the democratic choice ofthe Afghan people.

Pakistan and Afghanistan agree that terrorism
is a common enemy and on the need to strengthen
cooperation and coordination to deal with that common
menace. Pakistan, as members know, is making a
resolute and stern effort against terrorists and their
hideouts through our military operation Zarb-e-Azb.
We expect all possible cooperation from the Afghan
Government to take measures to eliminate terrorist
sanctuaries on their side. Regrettably, we have seen
a proliferation of cross-border attacks into Pakistan
over the past few months. That has been coupled
with unsubstantiated allegations. Our constructive
engagement will, we hope, help build trust. We also
remain committed to working on the economic, trade
and energy linkages envisaged in Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif's prosperous neighbourhood strategy.

We agree with the Secretary-General's assessment
that the Afghan economy is a source of grave
concern. Economic decline would have an impact
on everything - reconstruction, security, refugee
repatriation and peace and stability. It is important that
the international community recommit to supporting
Afghanistan at the London Conference later this year.
"Predictability" and "continuity" are the key words.
Strengthening the capacity of the Afghan National
Security Forces (ANSF) is essential for dealing with
the security challenges pertaining to the situation post-
2014. It is reassuring that the international community,
at the NATO Summit in Wales, reaffirmed its continuing
engagement with Afghanistan through pledges of
increased financial support to the ANSF. We also
believe that sustainable peace is not possible without
comprehensive national reconciliation. We hope that
proper attention will be paid to an inclusive Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace process. That is an essential
pillar of stability that cannot be indefinitely ignored.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2014/656)
mentions the declining rate of refugee return. We hope
that Afghanistan will work on creating the pull factors
necessary for the sustainable return of Afghan refugees.
Another issue of concern for us is the illicit economy.
We agree with the Secretary-General that it has been
both a symptom and a source of uncertainty.

Pakistan continues to be constructively engaged
with regional and international efforts for Afghanistan's
stability and development. We appreciate the wise
leadership that China is providing for the Istanbul
Process and look forward to the ministerial conference
in Tianjin.

In the end, a peaceful and stable Afghanistan is
in Pakistan's vital interest. We recommit ourselves
to supporting all endeavours in the cause of peace,
stability and the development of the country.

