Thank you to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the report (S/2020/239) and his briefing today and to Mr. David Santiago Cano Salazar for his inspiring and wide-ranging briefing on reintegration. I very much look forward to the coffee that we have promised. Let me also welcome Foreign Minister Blum de Barberi to the Security Council today. Let me start with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which is on our minds as we look across the range of Security Council business. I will begin by saying to the Minister that we very much recognize the challenge that this crisis poses to Colombia. It was therefore heartening to hear your Government's assurances in the President's "stay at home" message of 24 March that the implementation of the peace agreement will continue and to see the measures implemented jointly by the parties to limit the spread of the virus and ensure continued service provision for former combatants. Let me also say that we welcomed the announcement of a unilateral ceasefire by the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional. The group's fulfilment of this commitment would facilitate efforts to address the COVID-19 pandemic, potentially and hopefully representing a step towards constructive engagement around a lasting peace. In addition, let me also express appreciation to you, Mr. Ruiz Massieu, and to your team for all your efforts to continue and adapt your work in the face of the COVID-19 challenge. We have also seen progress on implementation of the peace agreement. The continued roll-out of the development programmes with a territorial focus demonstrates the Government's commitment to working with local authorities to ensure that implementation reaches conflict-affected areas. Similarly, local authorities' own incorporation of peace-related considerations into their development plans is encouraging. Furthermore, reintegration of former members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) continues, including efforts to ensure sustainability of reintegration processes both in and outside the former territorial areas for training and reintegration, and we hope to see further efforts on the outstanding issues of access to land and the needs of women former combatants. It was heartening to hear from Mr. Cano Salazar about his personal experience of some of those issues. How important and impressive it was to hear about one community's adaptability to COVID-19 by creating face masks to help tackle the crisis. Finally, let me welcome the ongoing activity by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, especially to increase the participation of victims in its proceedings; we hope the pace of its important work can be maintained. However, I should also note some areas of concern that require urgent efforts in order to build on progress made. First, as we have mentioned in previous meetings, we are seriously concerned about the continuously rising numbers of killings of human rights defenders and other activists, including women leaders. I think we all remember our visit to Colombia last year and the real concerns over safety that were expressed to us by the community leaders whom we met. That was an overwhelming takeaway from our visit. Now, the launch of the action plan under the comprehensive programme to safeguard women leaders and human rights defenders was a positive step towards addressing this issue. We recognize that COVID-19 may necessitate adjustments to the plan, but we urge the Government to be flexible and to ensure that the plan soon becomes reality, especially as individuals who rightly stay at home to combat COVID-19 are potentially more easily targeted for attack. Similarly, protection measures for former FARC-EP combatants inside and outside former territorial areas for training and reintegration should be strengthened, as that population continues to face security issues. I think this is reputational for Colombia. Secondly, while we recognize the many challenges involved in implementation, we also note that mechanisms to address many of these challenges already exist. The National Commission on Security Guarantees is one such mechanism, and we encourage its more frequent convening and engagement with civil society. Use of other mechanisms for dialogue between the parties would also ensure that disagreements are constructively addressed and overcome and would send a positive signal to all stakeholders about the parties' credible commitment. Lastly, the Special Representative's report emphasizes the need to keep communities at the heart of implementation. That means ensuring community participation, from process design through to implementation and follow-up and from rural reform and development plans to crop substitution and security. Local authorities, civil society - including women's organizations - and other community stakeholders have been most affected by conflict. They are also a source of local knowledge, capacity and commitment. It therefore makes sense for them to be at the centre of efforts to secure and sustain peace. Let me conclude by saying that, in these uncertain times, the United Kingdom recognizes that the challenges Colombia faces are great. We need to retain this bright spot on our agenda. But this means that the need for lasting and inclusive peace is even greater. The United Kingdom continues to support the Colombian Government in its efforts to achieve this crucial goal.
