Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, let me thank
our briefers, Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock, for
their comprehensive briefings.

We very much welcome the encouraging signs of
hope for the political process referred to by Martin
Griffiths, while we recognize that these signs are
still extremely fragile. We welcome the fact that
concrete steps have been taken in the last days and
weeks that have led to a positive change. We welcome
the announcement by the Houthis to suspend missile
attacks on Saudi Arabia, which has been followed by
a reduction in the number of attacks and by the release
of several hundred prisoners. These are steps in the
right direction, and we hope that they will contribute
to building confidence among the parties and open the
door for re-engagement in the political process.

We would also like to commend the ongoing talks
in Jeddah facilitated by Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates. We welcome the significant progress
achieved so far and hope for the swift and successful
conclusion of the talks. This dialogue is an important
contribution to the political process and underlines
the importance of an inclusive approach to a broader
political framework agreement. The preservation
of the territorial integrity of Yemen should be an
underlying principle of the talks. In addition, we
support the Special Envoy's continued efforts to build
confidence among the parties, in particular with regard
to the port of Al-Hudaydah, the use of revenues and the
Sana'a airport.

With regard to the broader consultations, the
process must be inclusive, as many speakers have
mentioned before me, and involve women, youth, civil
society and different regional groups. The failure to
fully implement the Stockholm Agreement - a failure
that we deplore - must not prevent the parties from
participating in the Special Envoy's process towards a
broader political settlement to finally end the conflict
without any further delay. We call on all actors to
engage constructively with the proposals presented by
the Special Envoy. Let me also mention that Germany
remains committed to playing its part in supporting
the political process wherever we can, for example, by
facilitating meetings at different levels.

Turning to the humanitarian and human rights
situation, which is obviously still extremely dire, I
would like to begin by referring to the report of the
Independent Group in Geneva, which shows that
basic human rights are constantly being violated by
all parties involved in the conflict. There is no excuse
for killing, torturing or abusing innocent people, and
all parties need to comply with their responsibilities
under human rights law. The perpetrators must be held
accountable for their crimes. In that context, we would
also find it useful to hear from the Group of Eminent
Experts directly.

As for the humanitarian situation, Mr. Lowcock's
briefing was very clear, and we urge the parties to
the conflict to facilitate safe, rapid and unhindered
humanitarian assistance in compliance with
resolution 2451 (2018) and to fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law. Commenting
very briefly on the first three priorities outlined by
Mr. Lowcock, let me start by saying that, first and
foremost, we have to ensure the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure, for it is the most vulnerable,
in particular women and children, who feel the impact of
war the most. I do not want to go into further detail, but
the 30 active front lines Mr. Lowcock mentioned speak
for themselves. It is good that the situation in October
was slightly better than in previous months, but, of
course, the overall picture remains extremely grim.

Secondly, on the issue of access, we are seeing an
increasingly restrictive environment, especially in the
north, to the extent that humanitarian actors are not able
to provide principled humanitarian assistance to people
in dire need. Over 5 million people cannot be reached
as a result of restrictions on access. For that reason,
we urge all parties to facilitate unhindered access
for humanitarian assistance and reduce bureaucratic
impediments. We call upon all parties to refrain from
interfering with humanitarian assistance in a way that
goes against the humanitarian principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence.

Thirdly, on the funding of humanitarian operations,
we very much welcome the recent disbursements by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates
and Kuwait of the funding pledged in Geneva. With
these generous contributions, further pipeline breaks
have been averted, and funding for the majority of
humanitarian programmes was secured at the very last
minute. In order to ensure reliable assistance, we call
upon all donors to provide funding that is as flexible
as possible, in a timely manner and without conditions.

Let me also touch upon on our concern that the
United Nations has still not been granted access to the
abandoned floating storage and offloading facility,
the FSO SAFER oil tanker, in Al-Hudaydah. We must
not allow a potential oil spill that would lead to an
unprecedented environmental disaster in the Red Sea
to happen, and we call on all actors, especially the
Houthis, to allow the United Nations assessment team
to access the tanker. On a more general note, Germany
calls on all parties involved in the conflict to ensure the
freedom of movement of all United Nations personnel
so that they can carry out their task.

