Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I would first like to thank the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Secretary- General of the League
of Arab States, Mr. Aboul Gheit, for their informative
briefings. I also extend a warm welcome to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Poland.

Regional cooperation is one of the pillars of
Belgium's foreign policy. We therefore welcome
this opportunity to discuss within the Council the
cooperation between the United Nations and the League
of Arab States. In the same spirit, the European Union
met with the League of Arab States in February.

The Arab world is currently facing many challenges,
ranging from conflicts in some of its countries to
thematic challenges, such as the preservation and
management of water resources. The conflicts in Syria,
Yemen and Libya, as well as the stalemate in the Middle
East peace process, have considerably destabilized
the region and strongly exacerbated tensions among
its States and putting its security at serious risk, as
evidenced today by the serious incidents in the Gulf of
Oman. The internationalization of these conflicts also
jeopardizes international peace and security, of which
the Council is the guarantor.

The region is stronger when it speaks with one
voice. The widespread support of the region for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East is a good example, as is the
support of the Arab world for maintaining the two-State
solution in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Given the
gravity and the complex and multidimensional nature
of the challenges faced, strengthened dialogue and
collaboration within the League of Arab States, as well
as between the League of Arab States and the Security
Council, are of critical importance. We therefore
support the request to convene the Security Council
and the League of Arab States at regular intervals, as is
the case with other regional organizations, such as the
European Union and the African Union.

Belgium has made conflict prevention one of its
priorities. As the Secretary-General points out in his
report on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations (S/2018/592), the latter
have a key role to play in conflict prevention, which is
also the case for the League of Arab States. Belgium
supports efforts to strengthen that dimension. A joint
analysis and common early warning mechanisms are
essential instruments in that regard. In that context, we
welcome the announcement of the opening of a United
Nations liaison office to the League of Arab States in
Cairo.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States must also be guided by the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The root
causes, as well as socioeconomic inequalities, must be
addressed without delay. In addition, respect for human
rights, inclusive governance and the rule of law must
be the thread of that cooperation. It is also essential
to ensure the meaningful participation of women and
young people.

Belgium will continue to give its full support to
strengthening and deepening the existing synergies
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States, with the common objective of contributing
to stability and the search for peace, as well as the
promotion of multilateralism and a global order based
on the rule of law.

