Mr. Haque (Pakistan): I would like to begin by
expressing our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I am confident that today's debate will
create greater awareness among Member States of the
United Nations about the gravity and complexity of the
problem and the need to address it on a priority basis.

It is matter of grave concern for Pakistan and for the
international community as a whole that violence against
civilians in situations of armed conflict has reached
dangerous proportions. In most cases this violence is
directed against women, children and other vulnerable
groups, including internally displaced persons. The statistics
contained in the report of the Secretary-General are indeed
staggering. The fact that civilian casualties account for
almost 80 per cent of the total number of victims of armed
conflict and that more than one million people die each
year in various conflict areas around the world are
extremely disturbing. It is also a painful reality that there
are more than 30 million refugees in the world. Pakistan
itself has carried the burden of millions of Afghan
refugees on its soil for more than two decades and is only
too keenly aware of the plight of people who are forced
to leave their countries. We therefore condemn
unequivocally the targeting of civilians in armed conflicts.

Unfortunately, civilians are subjected to violence
despite the existence of a substantial body of international
law that has evolved over the years to protect civilians,
refugees and humanitarian personnel. It is therefore our
collective responsibility to ensure effective adherence to
these international legal instruments.

Violence against civilians is an unfortunate and
unacceptable by-product of wars and armed conflicts.
While recognizing the urgent need to address this issue,
my delegation is of the view that it is necessary for the
Security Council to address the causes of conflict,
including the denial of the right to self-determination of
people who are under foreign occupation and suffering
oppression and massive violations of their human rights.
The Council must work to redress these problems so that
conflicts and the grievous consequences that flow from
them may disappear.

The Secretary-General has proposed a set of specific
recommendations to pave the way for ensuring protection
for civilians in armed conflict. These include, to name
only a few, proposals for the deployment of preventive
peacekeeping operations; the need to establish working
groups of the Security Council to address specific volatile
situations; the establishment of a permanent technical
review mechanism of the United Nations; and the
imposition of verifiable arms embargoes to limit the
ability of warring parties to wage war against one another
and against civilians. These and the other
recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-
General will be studied carefully by my Government. I
would merely like to note here that at times one needs to
stretch one's imagination considerably to find the tenuous
linkage between some of the recommendations and the
mandate of the Security Council.

The Secretary-General has encouraged the Council
to take decisive action to address this critical issue and to
promote a climate of compliance. In this context I would
like to recall that during the last debate on this subject in
the Security Council, in February 1999, a large number of
countries pointed out that the report of the Secretary-
General should not merely focus on the role of the
Security Council, but should be comprehensive in nature,
identifying the role of all concerned bodies and agencies.

 

We believe that Member States should have the
opportunity to thoroughly study and discuss this
comprehensive and far-reaching report and its
recommendations. We also feel that it is not possible for
non-members of the Security Council to engage in an
in-depth and interactive discussion of these
recommendations in the Council itself. Thus there is a need
for a forum, comprising the entire membership of the
United Nations, where all Member States can fully
participate in such discussions. The Security Council may,
therefore, consider requesting the General Assembly to
undertake the task of inviting the views of Member States
on the report itself and its recommendations, to conduct a
comprehensive exchange of views on the issue, and, if
necessary, to work towards the elucidation of a legal and
internationally binding instrument regarding the protection
of civilians in armed conflicts. Pending that, the Council
may call for the scrupulous application of the considerable
body of existing international law to protect civilians in
armed conflict.

