Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): This meeting to
consider the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is very timely, in view of the tragic
events that have plunged the Palestinian people in
Gaza and the international community into mourning
and threaten to engulf the United Nations once again in
a cloud of desperation, impotence and frustration.
Civilians trapped in armed conflicts and those who
suffer because their neighbours are suffering hope that
the purposes and principles enshrined in the preamble
of the Charter of the United Nations will be applied to
safeguard current and future generations from the
scourge of war.
The nature of armed conflicts is changing,
involving a whole series of factors that must be
examined as a whole. The parties involved, the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the Human Rights Council and
other bodies of the system, each within their respective
competencies, need to examine strategies of prevention
to safeguard peace and protect civilians, looking to the
underlying causes of armed conflict.

In the Gaza Strip, we are facing one of the worst
types of war in the modern world: punishing the
civilian population to break their morale, destroy their
spirit of resistance, crush their will to fight and lead
them to believe that slavery can be benign. However,
the dignity of peoples has prevailed throughout history.
Resistance in search of freedom and self-determination
is preferable to submission to genocidal Powers.

Resolution 1674 (2006) contains valuable
elements. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
wishes to emphasize that the framework established by
that resolution is not exhaustive in terms of the
possible actions that the international community
should or could take. This is shown most clearly in the
deplorable cases of inaction or excessive delay in
responding on the part of the Security Council when it
needs to safeguard the lives, physical integrity and
basic needs of civilians in situations of armed conflict.

The recent experiences in the Gaza Strip and
southern Lebanon are clear examples of how an
outdated institution tied to the specific interests of
certain States can affect civilians. It enables the parties
to a conflict - or some of them - to flagrantly violate
international humanitarian law and human rights.

Venezuela reiterates that the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict rests with States. Here, the international
community can play a constructive role by supporting
national efforts, always respecting the framework set
out in the Charter of the United Nations, and working
to preserve the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
countries.

The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela notes with concern the attempts of certain
States to obstruct the debate on the concept of the
responsibility to protect, set out in paragraph 139 of
the 2005 World Summit Outcome. In that connection,
those countries have baselessly tried to maintain that
that concept is a standard that can be applied without
engaging in the necessary discussion. Our country fully
agrees with those States that have expressed the view
that the Security Council is not in a position to
interpret or utilize that concept before a consensus has
been reached in the General Assembly. Our
Government highlights the importance of the work
accomplished in this area by Mr. Edward Luck, the
Secretary-General's Special Adviser on the
responsibility to protect.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict and
the prevention of humanitarian crises and the
commission of grave crimes against humanity can be
guaranteed only in an atmosphere of cooperation, good
faith and strict compliance with international law.

Without the appropriate and timely provision of
humanitarian assistance, civilian populations in
situations of armed conflict are condemned to
prolonged suffering that may even lead to their death.
For that reason, Venezuela condemns deliberate attacks
against any personnel who do humanitarian work. We
deplore the fact that the occupying Power, Israel, has
not provided the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) with the security conditions necessary for
its humanitarian activities in Gaza. The attacks on
United Nations convoys and facilities constitute crimes
against human rights, and those responsible must be
brought to justice under the relevant international laws.
The Israeli authorities must be required to provide
conditions of security so that UNRWA and the other
United Nations entities acting in situ can continue to
assist the victims of the mad violence unleashed as a
result of the military aggression perpetrated since
27 December 2008.

Finally, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
reaffirms its commitment to the cause of peace and its
willingness to debate, within the forum of the General
Assembly, all measures aimed at the effective
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We are
convinced that it is within that framework that we can
achieve genuine political commitment on the part of
States to the development and application of the norms
of international humanitarian and human rights law on
behalf of civilian populations affected by armed
conflict.

