Mr. Mantovani (Italy): First of all I wish to
thank Special Representative De Mistura and
Ambassador Khalilzad for their briefings. As this is the
first time that Mr. De Mistura has briefed the Council
since the assumption of his role as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, I
wish to congratulate him on the work he has already
done - showing a very pragmatic approach - and to
wish him all success in his future endeavours in Iraq.

We would also like to express our appreciation
for the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/ 19) and for the informative insights that he has
provided on the situation in Iraq. Italy fully appreciates

and supports the steadfast commitment of the United
Nations in Iraq, recently strengthened by the new and
broader mandate given by resolution 1770 (2007) to
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) and to Special Representative De Mistura.

We have always supported the role of the United
Nations in facilitating and sustaining national
reconciliation and the political process in Iraq, through
the dialogue that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General maintains with a whole range of
Iraqi political actors and civil society representatives,
and also through the technical assistance provided by
the mission in the electoral and constitutional fields.

In this framework, we welcome the extension of
the breadth and scope of UNAMI action favouring the
correct implementation of article 140 of the Iraqi
constitution, which has been extensively illustrated in
the most recent report of the Secretary-General.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
continue to be extremely concerned by the high
number of Iraqi refugees in neighbouring countries and
of internally displaced persons in Iraq. We commend
the efforts to address this situation by the countries that
have received the Iraqi refugees and by the United
Nations. For its part, Italy responded to last July's joint
appeal of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and UNICEF with more
than $4.2 million for activities to benefit Iraqi refugees
and internally displaced persons in Iraq, Syria and
Jordan.

In his report, the Secretary-General also
mentioned activities supporting Iraqi reconstruction
through the use of funds from the International
Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq. In this regard, I
would like to provide some information on the progress
of the Italian Co-Presidency of the Facility's Donor
Committee in aligning its action plan with the priorities
highlighted by the national development strategy
within the framework of the International Compact
with Iraq.

As a follow-up to the meeting held in Baghdad on
8 December, we have called informal meetings, which
are going to take place in Italy in the next few days,
with the participation of Iraqi Government
representatives, United Nations agencies and the World
Bank, as well as major donors committed to Iraqi
reconstruction that already have their facilities on the
ground.

These meetings will also precede the half-yearly
meeting of the Donor Committee, scheduled to take
place in Baghdad in late March. The aim is to create as
many synergies as possible on the ground - both at
central and local levels - through the optimization of
existing facilities and the use of coordination
mechanisms provided by the International Compact for
Iraq. Such an example is the Iraq Consultative Group,
whose first meeting, Italy believes, should take place
before the scheduled meeting of the Reconstruction
Fund Facility's Donor Committee.

