Mr. Wang Donghua (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the Foreign Minister
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Third
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Uganda, the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania and the
Adviser to the President of Rwanda, and thanks them
for their presence at this open meeting of the Security
Council.

The Chinese delegation would like to thank
Ambassador Kassem and the other members of the
Panel for the addendum to the report of the Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural

S/l'VA437

 
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This addendum has
attracted the attention not only of the Security Council,
but also of the parties concerned. We note that some
countries have already responded to the addendum and
expressed the wish to cooperate earnestly. It could be
said that, in a way, the addendum has already made a
difference.

At the same time, we must not underestimate the
grave nature of the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Seven months have passed since the Security Council
began its consideration of this issue last May, but it
seems that little has changed. The illegal exploitation
and plundering of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo continue unabated.
It is imperative for the Security Council to pay
attention to this situation and take appropriate
measures to stop the illegal exploitation and plundering
of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

The addendum of the Panel of Experts makes a
number of recommendations that will help the Security
Council in the next phase of its consideration of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in trying to promote peace in the Great Lakes region.

At the same time, we also believe that the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is only one among many issues
concerning the conflict in the Great Lakes region. We
hope that the Security Council's consideration of the
addendum will go a long way towards sustaining and
increasing the momentum for a political solution to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
continue to move forward the inter-Congolese political
dialogue to a successful conclusion on the basis of
ensuring the territorial integrity and sovereign
independence of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

In conclusion, we also favour an appropriate
extension of the Panel's mandate so that it will
continue to monitor the illegal exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

