Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to express to you, Mr. President,
and, through you, to members of your delegation and
your friendly country, Turkey, my delegation's thanks
for having convened this meeting on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I would also like to thank
Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for introducing the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2009/277).

We continue to see civilians paying the heaviest
price in armed conflicts. The world has seen
remarkable progress in the legal field and through
international agreements in addressing the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, beginning
with the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and the
many subsequent resolutions adopted by the Council.
However, the striking paradox here is that the gap is
widening between the texts and their application on the

grounds, in other words between what is legal and the
practices on the ground regarding the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

Ten years have elapsed since this Council first
debated this important theme. Delegations participating
in this debate, Council members, the Secretary-General,
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and the special rapporteurs are all demanding greater
respect for international norms and laws that guarantee
protection for civilians in times of armed conflict.

In that regard, let us recall the Security Council's
most recent deliberations on this matter, on 14 January
2009 (see S/PV.6066). Those deliberations coincided
with events witnessed by the entire world: brutal and
flagrant aggression by Israel against the Palestinians in
the Gaza Strip. At that time, most delegations demanded
that Israel, the occupying Power, comply with international
law and norms relating to the protection of Palestinian
civilians in Gaza; they stressed the need to ensure the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to those people and the
need for an independent international investigation of the
war crimes committed by Israel during that aggression.

Unfortunately, however, despite repeated
demands by the Security Council and the international
community that Israel cease its illegitimate policies
and practices forthwith, Israel not merely ignored all
those pleas and demands but escalated its aggressive
action targeting unarmed civilians who were virtual
hostages in that vast collective prison. To this day,
Israel continues its policies of aggression against the
Palestinian civilian population by imposing a siege,
closing border crossings, carrying out detentions,
forbidding movements by sick people and students,
impeding the delivery of international aid in the form
of supplies and medicine to the people of Gaza,
imposing collective punishment, confiscating land,
engaging in settlement activities, demolishing homes
and burning farmland, in addition to its oppressive and
arbitrary practices against the civilian Syrian
population of the occupied Syrian Golan. It thus
blatantly thumbs its nose at international legitimacy,
international law and international humanitarian law.

Israel's criminal acts are a unique instance of the
systematic and comprehensive breach of all
international norms and principles set forth in
international law, international humanitarian law,
international human rights law, the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and the 1949 Geneva

Conventions and their Protocols. Israel's aggressive
behaviour is marked by a stain that no other usurper of
land in history has borne: it breaches, en masse and
without exception, the entire cumulative historical
body of human law.

In a series of statements, most recently that of
14 January 2009 (S/PRST/2009/1), on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the Security Council has
condemned all violations of international law against
civilians and has called on all parties concerned to put
an end forthwith to such practices. The Council has
also stressed that parties to armed conflict bear the
primary responsibility to take all feasible steps to
ensure the protection of affected civilians and to meet
their basic needs, including by giving special attention
to the specific needs of women and children. The
Council recognized the needs of civilians under foreign
occupation and stressed further, in this regard, the
responsibilities of the occupying Power. It stressed the
importance of safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian personnel in order to ensure the delivery of
assistance to civilians in armed conflict, in conformity with
international humanitarian law. The Council also
emphasized the responsibility of States to comply with
their obligations to end impunity and to prosecute those
responsible for war crimes, genocide and crimes against
humanity.

Furthermore, in his most recent report, the
Secretary-General stated grave concern at the high
number of casualties in Gaza, in particular among
children, and at the damage to homes and schools,
including schools operated by the United Nations
itself, as a result of the Israeli aggression. The
Secretary-General also expressed concern at Israel's
wide-scale use of cluster munitions and explosive
weapons against civilian populations in Gaza. In his
report, the Secretary-General states that Israel has
persisted in imposing restrictions on the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to Gaza and noted the broad
impact on the lives of civilians. The report states that
"[t]he cumulative effect of these restrictions and their
unpredictability contribute to the protracted suffering
of Gaza's civilian population" (S/2009/277, annex, para. 16).
My delegation carefully studied the Secretary-
General's summary of the report of the Board of
Inquiry he dispatched to Gaza. That report documents
crimes committed by Israel against United Nations
premises and against Palestinian civilians in those
premises, including women and children. It documents
Israel's use of white phosphorus bombs and its
responsibility for deaths and injuries within United
Nations buildings, along with the damage caused to
those premises.

Those are all war crimes, and the Security
Council is obliged, more than ever before, to
implement the recommendations of the Board of
Inquiry, which was chaired by Mr. Ian Martin, and to
hold Israeli leaders accountable for their repeated
crimes, which are legally defined as war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide.

Here we ask the Security Council to tell us: What
international obligations has Israel met since the
Council added this item to its agenda? Another
important question to which an answer would be much
appreciated is this: Why do we have a double standard
for the implementation of international law, with Israel
exempt from fulfilling the norms of international law?
Or is there a crisis in the understanding of legal
terminology, by which Palestinian civilians are
considered to be unlike any other civilians in the free
world?

The situation of Syrian civilians in the occupied
Syrian Golan does not differ greatly from that of the
Palestinians. The Israeli occupation authorities
continue to pursue practices such as confiscating land,
stealing water resources, laying mines and expanding
illegal settlements. Israel also persists in oppressing the
Syrian civilian population in the occupied Golan and
throwing civilians into prisons and detention centres,
without justification, in life-threatening conditions. Let
me also cite in particular the case of a Syrian citizen,
Bishr al-Mukt, with respect to whom my Government
has appealed to the Secretary-General and to the
International Committee of the Red Cross and other
international institutions, urging them to intervene to
save his life.

The most recent such practice in the occupied
Syrian Golan was the imposition by the Israeli
authorities of two years of house arrest against a
two-year-old child, Fahid Lu'ay Shuqeir, on the excuse
that he was born outside Israel when his parents were
studying in Syria. In the same context, Israel persists in
its policy of disrupting all forms of communication
among Syrian families that have been torn asunder as a
result of occupation. Also, the Israeli occupation
authorities confiscated the Syrian identity cards of
Syrian students studying at Damascus University when
they returned to their towns and villages in the
occupied Golan.

To lend credibility to this special debate, Syria
demands that this Council bring pressure to bear on
Israel in order to allow the immediate resumption of
family visits by Syrian citizens through the Quneitra
crossing. My country addressed letters on this matter to
the Secretary-General, the President of the Security
Council and the President of the General Assembly and
to international governmental and non-governmental
organizations, requesting that they intervene to resolve
this matter. It is our sincere hope that all these parties
will translate their positions that we have heard in this
debate into realities on the ground, especially since
international law considers that Israel's occupation of
the Golan is double occupation, which requires double
criminalization by this Council.

Israel was not satisfied by having occupied the
Syrian Golan since 1967 but enacted an unjust and
provocative decree to annex it. The Security Council
unanimously rejected that decree in resolution 497
(1981), which considered Israel's annexation of the
occupied Syrian Golan null and void and demanded
that Israel rescind it forthwith.

