Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): First,
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and on the
praiseworthy manner in which you are leading the
Council's work. I also thank you and all members of
the Council for the welcome and assistance that the
Algerian delegation has received at the beginning of its
term on the Council. I assure you of our full
cooperation as you carry out your mandate.

I thank you, Sir, for the excellent briefing you
have just given the Council as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) and for your visits in October
and December 2003 to various countries, and
appreciate the work of the Committee and Monitoring
Group, as required by resolution 1455 (2003).

We appreciate the efforts and the role played by
the 1267 Committee in combating terrorism, in
particular the consolidated list it has elaborated, which
constitutes an important instrument in our common
struggle against this phenomenon.

We note, however, that only 371 names of
individuals and entities are listed, a meagre few in
comparison to the very high number of individuals and
organizations linked to the Al Qaeda network. This, we
believe, is due, on the one hand, to the reluctance of
some States to communicate names to the Committee,
preferring a bilateral exchange of information, and, on
the other, to the difficulties encountered by those that
have chosen to cooperate with the Committee in adding
names to the consolidated list, due to the disinclination
of some States members of the Committee to
acknowledge evidence of the existence of links
between certain individuals and terrorist groups and the
Al Qaeda organization.

In that connection, we call for enhanced
transparency in the Committee's work and working
methods with a view to ensuring the objective and
speediest possible consideration of the lists of
individuals and terrorist organizations submitted by
States that are in a position to encourage more
recalcitrant States to cooperate further with the
Committee.

We concur with the opinion of the Chairman that
reports submitted by States pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 1455 (2003) are an important aspect of
international cooperation in combating Al Qaeda and
the Taliban, just as they help to assess the
implementation by Member States of Security Council
resolutions. We understand the travels of the Chairman
of the Committee to be an initiative designed to
strengthen the effective and complete implementation
of measures established in Security Council resolutions
and we therefore encourage him to pursue those
travels, which are extremely useful in providing greater
visibility for the Committee's work.

Although the number of reports submitted to the
Committee has more than doubled since the adoption
of resolution 1390 (2002), we note nevertheless that
only 92 States have submitted their reports pursuant to
resolution 1455 (2003). While we take note of the
information that may underlie such lack of cooperation,
and while we call on States that have not yet submitted
reports to discharge their obligations, we hope that the
Committee will consider in depth the issue of the
failure of 99 States to submit reports and that it will
draft a report containing a list of States that have not
submitted reports and their motives or reasons for
failing to cooperate with the Committee.

I also take this opportunity to thank the
Monitoring Group for its role in the implementation of
measures taken by States pursuant to Security Council
resolutions. We hope for improved coordination
between the Monitoring Group and the Committee with
a view to enhancing its performance and to helping the
Group to continue and improve its analytical reporting
to the Security Council. We also hope that cooperation
between the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) will continue to improve, including through the
creation of electronic databases containing information
of all kinds provided by experts and members of the
Committee or its Chairman following their travels in
the field. We further call for enhanced cooperation
between the Committee on sanctions against Al Qaeda
and the Taliban and Interpol with a view to assisting
the Committee better to discharge its mission with
regard to the establishment and distribution of the
consolidated list. Moreover, we encourage the
Committee's Chairman and the Monitoring Group to
pursue their visits to the field in order to assess the
implementation of sanctions measures with regard to
the travel ban, the arms embargo and the freezing of
financial and economic assets.

I do not intend to enumerate here all the steps
taken by my country to combat terrorism, but it would
be useful to recall that Algeria has always fulfilled its
obligations pursuant to Security Council resolutions
and that it remains actively involved in the fight
against terrorism at the subregional, regional and
international levels. Thus, my country has already
submitted three reports under resolution 1373 (2001)
and two further reports under resolutions 1390 (2002)
and 1455 (2003). In that regard, we assure the Security
Council that my country will continue to work
assiduously with the various United Nations bodies to
combat terrorism.

Far from diminishing, the threats posed by
terrorism, and especially by the Al Qaeda organization,
to international peace and security have been neither
isolated nor curbed, but rather have become more
interconnected and transnational. Hence, the need to
adopt a comprehensive and integrated approach that
takes into account the political, diplomatic and
operational dimensions, including legal assistance,
cooperation in information exchange and the
acquisition of specific equipment designed to thwart
terrorism. The combat against terrorism must thus be
part of an overall plan to encourage the emergence of a
new system of collective security based on the
principle of the indivisibility of security and on
requirements both for security and for economic and
social development. Stability and security are
dependent on those requirements and no country by
itself can ensure its own security, much less to the
detriment of that of others. Thus, above and beyond the
fact that our endeavour to combat terrorism must be
undertaken in a spirit of transparency, impartiality and
good faith, it must transcend the mere treatment of the
phenomenon's symptoms and attack its root causes.

In conclusion, we hope that the resolution soon to
be adopted will renew and improve those sanctions
measures that have been imposed against Al Qaeda, the
Taliban and individuals and entities associated with
them. Only increased cooperation among States,
international, regional and subregional organizations
and the Committee established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1267 (1999) will allow us to ensure
the effective implementation of the measures foreseen.

