Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): I should like to
express my warmest congratulations to you, Sir, on the
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
by your country this month. There is no doubt that on
the day when the results are assessed, the international
community will remember the positive momentum that
you gave to this body.

I appreciate this opportunity to share with the
Council the conclusions of recent deliberations held
by the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People on the issue that is
central to its mandate. Meeting on 17 and 18 April in
Caracas, Venezuela, at the invitation of the Venezuelan
Government, our Committee called on the international
community to re-engage with Israel and the State of
Palestine and to remove the obstacles to negotiation.
We called for a revitalized Quartet, which should
coordinate with key regional players and report to the
Council on its efforts and progress made.

In Caracas, we strongly condemned settlements
and demanded their removal. We also asked the
Council and the high contracting parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention to uphold their responsibilities to
ensure a end to settlement construction in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The meeting in Caracas deplored
the abuse of Palestinian prisoners, who are often
detained without trial, leading to hunger strikes and
deaths. Participating delegations also demanded the
immediate release of all prisoners, including children,
women, elected officials, pre-Oslo detainees, and those
held without trial.

We expressed optimism that the passage of General
Assembly resolution 67/ 19 would accelerate the
momentum in the Council towards full United Nations
membership for the State of Palestine. We considered
the vote on 29 November 2012 was a kind of vote of
confidence, as Palestine meets the Charter criteria
for statehood and is ready and willing to assume
the responsibilities that come with United Nations
membership. That is why we called on States that
recognize Palestine at the United Nations to establish
diplomatic relations with it.

We confirmed that the State of Palestine may avail
itself of the dispute-settlement mechanisms provided
by the International Court of Justice, and supported any
action by Palestine to participate fully, effectively and
constructively in the work of the United Nations and its
conferences, including, for example, by signing treaties
and conventions, including the Rome Statute. We also
called on the international community unequivocally to
support Palestinian unity.

Finally, at the Caracas meeting it was decided to
ask the General Assembly to proclaim an international
year of solidarity with the Palestinian people in 2014
and to launch a global campaign to bring an end to the
Israeli occupation of the occupied territories, realize
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, and
promote a just, lasting, and comprehensive negotiated
peace. Those, Sir, are the decisions that we took in
Caracas and that the Committee, through me, wishes
to convey to you.

