Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan): Before I start, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for arranging
this open debate on the agenda item under discussion.

My delegation has carefully studied the Security
Council draft resolution on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD). We view the
document as an essential instrument designed to
reinforce the WMD non-proliferation regime in the
new international security environment.

We believe that the main objective of the draft
resolution is the adoption by all States at the national
level of measures to prevent non-State actors from
acquiring WMD and their components. We also believe
that the draft resolution to be adopted would help
countries achieve that declared goal. At the same time,
it is the responsibility of every State to decide for itself
which specific steps it should take at the national level
in order to secure its borders, sensitive military assets
and scientific and research capabilities, thus
eliminating any possibility of their use by terrorists.

Yet, in order to be able to fully and effectively
implement the provisions of the draft resolution, many
countries with extensive land and sea boundaries would
require assistance in equipping their borders with
modern technical means of detection of the
components of WMD and their means of delivery. In
our view, effective border controls and well-
coordinated law enforcement efforts, including through
international cooperation, constitute an important
factor that contributes to the reinforcement of the
WMD non-proliferation regimes.

Kazakhstan's contribution to WMD non-
proliferation is widely recognized. We have voluntarily
renounced our nuclear inheritance, shut down the
Semipalatinsk nuclear testing ground, acceded to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and all
other regimes on the non-proliferation of WMD and
their means of delivery.

We find it very timely that the draft resolution
calls on States to take measures to strengthen controls
on the manufacturing, storage and export of sensitive
materials and technologies. Since 1992, Kazakhstan
has been working to improve the efficiency of its
national export control system. It has adopted an export
control law and introduced a comprehensive control list
of dual-use products and sensitive materials.

Kazakhstan has been actively involved in the
negotiations to draft a treaty on the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia. That
initiative of the Central Asian States to establish such a
zone in the region should constitute an important
milestone in the efforts to strengthen the non-
proliferation regime.

Weakened international control is the main reason
for the existence of a threat of non-State actors getting
hold of WMD. There is only one solution: to tighten
controls and to increase transparency, which should
become the pillars of the draft resolution under
consideration.

At the same time, we should continue to improve
the existing international agreements in this area in
order to adapt them to the realities of today. We also
believe that non-proliferation and disarmament are
mutually reinforcing processes. Compliance with the
draft resolution, and its implementation, will largely
depend on the political will and on the joint efforts of
all States. The effectiveness of the reporting
mechanism hinges on this as well.

I wish to assure all members of the Council that
Kazakhstan is fully aware of the risk of any
irresponsible persons acquiring WMD, and that it will
exert every effort to reinforce the international non-
proliferation regime.

