Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): We would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for inviting Mrs. Ogata to
speak to us. Her introductory comments were the best and
clearest, although perhaps, also the most distressing, that we
have heard at the opening of a debate. Perhaps I should say
refer to this as a continuation of the debate that began on
Monday on problems in Africa. Mrs. Ogata set out, as
thoroughly as usual, the human aspect of the situation in
Africa and, in the coming days, we should seek solutions
in the light of her thoughts and comments.

I had thought of a number of questions to ask Mrs.
Ogata, but when I heard her statement, I realized that she
had, in fact, already anticipated the issues that would be
of concern to us and answered all of the questions that I
had in mind. I shall therefore content myself with asking
her to elaborate a little further on the situation in West
Africa, and to give us some idea as to the possible rate of
return to Sierra Leone of people who had taken refuge in
Guinea and Liberia. We know that the great number of
people in Guinea - several hundred thousand - were
a considerable economic, social and human burden on the
resources of the State, which was courageously trying to
handle the situation with support from certain other
countries and from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). It would be useful
if Mrs. Ogata could give us an idea of a possible
time-frame for the return of the refugees, which might
give some hope to the Guinean authorities, who, I should
like to say once again, we must commend for having
taken in the refugees from Sierra Leone in accordance
with African tradition.

I should also like to know if we could obtain more
detailed information about the humanitarian impact of the
conflict between Eritrea and Ethiopia. We know that there
has been some progress and that sustained efforts are
being made under the auspices of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), and with our full support, to
resolve the crisis. But from the outset we have been
disturbed by descriptions of the humanitarian impact of
the conflict. Since then, we have not really received any
detailed information, so any information that Mrs. Ogata
can give that might help strengthen the resolve of the
United Nations and the OAU to end the crisis would be
welcome.

I also think that further reflection on other subjects
could be useful. Mrs. Ogata has mentioned the
regroupment policy in Burundi. But we might ask, in
view of the threats existing in the region, whether what is
being done in Burundi could be assessed on the basis of
the similar experience of regroupment in Rwanda. The
two countries have had to face obvious and extremely
serious security problems, so any comparison between
them could be helpful.

But what I would especially like to highlight from
the High Commissioner's statement are the very strong
and direct appeals addressed to us to respond in the

 

exercise of our responsibilities. There is, of course, the
ongoing appeal to donors to continue their efforts, in view
of the gravity and scale of the crisis, which is unlike
anything in other parts of the world. This was a quite
legitimate appeal from the High Commissioner.

But above and beyond that appeal to donor countries,
to those that can give something and continue their
efforts - an appeal that we hope will be heard - Mrs.
Ogata made certain operational points, notably the idea that
humanitarian assistance in some crisis areas needs to be
protected. I think that is a very useful point that we should
bear in mind. The point was made by Mrs. Ogata in
connection with the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Above and beyond the possible monitoring of the ceasefire,
I think we have to remember that the delivery of
humanitarian assistance must be protected. This means that
people involved in peacekeeping operations must, under
their mandate, be able to accept the need to accompany and
protect the delivery of humanitarian assistance. This is not
a new idea; it is something that we ourselves proposed in
1996. Our proposals were accepted and noted in two
resolutions of the Security Council, though they never took
shape. I think that the unfortunate consequences of that
shortcoming have led all of us to reflect on the frightening
numbers of dead, those who died because of lack of
assistance in the Congo area.

So if we are thinking of deploying a peacekeeping
operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
must very seriously bear in mind this observation made by
Mrs. Ogata on the need to protect humanitarian assistance.
This is one aspect of the mandate that we have to think
about. This can also unquestionably, have a bearing on the
size and scope of an operation.

The second substantive point made very forcefully by
Mrs. Ogata related to Africa's establishment of the
equivalent of a stability pact. Mrs. Ogata referred to what
has been done in Europe, and its true that as of 1993, 1994,
1995, France had proposed the idea of a stability pact for
European countries, affirming their independence so that
relations could be established among all of them on a basis
on mutual trust and with a view to avoiding crises and their
humanitarian consequences. I think this same idea should
be advocated for Africa. This would lead naturally to a set
of commitments between neighbouring States, States of the
region, to establish truly friendly relations and, within their
borders, to deal with the fate of displaced persons and of
minorities. It is obvious that where minority populations are
threatened, they want to defend themselves by force of
arms; at that point there can be displacements of people
across borders, and then all regimes are threatened by the
existence of armed groups beyond their borders that want
to return to the country, but that also want to protect
themselves, and that thus might use violence and threats.
Therefore, the States of a region must meet around a table
so that they can look courageously and clearly at the
problem of minorities, the problem of how to strengthen
democratic rule within States and the problem of how to
protect within States people who have been displaced
because they feared action by minorities from the
exterior.

That is the basic objective of a stability pact, and it
is something that African leaders should consider. I think
it is one of the guiding ideas that will be discussed in the
course of the meetings that you, Mr. President, have had
the wisdom to schedule. I believe that we have to set an
objective for the work that is soon to be undertaken under
your presidency, Sir, here in New York. We must
certainly strengthen the ceasefire and strengthen relations
of dialogue and trust among the African leaders who will
be coming here to New York. But above and beyond that,
we must lay the foundations of a genuine conference on
the Great Lakes region that, by dealing with the issues
brought up by Mrs. Ogata, would establish real stability
in that region of Africa and would allow the re-
establishment of satisfactory humanitarian conditions.

This is the wish that I address to you, Mr. President:
that the debates to be held soon here in New York, which
began with the meeting this past Monday and now
continue with Mrs. Ogata's statement, can really have -
above and beyond the immediate consolidation of the
ceasefire - a more general objective: a return to stability
through an international conference on stability in the
Great Lakes region.

