The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Nepal for his statement. I will now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Costa Rica.

I thank Mr. Ian Martin for his briefing and the
Permanent Representative of Nepal for his statement.

My delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Nepal (UNMIN). We also welcome the positive news
on the progress in peacebuilding and the consolidation
of democracy in Nepal. In particular, we welcome the
commitment of the new authorities to promoting and
protecting human rights and to combating
discrimination in all its forms, as well as the progress
achieved to date in mine clearance and the destruction
of improvised explosive devices. We are also
encouraged by the statements by the Secretary-General
on the progress he observed on the ground during his
recent visit to the country.

Within this positive outlook, there are some
pending questions that are of concern to my delegation,
which I will proceed to outline now. We hope that the
recent establishment of the new Government will
enable substantial progress to be made in the process of
bringing to justice those individuals who committed
crimes during the armed conflict. My delegation has
reiterated in various forums that the building of a
lasting peace requires, as a necessity, the application of
justice based on law, which will make national
reconciliation possible. In this context, we support the
intention of the Government of Nepal to establish a
truth and reconciliation commission and another
commission to investigate the whereabouts of
disappeared persons. In general, we support all the
actions that have been taken to strengthen the rule of
law.

We also urge the Nepalese Constituent Assembly
to do its very best to achieve agreements and move
forward in drafting the new constitution. In addition,
the relatively slow progress of the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of the
Maoist army is a matter of concern, particularly in
respect to the discharge of minors. We repeat the
appeal made by the Special Representative and urge
the immediate release of all minors who have not yet
been discharged. We also hope that the resources
provided by the Peacebuilding Fund and the World
Bank will make it possible to speed up the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. In this
context of pending issues in the areas of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, within which
UNMIN fulfils an important supporting role to the
Government, my delegation would be ready to
carefully consider a limited extension of the Mission's
mandate, if a request were to be received from the
Government of Nepal and the Secretary-General. We
08-59080
must not be over-hasty in withdrawing the Mission, if
there remain important peacebuilding tasks for which
UNMIN support continues to be necessary. But neither
should we maintain a mission of a size that is greater
than that which is strictly necessary.

In closing, I thank the new Special
Representative, Mr. Martin, for his briefing and
congratulate the people of Nepal through their
Permanent Representative for their admirable efforts to
achieve peace and democracy in their country. As the
Permanent Representative himself said, a considerable
amount has been achieved in a relatively short time and
an historic transformation of great importance has
occurred.

I resume my function as President of the Security
Council. There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I should now like to
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at 3.40 pm.
