Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to join other
speakers in welcoming High Representative Inzko
and express our thanks for his briefing and report
(S/2014/314). I would also like to extend our appreciation
for the personal efforts he has been investing in carrying
out his difficult mandate.

Croatia aligns itselfwith the statementjust delivered
by the observer of the European Union, but I would like
to add several remarks in my national capacity.

The importance Croatia attaches to the territorial
integrity, stability and functionality of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is ofthe highest degree. We firmly believe
that a stable and functional Bosnia and Herzegovina
is essential for the stability and prosperity of South-
East Europe and beyond. The Dayton Peace Agreement
created a specific political system based primarily on
ethnic representation, which rests on genuine equality
between three constitutive peoples. This equality is a
prerequisite for the stability ofBosnia and Herzegovina.

However, a complicated institutional set-up created
by Dayton is often exploited by political elites, resulting
in the present political and institutional stalemate. The
protests in Sarajevo and other cities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina earlier this year were a clear expression
of citizens' frustration with the disfunctionality of the
system and the deteriorating socioeconomic situation
in the country. These events were a direct consequence
of the lack of progressive steps taken by political elites
and an indication that Bosnia and Herzegovina must
embark on the reform processes in order to ensure
stability and prosperity. Otherwise, the country might
face further destabilization, including along ethnic
lines.
We encourage the political leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to rise above their narrow ethnic interests
in the upcoming election campaign. The citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina deserve a fresh perspective
that incorporates the recognition and fulfilment of their
social and economic needs.

We share the High Representative's concern
and condemnation of those in Republika Srpska
who continue to challenge the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
secessionist and divisive rhetoric by the President and
other high officials of Republika Srpska is completely
unacceptable.

In order to achieve our common goal - a stable,
functioningandprosperousBosniaandHerzegovina-we
need to come up with a realistic strategy that takes into
account the situation on the ground. The clear prospect of
European Union membership constitutes beyond doubt
the best stability and security framework within which
Bosnia and Herzegovina can achieve steady progress.
The European Union accession process serves as the
best blueprint for State-building reforms, strengthened
administrative capacities and good governance - all of
which Bosnia and Herzegovina is in dire need of.

We encourage the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to find the necessary political will to
implement the Sejdic-Finci ruling and to pursue other
reforms, including those in the military sector.

Envisioning a tailor-made approach for Bosnia
and Herzegovina's European integration process is
essential. We should consider identifying concrete
deliverables, beyond the Sejdic-Finci ruling, that
would keep the country's integration process tangible
and feasible. That should not mean lowering the
criteria, but helping Bosnia and Herzegovina meet all
of them. The fundamental logic of such an approach is
in its conditionality. The pace and progress of Bosnia
and Herzegovina's integration in the European Union
should be directly linked to the pace and progress of its
political, legal and administrative reforms, and every
substantial bit of progress should be equally rewarded.

Croatia stresses the importance of the continuous
high-level engagement on behalf of the European Union
and the international community. At the same time, we
expect to see the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
engage constructively in the recent initiatives by the
European Commission, the European Union Special
Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina and some
member States, the aim of which is to give impetus to
the European Union integration process, which is now
lagging behind.

We support all initiatives aimed at improving
economic and social cohesion, the active engagement
of civil society and youth, and institution-building
capacities and their functionality and efficiency.

Let me conclude by reiterating the readiness of
Croatia, as the only European Union member State that
directly borders Bosnia and Herzegovina, to continue
to cooperate closely with our neighbour on all issues
and to provide Bosnia and Herzegovina with strong
and continuous political and technical support in the
process of its European Union integration. We remain
conscious of all the legitimate needs and rights ofCroats
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. They are the smallest of the
three constituent people in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
but of course they remain equally important. We will
continue to extend our support to them.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's troubled history is, at
present, unfortunately often much more a source of
tensions and disputes than the springboard for a better
future. That is all the more reason to intensify our joint
efforts in extending to Bosnia and Herzegovina all the
support and assistance required.

On a positive note, just a few days ago, we witnessed
the return of the famous Sarajevo City Hall to its old
glory, after it was devastated during the siege of the city
in the 1990s. The restoration of that iconic building,
which is the symbol of Sarajevo, should be a harbinger
of the better days that await that important European
country.

Finally, on a much more informal note ~ and a
positive one as well - I would like to wish Bosnia and
Herzegovina every success in the upcoming World Cup
in Brazil. That is a small but telling example of how
Bosnia and Herzegovina can be successful on the world
stage when it gets its act together.

