Mr. Amendola (Italy): First of all, as Prime
Minister Gentiloni expressed to British Prime Minister
May, I would like to reiterate our deep condolences to
the British people and its Government over yesterday's
terrorist attacks. We reaffirm our commitment to
remaining united in our fight against terrorism.

At the outset, allow me to greet President Farmajo
and express Italy's congratulations on his election and
on the early appointment of the Prime Minister and the
new Government, as well as on the strong representation
of women within the new Government. We assure him
of our strong commitment to supporting the Somali
leadership in its efforts to stabilize the country. We
are convinced that Somali ownership is the key to
that process.

We have always believed in that principle; we
reaffirmed that position during the recent election,
and we will continue to do so as we further strengthen
our bilateral relations and shore up our contribution
for building the stable and prosperous Somalia that its
President invoked during his statement.

Somali ownership brings me to the first point:
institutional framework and security architecture. We
are actively involved - along with Somalia, the United
Nations, the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the European Union
and other relevant partners - in supporting the
empowerment of Somali institutions. To that end,
it is instrumental that Somali national and regional
authorities work together to consolidate a united
Federal Somalia.

As far as security is concerned, the exit strategy for

the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) must
be gradual in order to enable the entry of the Somali
security forces. Besides supporting Somali ownership
in the security field through bilateral training for
the Somali police and leading the European Union
training mission in Somalia with a command of more
than half of its soldiers, we continue to encourage the
efforts of the United Nations and the African Union, as
expressed before, aimed at laying the groundwork for
the AMISOM. transition.

I turn now to the stabilization of the country. The
presence today of President Farmajo and Minister
Omer is the best evidence of what has been achieved
over the past year. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General used the words "tragedy" and
"hope", but Somalia could be and is a success story.
After instability and unrest, it is finally heading towards
peace. But we should not lose sight of the multifaceted
challenges posed by terrorists. Security is not the only
concern. The residual capability of Al-Shabaab and the
appearance of Da'esh still constitute threats that affect
the daily lives ofthe Somali people. The United Nations
and all partners of Somalia can do more to tackle the
root causes of radicalization, namely, poverty, the lack
of education and the lack of job opportunities.

We hope that the ongoing review of the United
Nations presence in the country will carefully assess
that issue. We call on international financial institutions
to do their part and, jointly with the donor community,
to support the Somali Government in improving the
business climate.

Finally, with regard to the humanitarian crisis, we
are extremely concerned, like other speakers before us,
about the severe impact of the drought and the risk of
famine. It is a situation that requires immediate action,
as the Secretary-General pointed out following his
recent visit. We are encouraged by the outcome of the
high-level round table convened by President Farmajo in
Mogadishu on 28 February and by the prompt measures
he has taken to facilitate the delivery of much-needed
humanitarian aid. We look forward to further results
during the forthcoming Intergovernmental Authority
on Development conference on Somali refugees to be
held on 25 March.

I am pleased to be able to share with the Council
that in answer to its appeal ahead of the London
conference, our Foreign Minister, Mr. Alfano,
personally informed Secretary-General Guterres a few
days ago of an additional humanitarian-aid contribution
by Italy, which will provide direct support to the Somali
people and the Government as they face this critical
humanitarian situation.

I would like to conclude by expressing our solidarity
with the people and the Government of Somalia

following the death of 40 Somali refugees on a boat
off the Yemeni coast. Our thoughts and condolences
go to the families of the victims. We follow the plight
of Somali refugees with great concern. As that most
recent tragic event has sadly reminded us, insecurity
and humanitarian challenges are interlinked. It is
imperative that we find a common solution to tackling
the root causes that have led to the problem ofmigration
in Somalia and elsewhere.

