Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes to thank Malaysia for its initiative
to hold today's debate on the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs), a theme at the top of
the international agenda in view of its importance for
collective security.

The delegation of the Kingdom of Morocco aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is a threat to international peace and security. The
Kingdom of Morocco shares the conviction of the
international community, which remains concerned
about the threat of terrorism and the risk that non-State
actors might acquire weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery, develop or use them or engage
in the trafficking thereof.

The terrorist threat has been exacerbated to the
point of jeopardizing the stability and territorial
integrity of States. Similarly, efforts by terrorist groups
to use WMDs have increased. This is the real threat
that reinforces the need for the full and universal
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), in 2004,
reflected a shared determination to step up the fight
against the proliferation of chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear (CBRN) weapons and their
delivery systems, and in particular to prevent their
acquisition by non-State actors. The contribution of
resolution 1540 (2004) to the non-proliferation regime,
a unique instrument by virtue of its scope and the
universal support it enjoys, is undeniable. The 10-year
extension of the mandate of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in 2011 reflects the
shared determination to pursue the objectives of the
resolution, which has filled international law gaps, in
particular by introducing a comprehensive approach to
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

The Kingdom of Morocco strictly complies with
its obligations under all the relevant international
instruments on WMDs and their means of delivery,
including resolution 1540 (2004). The reports submitted
regularly by Morocco highlight the efforts of the
Kingdom to fulfil its obligations.

Morocco also participates in the process and
international efforts to fight against proliferation
and to promote a culture of safety through training,
practical exercises and exchange of experience and best
practices, such as the Nuclear Security Summit, the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the
Centres of Excellence for reducing nuclear, radiological,
bacteriological and chemical risks. In that context,
Morocco, together with Georgia and the Philippines,
established a Group of Friends that aims to heighten
awareness and promote and coordinate international
efforts in the area of chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear risk reduction. Morocco, which currently
chairs the Group of Friends, invites all Member States
to a high-level event on CBRN risks and counter-
terrorism, to be organized by the Group in cooperation
with the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute on 29 September. Morocco will also
host, in cooperation with the 1540 (2004) Committee,
the first meeting of African national contact points.

The Kingdom of Morocco has always stressed the
need for international cooperation and appropriate
technical assistance to bolster national capacities
on non-proliferation of WMDs and their means of
delivery, especially in Africa. Only active international
cooperation based on the principles of solidarity and
shared responsibility can enable an effective and
universal application of the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004) and the relevant multilateral instruments. The
assistance mechanisms in place should be strengthened
to be able to meet the expectations of States in need
and to effectively help them to fulfil their obligations.
I would also point out that, without the contribution
of enhanced regional and subregional cooperation,
national efforts will remain inadequate.

I cannot conclude without reaffirming that the
international community should accelerate its efforts
to bring about the total elimination of WMDs as the
ultimate guarantee against their proliferation, use
or acquisition by non-State actors. The international
community must safeguard the credibility and
effectiveness of the relevant instruments by fulfilling
all international obligations, including those related
to disarmament. It is equally important in that context
for the international community to move seriously
towards delegitimizing nuclear weapons, the only type
of weapon of mass destruction not to be subject to
prohibition through an international legal instrument.

