The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council stresses the urgent
need for an inclusive and sustainable political
settlement in Darfur and strongly welcomes, in
this regard, the convening of peace talks on
27 October in Sirte, under the leadership of
United Nations Special Envoy Mr. Jan Eliasson
and African Union Special Envoy Dr. Salim
Salim, who have the Council's full support.

"The Security Council expresses its strong
concern at the continuing deterioration in the
security and humanitarian situation in Darfur and
urges all parties to exercise restraint immediately,
avoiding retaliation and escalation.

"The Security Council calls on all parties to
attend and to engage fully and constructively in
the talks, and, as a first step, to urgently agree
and implement a cessation of hostilities to be
the

overseen by the United Nations and the African
Union. The Council underlines its willingness to
take action against any party that seeks to
undermine the peace process, including by failing
to respect such a cessation of hostilities or by
impeding the talks, peacekeeping or humanitarian
aid. The Council also recognizes that due process
must take its course.

"The Security Council underlines that an
inclusive political settlement and the successful
deployment of UNAMID are essential for
re-establishing peace and stability in Darfur. The
Council expresses its deep concern at the delays
in deploying UNAMID. The Council calls, in this
regard, for Member States to urgently make
available the aviation and ground transport units
still required for UNAMID and for all parties to
facilitate and expedite UNAMID's effective
deployment.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General, in his regular 30-day reports
to the Council on UNAMID, to also report on
progress being made on, and any obstacles to, the
political process and the situation on the ground."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/4l.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.
07-56284
