The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

I am grateful to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH),
Jacques Paul Klein, for his comprehensive briefing. It
is important that, despite the notable progress in
UNMIBH's activities, he focused not on the success
story, but on the problems that remain in implementing
the Dayton and Paris Agreements. I welcome this
businesslike approach to the subject. He is a good
example to other Special Representatives in other
United Nations operations, including in the Balkans,
who are trying to conceal their problems and mistakes
and who describe the entire situation through rose-
coloured glasses, despite the well-known facts.
Fortunately, we hope that the period of assignment of
those who cannot or do not want to discharge the
Security Council's mandates will soon end.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report,
which on the whole objectively reflects the
implementation ofthe Mission's important mandate. Its
interim outcome is encouraging, particularly in the
context of the rather modest successes of the collective
efforts of other institutions to provide real stability in
Bosnia and in each of its entities. We note the effective
actions of the national police forces in keeping order
during the November elections.

We commend the activities of Mr. Klein's
Mission, which seek to focus the efforts of its
personnel on discharging the Mission's core mandate
by the end of 2002. We also agree with the
recommendation in the Secretary-General's report that
the strength of the International Police Task Force
(IPTF) be reduced for the period 2001-2002 to 1,850
personnel.

I agree with my colleagues' View that the basic
component for stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
the Dayton Peace Agreement, which takes into account
the different, at times, conflicting interests of the three
Bosnian peoples and neighbouring States, primarily
Yugoslavia and Croatia. Dayton laid the foundation of
Bosnian statehood on the basis of the existing two
equal entities and the three peoples emerging into
statehood. We believe that any arbitrary interpretation
of the mandate of the international structures is
inadmissible. Any revision of the Dayton Agreement
will inevitably lead to upsetting the balance of
interests. This could lead to new tension in Bosnia and
beyond its borders.

We are convinced that only by basing ourselves
firmly on the Dayton Agreement, Security Council
resolutions and other international documents to settle
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina can we move
forward. Only on this basis can we carry out the task of
strengthening multi-ethnic statehood there, observing
the rights of all peoples in Bosnia and achieving real
reconciliation and post-conflict peace-building.

S/PV.4245

 

Until all these tasks have been done, the
international community has no right to be complacent.
It is important to ensure that the leading political forces
of Bosnia and Herzegovina shoulder their
responsibility for their country's fate and for resolving
the remaining problems, as they undertook to do in the
New York Declaration, which was adopted by the joint
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also call
upon them to improve cooperation between the two
entities, and cooperation not only between each other
within the general Bosnia and Herzegovina organs, but
also with international structures in the country.

With regard to the work of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, I wish once again
to reaffirm our position. We must eliminate
politicization and short-term expediency from its work
and bring its activities into strict compliance with the
Tribunal's status and the decisions of the Security
Council. We must end the practice, which goes beyond
the mandate of the Stabilization Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, of using force to track down indictees on
the basis of so-called sealed indictments of the
Tribunal. We look forward to Council members' having
a text of the so-called secret agreement between the
Tribunal and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO). Carla del Ponte, the Prosecutor of the
Tribunal, decided recently to state publicly that the
agreement did not exist. But we all know, as she does,
that she was not telling the truth. A judiciary has to be
based on the truth. It is time to review the Tribunal's
activities in general, in the light of the basically new
situation that is emerging in the region, in keeping with
the Russian proposals. Those proposals are well
known, and we will continue to discuss them.

The latest events in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia will have a positive impact on the situation
in Bosnia. I am certain that an added impetus to this
positive process will be given by the establishment of
diplomatic relations between Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as well as by
the statement of the President of Yugoslavia, Mr.
Kostunica, regarding his commitment to the Dayton
Peace Agreement.

For its part, Russia will make a constructive
contribution to resolving the remaining problems on
the Bosnian settlement agenda and towards the
establishment of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a unified
multi-ethnic and democratic State.

I also wish to state that the entire history of
peacekeeping efforts in Bosnia reflects a number of
general problems that must be discussed within the
context of United Nations peacekeeping activities as a
whole. Eliminating these problems is the focus of the
Brahimi report (S/2000/809), which the Russian
Federation supports.

It is also clear that, in order to enhance the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, we need a solid financial basis for it. In this
context, we attach particular importance to efforts
being made to reach agreement on reform of the scale
of assessments. We have already had an opportunity to
welcome Senator Biden, who set forth the United
States approach to this problem and pointed out some
specific features inherent to that approach with regard
to the position of the United States Administration on
the one hand and various viewpoints in Congress on
the other hand.

The Russian Federation has adopted and will
continue to adopt a constructive position in its
approach to reform of the scale of assessments,
including, of course, the scale of assessments for
peacekeeping operations. We support the need for a
generally acceptable reform of the scale, and shall fully
assume our particular responsibility in this matter as a
permanent member of the Security Council. The final
outcome of talks on the matter, which we hope can be
achieved next week, can only be a compromise based
on the various positions of all the people involved in
the negotiations. Russia will be prepared to take this
step forward, and we expect others to take this step
also.

I have completed my statement as representative
of the Russian Federation, and resume my functions as
President ofthe Council.

Would any Council members like to make a
follow-up statement at this stage?

