Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing. I would
also like to thank Ms. Imam for sharing her important
perspective with the Security Council. I agree that,
in all of our work, we must endeavour to listen to the
voices of those who are most affected. I did not have
the opportunity to join the Council during its visit,
so I am even more appreciative of Ms. Imam's very
honest description, even in cases where she pointed to
harshness and insufficiencies.

The challenges that face the Lake Chad basin
region are multidimensional - a security crisis, a
humanitarian emergency and development deficits.
During its visit earlier this year, the Council had an
opportunity to see how the interplay between those
elements affects the lives of people in the region.
Resolution 2349 (2017), adopted on our return, and to
which today's briefing responds, was forward-looking
and underlined our solidarity with, and full support of,
the conflict-affected populations and the Governments
in the region.

We commend the subregional, regional and
international efforts being undertaken to mitigate the
consequences of the Boko Haram insurgency. At the
same time, we continue to be deeply concerned about
the alarming scale of the humanitarian crisis. Despite
progress in expanding the humanitarian response,
it is clear that we still need to step up our efforts,
while building on commitments made at the Oslo
Humanitarian Conference in February. We must not let
our attention to the situation wane. I would like to raise
three points that we believe are critical to successfully
responding to the challenges.

First, a holistic and regional approach is necessary.
There are many root causes of instability and insecurity
in the region, including climate change, economic
fragility, marginalization, human rights violations
and demographic challenges. Responding to the
immediate security challenges must go hand in hand
with development efforts that seek to address long-term
instability by improving the daily lives of people on
the ground.

We welcome the plans announced by the African
Union Commission and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission to hold a stabilization conference in
early October. That meeting will present an important
opportunity for countries to work together on the
development of a regional strategy to address the
root causes.

The effects of climate change and its links to
stability and security are evident. We cannot hide from
that reality if we want to truly address the challenges
in the region. The lack of follow-up in this area in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/764) serves
once again to underline the need for improved risk
assessment and risk-management strategies by the
United Nations, as clearly highlighted by the Security
Council in resolution 2349 (2017). The Council must
remain alert to the threats to stability as a result of the
adverse effects of climate change.

There is an inherent link between security,
development and human rights. We agree with the
Secretary-General's assertion that funding for United
Nations human rights monitoring tasks must be
safeguarded. Nigeria's establishment of a judicial
commission to review the compliance of its armed
forces with human rights obligations and rules of
engagement is a welcome development, and we call on
all parties concerned to implement the Abuja Action
Statement. We also encourage the swift deployment of
the remaining civilian personnel to the Multinational
Joint Task Force, not least adequate gender expertise.

The second point I would like to make is on the need
for broad partnerships, particularly with the African
Union (AU) and development actors. As shown by our
visit to Addis Ababa last week, the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council are united in
our analysis of the situation and the required responses.
In order to operationalize those responses, we should
seize the momentum created through the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security.

Similarly, no sustainable peace can be achieved
without effective partnerships spanning the
humanitarian, reconstruction and development nexus.
The Berlin meeting earlier this month underlined
the need for early recovery, prevention and joint
stabilization efforts. Complementarity and cooperation
must be sought with a number of actors, including the
International Financial Institutions (IFI).

My third point is on the role of women as agents of
change. Women's empowerment cannot be overlooked
in reconstruction and stabilization efforts. With the full,
equal and effective participation of women at all levels
of society, policies will be better adapted to realities
on the ground, thereby creating better conditions for
long-term stability and peace. I am particularly pleased
that we have benefited from Ms. Imam joining us here
today. Women from civil society can provide unique
insights to underpin our discussions and decisions.

We are appalled by the finding in the Secretary-
General's report that Boko Haram is increasingly
resorting to suicide attacks, often carried out by
forcibly recruited girls. That is why a key priority of
Governments must be rehabilitation opportunities for
children and their mothers, including the sensitization
of communities to avoid stigmatization and to facilitate
return. We also support the Secretary-General's call
for the development of a strategy to engage women in
the prevention of violent extremism, while taking into
account the complexity of the categories that women
fall into.
The adoption of resolution 2349 (2017) was an
important acknowledgement of the many challenges
facing the Lake Chad basin region and of the Council's
commitment to supporting efforts towards long term
and sustainable peace and development. We must not
lose focus. We see three opportunities going forward.

First, we would welcome further information on
the planning for the joint visit by the leaders of the
United Nations, the AU and the IFIs, as requested in the
resolution. Secondly, we would be interested in hearing
from the United Nations system how the Security
Council can best support the AU-Lake Chad Basin
Commission stabilization conference. Finally, we look
forward to the Secretary-General's report in October
in response to the presidential statement on the risk of
famine in Yemen, Somalia, South Sudan and north-east
Nigeria (S/PRST/2017/14). This briefing will help add
to our understanding of, and response to, the challenges
being faced in the region and beyond.

