Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): The draft
resolution (S/2018/516), which was not adopted by
the Security Council owing to the veto by the United
States, was submitted by us on behalf of the Group
of Arab States, as Kuwait is the Arab member of the
Council at present. This draft resolution was also
supported by the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
at its extraordinary emergency summit, held recently
in Istanbul. We deplore that the Council failed to adopt
the draft resolution, which stipulated that international
protection should be provided to the Palestinian people.
The past few days have shown that the Palestinian
people, as a result of the tragic situation in which
they live, are in dire need of swaying our conscience
to provide them with the protection they require in
the face of the massacres perpetrated against them by
Israel, the occupying Power.

Not only in the light of the most recent protests,
but also over the past five decades, international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
relevant Security Council resolutions have not been
taken into consideration. We would like to thank all
countries that voted in favour of the draft resolution for
their principled and supportive positions towards the
Charter of the United Nations and the international law.

The message sent by the Security Council today in

voting against the draft resolution is that the occupying
Power is not subject to international law and Security
Council resolutions, that it is exempt from accountability
and condemnation, and that the Palestinian people, even
after repeated Israeli aggressions and violations against
their basic rights, do not even deserve a mechanism to
provide them with international protection, despite the
Council's affirmation and commitment that it protects
civilians, in line with many of its resolutions. The
message is also that the most recent events, which
claimed the lives of hundreds of civilians and thousands
of injured people, including women and children, do not
deserve an independent and transparent investigation
in order to identify the perpetrator, even though we
all know who the aggressor is and who is responsible
for that.
The Council's failure to assume its responsibilities
and to compel the occupying Power to implement
Security Council resolutions will exacerbate the
situation in the occupying territories and increase the
feeling of frustration and despair among Palestinians,
which will undoubtedly fuel further violence,
instability, hatred and extremism.

I would like in this regard to quote the questions
posed to the entire world by the Amir of Kuwait, His
Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah,
in his address to the seventh extraordinary Summit of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation which was
held in Istanbul on 18 May. He asked,

"Why must the Palestinians continue to suffer?
Why do we ignore Security Council resolutions and
fail to implement them? Why does the international
community fail to act and resolve the situation?
Why does Israel enjoy impunity? Why are all those
lives lost? Why is all that blood shed while the
entire world remains silent?"

