Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Allow me first of
all to thank you, Mr. President, for having scheduled
this important meeting this morning. I should like also
to thank Under-Secretary-General Abe for having
introduced the Secretary-General's report and for his
words this morning.

Preventing, combating and eradicating the
uncontrolled spread and excessive accumulation of
small arms and light weapons is an integral part of the
Security Council's peace efforts and represents a key
assignment for the Security Council in discharging its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Illicit small arms and light weapons are killing
people on a massive scale and are the main deadly
instruments in the hands of terrorists in several
countries around the globe. This debate is therefore
timely, as we believe that the Security Council has a
key role to play in this regard.

The 2001 United Nations Programme of Action
acknowledges that the excessive accumulation and
uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light
weapons in many regions of the world have had a wide
range of humanitarian and socio-economic
consequences and pose a serious threat to sustainable
development, peace and security. That phenomenon is
indeed a matter of serious international concern, since
it can be directly linked to the fuelling of armed
conflicts.

Small arms and light weapons are thus emerging
not only as a single disarmament and armaments
control issue, but as the source of a cluster of policy
issues with complex linkages among different elements
and regions.
The challenge will be to develop an adequate
political and practical framework within which all
relevant dimensions of this problem, including the
development dimension, can be effectively tackled in
the years to come.

In order to achieve that goal, we need to be
concrete in defining actions at the national, regional
and international levels, especially in strengthening
efforts in such key areas as manufacturing and export
controls, stockpile management, better end-user
certificates, and transparency and information
exchange on legal flows, brokering activities, and the
marking and tracing of small arms.

The United Nations Programme of Action
provides the international community with an
important tool in combating the source of illicit small
arms and light weapons. We are particularly
encouraged to see that regional and subregional
organizations are giving the question of small arms
high priority and that considerable efforts to implement
the Programme of Action are under way at the national
level.

To that effect, with the adoption in 2000 of the
Bamako Declaration on the illicit proliferation,
circulation and trafficking of small arms and light
weapons, the African Union has articulated a
continent-wide strategy for tackling the problem of
illicit small arms.

Correspondingly, the renewal by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) of its
moratorium on the import, export and manufacture of
small arms and light weapons and the initiatives taken
with the framework of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), especially in
adopting improved national legislation to ensure
effective control of the export, import, transit,
stockpiling and storage of small arms, represents a
genuine effort to address the issue.

My country, Angola, has bitter experience with
trafficking in small arms and light weapons fuelled by
the illicit exploitation of natural resources, namely
diamonds, a problem of which the international
community has gained new awareness. That prompted
the Security Council to decisive action - imposing a
strict arms embargo against the rebels - which was
instrumental in bringing the conflict to an end. Angola
and its people are very grateful for the decisive
intervention of the Security Council.

Since the adoption of the United Nations
Programme of Action, relative progress has been
achieved in this field. The United Nations has
established a Group of Governmental Experts to
examine the feasibility of developing an international
instrument on tracing. The progress already achieved,
particularly the report presented during the fifty-eighth
session of the General Assembly and General
Assembly resolution 58/241, represent very important
steps forward on issues related to the marking, tracing
and record-keeping of illicit small arms.

Measures to combat the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons and to promote peace-building and
conflict prevention must be implemented
simultaneously if we are to be successful. Thus,
providing for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of former combatants and
establishing measures for weapon collection and
destruction should always be considered in the context
of negotiated settlements and peacekeeping mandates.
Here, the references made a short while ago by the
representatives of Benin and France are relevant,
particularly to the situations prevailing in Central and
West Africa. In that connection, we fully support the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2003/1217). In addition, we believe it
important that the Security Council support efforts by
Governments and international institutions to develop
further steps to enhance international cooperation in
preventing, combating and eradicating illicit arms
brokering.

We are facing what one could call a sequence of
complex crises in Africa, the Middle East and
elsewhere. It is obvious that only a comprehensive
approach that takes into account socio-economic,
political, security and other factors can effectively
address the problems associated with small arms and
light weapons. The approach should be comprehensive,
in the sense that we need to address the issues at all
levels, from the global to the local. That implies
focusing on the link between licit and illicit flows of
small arms, because most weapons that are now illicit
originated from legal sources.

I should like to conclude by saying that the
international community's efforts aimed at dealing with
small arms must be focused on implementing the
Programme of Action adopted by the United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. My delegation
endorses the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report on small arms submitted to
the Security Council in December 2003, and fully
supports the draft presidential statement to be issued as
the outcome of this important meeting.

