First, allow me to congratulate the German presidency of the Security Council for convening this important open debate on conflict-related sexual violence in the context of the broader women and peace and security agenda. The fight against conflict-related sexual violence is one that should unite the international community, with the Security Council fulfilling its role as the principal organ responsible for maintaining international peace and security on behalf of Member States. For it is unacceptable that, in the twenty-first century, conflict be used as a pretext for carrying out despicable acts of sexual exploitation and violence. While the United Nations has set up a working architecture to deal with the fight against conflict-related sexual violence, it is urgent that words and commitments be translated into action on the ground. In this regard, Brazil lends it support to the efforts of the Office of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, created in 2009 to raise awareness and coordinate the response across the United Nations system and foster a victim- centred approach to sexual violence. Brazil also welcomes initiatives aimed at advancing standard procedures in the fight against conflict-related sexual violence, such as the recently launched "Murad code". We must consider that, among its various impacts on international peace and security, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic creates an ever-more challenging environment for survivors of sexual violence and abuse, providing potential perpetrators with opportunities for their acts to go unpunished while making it more difficult to deter such acts. With this in mind, Brazil warmly welcomes the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), calling for a global cessation of hostilities and establishing a humanitarian pause to allow efforts to stop the spread of the disease to take place in conflict- stricken areas. Nevertheless, the international community should not lower its guard when it comes to the fight against sexual exploitation and abuse in conflict and post- conflict situations. Conversely, we need to remain all the more watchful. Blue Helmets in particular have a key role to play in that regard, while trying to keep themselves safe from the spread of the disease and dutifully fulfilling the mandates of peacekeeping operations. With regard specifically to sexual violence, exploitation and abuse, the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy, to which Brazil adheres entirely, provides a starting point as well as a coherent conceptual framework to deal with this lingering scourge in the context of peacekeeping. We are proud of the overall track record of our peacekeepers in their performance over more than 70 years under the United Nations flag, especially of their strict observance of conduct and discipline protocols, including adherence to the zero-tolerance policy. The twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), which we celebrate this year, should give us pause to reflect on the accomplishments made in the two past decades and on the obstacles and shortcomings the women and peace and security agenda as stumbled upon along the way. Fighting sexual violence is one of the cornerstones of that historic, pioneering resolution. Since its adoption, the Security Council has adopted nine other resolutions on the matter, recognizing that one of the root causes of conflict-related sexual violence is gender inequality, which pick up where resolution 1325 (2000) left off, broadening the agenda of commitments and paving the way for a broad and coherent response by the United Nations system and Member States. The participation of women in every aspect of international peace and security is one way to address the root causes of violence, but women peacekeepers and women mediators are also valuable actors in peacemaking, peacekeeping and sustaining peace. Studies have demonstrated that a peace agreement is about 35 per cent more likely to last at least 15 years if women mediators are involved in the negotiation process. Evidence shows that belligerents trust women to be honest brokers in peace processes, hence lending more credibility to political and diplomatic efforts that will eventually hold out longer. Women peacekeepers are in general able to reach out to more segments of the local population than their male counterparts. Their presence on the ground can encourage the reporting of cases of sexual violence and forge stronger ties between a mission and communities. It is therefore noteworthy that, for the first time in history, roughly half of the Secretary-General's special representatives and envoys are women - a remarkable feat. As we advocate for greater participation by women in peace and security, we must highlight the importance of meeting the targets of the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy 2018-2028 - an integral part of the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Brazil's national action plan on women and peace and security commits to increasing the proportion of female military and police officers in peacekeeping from their current levels - 16.5 per cent of female military observers, 14.6 per cent of staff officers, 4.5 per cent of troops, 11 per cent of formed police units and 26.8 per cent of individual police officers - towards the Strategy's targets. Brazil is also proud of its two Blue Helmets - Commander Marcia Braga and Commander Carla Araujo - distinguished with the United Nations Military Gender Award, in 2018 and 2019, respectively, for the innovative work they carried out by promoting mixed teams in patrols of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, which helped reduce sexual violence in that country. Such recognition stands as a testament to the competence these two military officers bring to the job, as well as to Brazil's commitment to ensuring the broader participation of women in peacekeeping. The manifold links between the inclusion of women in peace and security efforts and the fight against conflict-related sexual violence should not be overlooked, most critically as the world struggles against the COVID-19 pandemic. Brazil stands ready to advance the goals of the women and peace and security agenda as we celebrate the first two decades of resolution 1325 (2000), and to help eliminate the scourge that conflict-related sexual violence inflicts on international peace and security as well as on human dignity.
