Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand applauds
the fact the Lithuania continues the tradition of elected
Council members paying close attention to the issue of
the protection of civilians.

The updated aide-memoire adopted with today's
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/3) is a useful
achievement. But we have to be realistic; it is only a
modest step. There are already many generic statements
from the Council on the protection issue. New Zealand
believes that, at this time, the real challenge is finding
ways to mainstream those thematic statements into the
real-life situations on the Council's agenda and that we
can meet that challenge by carefully assessing where the
gaps lie between Council decisions and actual practice,
and determining how to fill and close those gaps.

In short, we urge that the effort of those who sit at
the Council table be focused on protecting real people
in real conflict situations and on achieving results.
It only adds to the tragedy in Syria that today we are
debating the issue of protection in the abstract, instead
of applying the energy of the Council to a real-life
protection crisis that calls out for attention - and it is
an agonized call, at that.

Moreover, other real life situations demonstrate that
conflict can easily re-emerge in countries where there
is already a United Nations peacekeeping or special
political mission. Experience is showing that such
missions need much clearer guidance on fulfilling their
protection mandates. Events in South Sudan, with tens
of thousands of civilians sheltering in United Nations
compounds - the safe haven of the Blue Helmets,
of which Slovakia has just spoken - and nearly
1 million people displaced, underline the importance of
peacekeeping missions being better prepared and better
mandated for implementing practical protection roles.

New Zealand is convinced that protection works
best when combined with prevention. That means
that the Council must be better informed of emerging
protection challenges. Early warning is one element of
that. Regular briefings focused on emerging civilian
protection challenges should be treated as essential,
not just as "nice to have". But having been warned, are
we prepared to act? Sometimes, even early warning
is not enough. Finding the political will to act is
equally critical - in which regard the Council must
be congratulated for its prompt action, in December,
on South Sudan. But it is worth reflecting on how the
protection needs of civilians in the Central African
Republic and Mali might have been better achieved if
the Council had sent missions to those countries much
earlier in the evolution of their conflicts. Similar, lower-
level missions were sometimes used in that way to good
effect in the past. And they should be used again.

Given its tremendous responsibility to civilian
populations in danger - sometimes in mortal
danger - capacity bottlenecks in the Council should
never become a reason for delaying action. The Council
must ask which aspects of its current practice carry
the risk of delay, and how they can be remedied, thus
allowing it to respond to an emerging threat to civilians,
even if it is already dealing with other crises elsewhere.

It may also be that United Nations peacekeepers
could be better trained and equipped to fulfil
protection-of-civilians mandates. Peacekeepers might
need the relevant enablers, including air assets, to
enhance situation awareness, mobility and force
protection. The finalization by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of tactical-level training
material on the protection of civilians is very welcome,
and its adoption by training centres and troop-
contributing countries will further develop the capacity
and capability of peacebuilders and peacekeepers.

But, as we have said previously, in addition
to training and resources, actually implementing
a protection mandate also requires common
political will. Generating that willingness and
coordinating protection-of-civilians activities across
multidimensional missions is a complex task, and thus
New Zealand supports a strong protection-of-civilians
coordination capacity.

Like Germany, New Zealand is convinced that
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons
is one of the key factors threatening the safety of
civilians - indeed, threatening the safety of the
peacekeepers sent to protect them. Peacekeepers should
be mandated to assist in tracking illicit transfers of
small arms and in implementing restrictions on their
movement in their areas of operation. That would have
a real impact on the protection environment.

Looking forward, we must acknowledge that, when
the protection of civilians fails, all too often that failure
is accompanied by grave war crimes and atrocities.
As the representative of Italy has just emphasized,
where States cannot or do not fulfil their obligations
to ensure accountability for breaches of international
humanitarian and human rights law, international
mechanisms, including the International Criminal
Court, play an important role in preventing impunity.

As we have seen so recently, there are important
questions about when, and in what circumstances,
such mechanisms should play their role. Therefore,
Madam President, the debate on rule of law, which
your country, Lithuania, has scheduled for 19 February,
will be an ideal opportunity for the linkage between
protection and accountability to be explored. New
Zealand will welcome the opportunity to contribute to
that discussion as well.

