Mr. Djinnit: Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your country's assumption of
the Security Council presidency for the month of
October and to further convey the appreciation of the
Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union
(AU) for providing this opportunity for the
Commission to brief the Security Council on the
conclusions of the 40th meeting of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union on C6te
d'Ivoire.

The fact that we are meeting together here today,
following the meeting of the Peace and Security
Council, bears eloquent testimony to our common
resolve to promote and enhance coordination and
cooperation between the Security Council and regional
and subregional organizations.

As all Security Council members are aware, and
as recalled by Mr. Adeniji, the initiative to convene an
urgent meeting in New York of the Peace and Security
Council on 14 September at the head of State and
Government level, at the initiative of Nigerian
President Obasanjo, was taken against the background
of the slow progress in the implementation of
agreements and the resulting threat to the peace
process, particularly in view of the fact that the holding
of elections on 30 October 2005 was no longer
feasible.

At that meeting, the Peace and Security Council
decided that the Summit of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) should convene
urgently to assess the situation with respect to the
problems of the implementation of the outstanding
agreements and report to a meeting of the Peace and
Security Council, to be convened urgently at the
summit level, with the participation of ECOWAS
leaders, to consider the matter and decide accordingly.

The ECOWAS Summit met on 30 September and
formulated a set of recommendations that were
considered by the Peace and Security Council at its
meeting held on 6 October at the level of heads of State
or Government, with the participation of ECOWAS
leaders and the United Nations, among others.

Based on the ECOWAS recommendations and
taking into account the efforts made by ECOWAS
leaders, the AU Mediation and the United Nations on
the one hand, and the concerns expressed by all the
Ivorian parties on the other, the Peace and Security
Council endeavoured to provide an African perspective
to the efforts aimed at addressing the challenges
confronting the peace process in C6te d'Ivoire. After
its deliberations, the Peace and Security Council
agreed on the following.

Regarding the period after 30 October 2005, the
Peace and Security Council decided that the
arrangements agreed upon in the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement shall continue from 31 October 2005 for a
period not exceeding 12 months and that, first,
President Gbagbo shall remain Head of State during
the aforementioned period. Secondly, it agreed that a
new Prime Minister acceptable to all the Ivorian parties
signatories to the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement shall be
appointed; the Government which he will lead shall be
composed of personalities proposed by the Ivorian
parties signatories to the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.
Thirdly, it agreed that the Ivorian parties shall be
invited, as soon as possible, to a forum for national
dialogue in Yamoussoukro; that meeting, which shall
be open to civil society, including the traditional
leaders and the private sector, shall be co-chaired by
President Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria and President
Thabo Mbeki of South Africa.

Regarding the international community's role in
and support for the peace process, the Peace and
Security Council decided, first, to reaffirm President
Mbeki in his role as AU Mediator. Secondly, it decided
on the establishment of an international working group
at ministerial level to be chaired by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Nigeria in his capacity as Chair of
the AU. The Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the Special Representative of the
Executive Secretary of ECOWAS in Cote d'Ivoire and
the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
AU Commission in C6te d'Ivoire shall serve as
secretariat, which shall be coordinated by the United
Nations. Thirdly, it decided that the day-to-day
mediation shall be undertaken by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the High
Representative of the Secretary-General for elections
in Cote d'Ivoire, the Special Envoy of South Africa,
the Special Representative of the Executive Secretary
of ECOWAS and the Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the AU Commission in Cote d'Ivoire.
The mediation group shall be chaired by the Special
Envoy of South Africa, as the representative of the AU
Mediator.

Regarding the specific role of the United Nations,
the Peace and Security Council affirmed its support for
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(ONUCI) and requested the Security Council to
provide ONUCI with all necessary means to enable it
effectively discharge its mandate, and to further
consider authorizing a substantial increase of its
strength. It reaffirmed its support for individual
measures provided for in paragraphs 9 and 11 of
Security Council resolution 1572 (2004) of
15 November 2004 and subsequent resolutions relevant
to the commitments made by the Ivorian parties.

Finally, the Peace and Security Council decided
to dispatch a high-level delegation to C6te d'Ivoire
comprising President Olusegun Obasanjo, Chairman of
the AU, and President Thabo Mbeki, AU Mediator, to
meet with President Gbagbo and other Ivorian parties
with respect to the implementation of its decision.

At this crucial juncture in the peace process in
cote d'Ivoire, we cannot ignore the significant gains
achieved so far. Yet neither should we underestimate
the difficulties ahead, as we are quite familiar with the
fact that the non-implementation of agreements had
become a perennial state of play in Cote d'Ivoire. In
adopting its decision on 6 October 2005, the Peace and
Security Council aimed at injecting new impetus into
the peace process through greater determination and
involvement by the international community and
greater support for and pressure on the Ivorian parties
in the implementation of their commitments and
obligations.

Before concluding, I should like to share with
members of the Security Council the following
observations.

First, the Ivorian parties and the international
community need to take full advantage of the period
not exceeding 12 months to address all outstanding
issues, including disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, the disarmament and dismantling of
militias and the creation of conditions for the
organization of free, fair and transparent elections.
This requires the adoption as soon as possible of a tight
calendar of implementation.

Secondly, members of the international
community need to work hand in hand, and the
Security Council needs to convey a strong signal to the
Ivorian parties concerning the determination and
cohesion of the international community.

Thirdly, there is a need to strengthen the role and
presence of the United Nations, both in terms of
providing UNOCI with all the necessary means to
enable it discharge its mandate effectively and in terms
of strengthening the authority of the High
Representative for elections in Cote d'Ivoire in order to
enable him to organize credible elections.

Fourthly, the parties need to comply strictly with
their commitments and obligations, and the
international community needs to show greater
determination to exert the necessary pressure and
sanctions against defaulting parties.

In conclusion, I would like to invite the members
of the Security Council to support the decision of the
40th meeting of the Peace and Security Council and to
take all other necessary measures aimed at further
advancing the peace process in C6te d'Ivoire and thus
contribute to the restoration of peace in that country, a
peace which is anxiously awaited not only by the
people of cote d'Ivoire but by the region and the
continent as a whole.

