Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): All day, we have had the
pleasure of hearing many countries state their intent
with regard to Afghanistan. At this time in the evening,
it must be said that Ambassador Tanin has done a great
job, as evidenced in the immense feeling of goodwill
that has been expressed throughout this meeting for
him and for his country. I offer him my
congratulations.

Allow me to thank the Council for the
opportunity to participate in this discussion, as this
issue is of vital importance for my country and peace
in the region. We feel the pain and untold suffering
endured by our brothers in Afghanistan, who have been
the victims of history, circumstances and unrelenting
conflict for many years.

For three decades, Pakistan has suffered with our
Afghan brethren, and the fallout of the instability and
conflict has affected us grievously. The refugee influx
into Pakistan remains of amazing proportions, and this
is only one side of the reality. We have a vital stake in
the peace and stability of Afghanistan. The destinies of
our two peoples are as closely interlinked in the future
as they were in the past. It is with this perspective and
deep commitment that we participate in this debate on
Afghanistan.

The United Nations has a central role in
mobilizing and coordinating international action in
support of Afghanistan, and the challenging
circumstances of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), led by Special
Representative Kai Eide, cannot be underestimated. It
is a major contribution and will remain crucial to any
settlement that will be defined in conferences around
the world for many months to follow. I would like to
thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Eide for the most
recent report (S/2009/135), which, to my mind,
provides an objective overview of the situation in
Afghanistan.

The challenges are well-known, from security to
political, humanitarian and development issues. The
challenges are multifaceted, daunting in scope and
closely interlinked. They require a truly
comprehensive, substantial and integrated response
that is fully owned and led by the Afghans, with the
sustained and long-term attention and support of the
international community. The ongoing concern remains
the increased violence and insecurity, which continue
to be rooted in the complex interplay of Taliban,
Al-Qaida, warlordism, factional rivalries and the
activities of illegally armed and criminal groups and
are fuelled by the illicit drug trade. Popular grievances
arising from various causes, ranging from civilian
casualties to socio-economic hardships and lack of
governance and development, are further compounding
the situation.

Terrorism remains a major challenge. It has roots
in all parts of the world. Together with Afghanistan,
Pakistan faces the brunt of the terrorist and extremist
threat. In 2008 alone, nearly 2,000 Pakistanis lost their

lives in over 600 terrorism-related incidents in
Pakistan. Pakistan's economy has suffered directly and
indirectly, with losses in the billions. However, this has
not diminished our commitment to curb and reverse the
menace of terrorism and extremism. To deal with this
menace, the Government is pursuing a comprehensive
and multi-pronged strategy, partly through a resolution
of parliament structured around democracy, dialogue
and development. This approach is being pursued with
the support, cooperation and ownership of both
populations. Our message is unequivocal. The territory
of Pakistan will not be allowed to be used for terrorist
activities, while our sovereignty and territorial integrity
must also be fully respected.

We are doing our utmost to control and interdict
illegal movement across the difficult border with
Afghanistan. We have established approximately 1,000
checkpoints and deployed more than 120,000 troops on
our side of the border. Reciprocal measures on the
other side of the border can complement and reinforce
this effort. Cooperation under the tripartite military
commission has proven useful, and we wish to see this
mechanism further strengthened. We are concerned
about the financing and arming of militants and recent
incursion of militants into our territory. There is an
additional security risk posed by the millions of
refugees remaining within Pakistan.

I am sure that as the international community
reviews its strategy to achieve the common objective
of peace in Afghanistan, we will be guided by lessons
of history and past mistakes in this dispassionate stock-
taking. We should assess why, seven years on, despite
having made some notable gains in Afghanistan
through heavy investments and sacrifices, the situation
does not give rise to much optimism. Are the
underlying causes of insecurity being effectively
addressed? Are militancy and terrorism being reined in,
or are they spreading? How successful are the military
strategies? How adequate and effective is the non-
military component? Has international assistance
brought about a tangible improvement in the lives of
the ordinary people? Are we winning the hearts and
minds of the people of Afghanistan? If there is to be a
rule of thumb to follow in answering these questions, it
should be to ask why so many millions remain refugees
in appalling conditions in neighbouring countries.

Afghanistan can best cope with its challenges
without intervention or interference. However, this
should not mean disengagement and abandonment. As
many speakers have mentioned, this has happened in
the past. What is required is a fuller understanding of
the needs and priorities of the Afghan people and
respect for their traditions, values, culture and religion.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the strategy
must be to prioritize, rationalize and Afghanize. In our
view, the following should be the elements of any
constructive engagement.

First, we must ensure a comprehensive,
coordinated and balanced approach. It is evident that
reliance on military means alone cannot deliver peace.

Secondly, for durable stability, people must
assume ownership. There should be enhanced focus on
indigenous and national capacity-building in all fields,
from governance to security, in order to reduce reliance
on external support.

Thirdly, a massive investment in reconstruction,
development and social welfare is required with the
participation of all segments of Afghan society. The
benefits of development, rather than insecurity, chaos
and deprivation, should become the talk of the town.
The drug problem must be dealt with comprehensively
in the context of development through the provision of
alternative livelihoods.

Fourthly, in the battle for hearts and minds,
persuasion must override force and coercion. An
inclusive process based on dialogue and broad national
reconciliation can catalyse the consolidation of gains
from the international efforts in Afghanistan. The
forthcoming election offers an excellent opportunity to
harness reconciliation and promote inclusion through a
democratic process. Pakistan will provide all possible
support for the successful conduct of elections.

Fifthly, any strategy should accord priority and
allocate resources for the repatriation of the millions of
refugees from Pakistan. A pull factor needs to be
created inside Afghanistan to encourage the voluntary
return of refugees.

Regional cooperation is the key to sustainable
peace and development in Afghanistan. A regional
approach has to take into account the interests, the
capacities and the aspirations of sovereign States and
their peoples. It should build solid stakes in lasting
peace.

Afghanistan's integration in regional mechanisms
is encouraging. It is a member of the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation, it is a member

of the Economic Cooperation Organization, which
earlier this month held its tenth summit meeting in
Tehran, which also hosted the first Afghanistan-Iran-
Pakistan trilateral summit. The second trilateral summit
of Afghanistan, Pakistan and Turkey took place earlier
in Istanbul in December 2008. Pakistan will host the
third Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan in Islamabad in May.

Building on the Kabul and Delhi conferences, the
Islamabad meeting will focus on five major themes -
mining, health, trade and transit, labour movement and
human resources development, and energy and
infrastructure, including the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-
Pakistan-India gas pipeline project. We also look
forward to other forthcoming international engagements
on Afghanistan, in Moscow on 27 March, The Hague on
31 March and Trieste on 26 and 27 June.

Pakistan attaches high priority to close, friendly
and cooperative relations with Afghanistan. The new
democratic Government of Pakistan has made a
promising beginning with Afghanistan. There have
been a number of bilateral interactions at the highest
level. We are making steady progress in building a
relationship of deeper trust and understanding. The
reinvigorated Jirga process provides a useful means for
promoting dialogue and development.

During the visit of President Zardari to
Afghanistan in January 2009, the two sides signed an
historic joint declaration on future directions and
bilateral cooperation. The declaration provides a
comprehensive framework to take the Pak-Afghan
partnership to higher levels in the political, economic,
security and social fields.

I may mention that, despite our constraints,
Pakistan is also making a significant contribution to the
reconstruction and development efforts in Afghanistan.
We have pledged $320 million for that purpose, of
which $170 million have already been spent on various
projects in diverse socio-economic sectors, training,
capacity-building and infrastructure.

Let me conclude by saying that Pakistan will be
the primary beneficiary of peace and stability in
Afghanistan, which is also the collective objective of
the international community. We hope that today's
debate will further promote this objective, to which
Pakistan remains deeply committed.
