Mr. Vale De Almeida (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its 28 member States. I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2018/241), and
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing. I also
welcome the presence of our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Haiti at this meeting.

The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

On 13 April 2017, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2350 (2017), which ended the mandate of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
on 15 October 2017. The resolution sets out the legal
framework for the transition to the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
whose primary objective is strengthening the rule of
law and the Haitian National Police, as well as the
promotion and protection of human rights.

The long cycle of institutional instability that
characterized the electoral process in Haiti in 2015 and
2016 finally ended with the election of President Moise
and a new Parliament. As a long-standing supporter of
the Haitian people, the European Union welcomes the
country's return to constitutional normalcy despite the
significant challenges facing it. In our view, that is a
condition sine qua non for Haiti to be able to deal with
the many political, economic, social and environmental
challenges that it faces.

However, while a return to constitutional order
is necessary condition, it is not enough to ensure the
democratic stability and sustainable development that
the country needs. The root causes of the instability
persist. In our view, bold reforms of the Constitution, the
electoral system and the judiciary are therefore urgent
in order to restore the trust of the Haitian people in their
democracy and their political system. It is particularly
important to ensure true access for all to fair, equitable
and effective justice. Signs of a willingness to reform
are evident. We must now realize them and seize the
historic opportunity provided by this period of relative
stability and democratic legitimacy.

As in recent years, the efforts of all actors to
ensure the stability and security of citizens will remain
necessary to the process of democratic consolidation.
As MINUJUSTH notes in the section entitled
"Benchmarks for an exit strategy" (see S/2018/24l, annex), consensus-based and profound reform of the
electoral system would be key to preventing new crises
and to regaining the trust of the population.

The European Union remains a committed and
faithful partner of the Republic of Haiti. We are
resolved to support the country in this sensitive phase,
including in the necessary reform process that I have
just mentioned, in consultation with all the other
partners. The European Union appreciates and supports
the work of MINUJUSTH focusing on the development
of the Haitian National Police, the justice sector and
the rule of law and on the promotion and protection of
human rights.

Despite an improvement in the security situation
thanks to the political stability over the past year, the
European Union believes that the structural causes
of instability in Haiti still need to be addressed and
that the security situation remains very fragile. We
therefore believe that it is essential to complete the
task of strengthening and professionalizing the Haitian
National Police, to focus on the need for judicial and
prison reform and, finally, to strengthen respect for
human rights.

In that context, the ongoing implementation of
the mandate of MINUJUSTH over a period of time
sufficient for the transition of responsibilities to the
country team to be completed and to deal with all those
challenges seems to us essential. That time is necessary
to make adequate progress in order to ensure genuine
continuity following the withdrawal of the United
Nations mission, as well as the irreversibility of the
reforms carried out.

In conclusion, allow me to express the EU's positive
assessment of the contribution of MINUJUSTH in
terms of security, conflict prevention and strengthening
democracy and the rule of law in Haiti. That contribution
is attributable to its entire staff, its commitment and its
skills, for which we warmly thank them all.

However, we already need to think about the
future. In that regard, the modalities for the transition
of MINUJUSTH are in our View fundamental. Special
attention to respect for human rights in security work,
as well as access to impartial justice for all, will be
particularly necessary. It is essential that the Haitian
National Police and judicial system be effectively
prepared to assume in the future all the tasks currently
undertaken by the United Nations Mission.

Together with the United Nations and the
international community, the European Union will
support the Haitian authorities so that they can
strengthen their commitment and their efforts to ensure
a better future of peace, democracy, stability and well-
being for all Haitian people.

