We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. We are grateful to Nickolay for all his efforts and support him and his initiatives and ideas. As never before, international cooperation and action are needed to advance the Middle East peace process. Plans for the annexation of Palestinian territories threaten to undermine this process. President Mahmoud Abbas announced yesterday that the Palestinian Authority is free from its commitments under the Oslo Accords. As a result, the door to any prospects for the two-State solution may be closed. It proves that no time should be wasted. We see no alternative to two States, Israel and Palestine, living peacefully, side by side. In this regard, we reiterate our call to refrain from any unilateral action that may undermine prospects for such a solution. Russia, as a member of the Middle East Quartet of international mediators, is ready to fully engage in efforts to safeguard the principles of the settlement, which are enshrined in the relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. They provide a basis for the creation of an independent, sovereign, territorially contiguous Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We say no to violence. At the same time, we say no to the annexation of Palestinian territories, but also to that of the Syrian Golan Heights and of Lebanese territories. We say no to continuation of settlement activities, the demolition and confiscation of Palestinian property, and violent clashes. Events show the urgent need to engage in efforts to salvage the peace process. We are ready to support and facilitate them as a member of the Quartet. We are also ready to engage with key countries of the region to consolidate collective efforts and to hold Quartet meetings with their participation. We will continue dialogue with countries in the Middle East and with the League of Arab States. Palestinian unity is more necessary than ever. We will continue our efforts in this regard, and greatly appreciate the role of our Egyptian friends. We urge Palestinians and Israelis to continue coordination on fighting the coronavirus disease pandemic. We share concerns about possible consequences of the spread of the disease in the Gaza Strip. But even without the pandemic, the humanitarian situation in Gaza is dire. We note that medical equipment has been delivered by the World Health Organization and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). However, given the humanitarian situation in Gaza, these efforts should be enhanced. The work of UNRWA, and support for it from the international community, become more important than ever. We see no alternative to the Agency as an important element for maintaining stability and providing assistance to Palestinian refugees in the region.
