Mr. Oshima (Japan): Let me first express our
thanks to you, Sir, for convening this public meeting
on Timor-Leste at an important juncture, as the end of
the mandate of the United Nations Office in Timor-
Leste (UNOTIL) draws near in a few months time. We
thank Special Representative Hasegawa for his
comprehensive briefing on the latest developments in
the country. My delegation highly appreciates the
presence in the Chamber of President Xanana Gusmao
and Foreign Minister Jose Ramos-Horta, and
particularly thanks President Gusmao for his
significant statement.

Japan notes with satisfaction the tangible
achievements and encouraging progress that continue
to be made in Timor-Leste in its peace-building and
nation-building efforts, especially in the
implementation of the three programmes mandated by
the Security Council: the development of critical State
institutions, the development of police, and training in
the field of democratic governance and human rights.
We also welcome the progress being made in the
preparations for the transfer of the functions of
UNOTIL to the Government of Timor-Leste and
various development partners as the country moves
towards the phase of sustainable development.

We commend Special Representative Hasegawa
and his team for their hard work and pay tribute to
those advisers and experts working on the ground and
the many organizations and groups involved for all the
valuable contributions they have made, working in
close partnership with the Timor-Leste Government, its
institutions and its people. We have high expectations
that they will push on with their efforts as the mission's
mandate approaches its end in May, so that those gains
will be consolidated and made sustainable to the
maximum extent possible.

I would like, in passing, to note just one thing in
that connection. The Secretary-General's report
mentions, in reference to programme II of UNOTIL's
support for the development of the Timor-Leste police,
the fact that 10 Timorese national police officers have
recently been deployed to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo. I consider this a
remarkable thing, which shows the degree of success
of this programme. At the same time, the fact that, in
our world, a nation assisted in times of need can in turn
participate in assisting others in their time of need
demonstrates the true international cooperative spirit.
This is just a small episode, but I think that its
significance is, nevertheless, remarkable.

We are also encouraged to see steady, remarkable
improvements in Timor-Leste's relations with
neighbouring countries. Occasional incidents along the
border with Indonesia are resolved through dialogue,
backed up by the improved bilateral relationship
between the two countries. We hope that the remaining
work involved in the delineation of the land border
with Indonesia will be completed soon.

We also welcome the recent agreement reached
between Timor-Leste and Australia over the sharing of
the revenues from oil and gas development in the
Timor Sea. With the Petroleum Fund established to
ensure the prudent and wise use of income from natural
resources, we hope that this will provide an important
boost to the development of the Timorese economy and
society.

Japan underscores the necessity of ensuring that
the United Nations and the international community
continue to provide the appropriate and timely support
which is still needed in Timor-Leste and of adapting
that support to the country's changing needs and
requirements. Timor-Leste has moved from conflict to
peacekeeping to peacebuilding, and, as the country has
gone through those phases, the United Nations
presence and assistance to Timor-Leste has evolved
from the United Nations Mission in East Timor
(UNAMET) to the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) to the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), and finally to UNOTIL, to meet the
changing needs of the country, and it has done so, on
the whole, quite successfully. We owe it to ourselves,
as well as to the Government and the people of Timor-
Leste, to see to it that the record of this success story
remains a cause for pride in the annals of United
Nations history.

With that in mind, and with regard to the question
of the future engagement of the United Nations after
the mandate of UNOTIL expires, my Government has
taken note of the request of the Timor-Leste
Government to retain a United Nations political
presence for a certain period of time, particularly the
request for international assistance in connection with
the upcoming general elections in 2007 and the
retention of some civilian advisers. In making that
decision, we should study carefully the
recommendations of the United Nations electoral
assistance needs assessment mission.

My delegation will certainly study carefully the
request made by the Timor-Leste Government in
considering the modalities of United Nations assistance
in the post-UNOTIL period, with an objective
assessment of the situation on the ground, including in
the area of security, while also taking into account the
views of UNOTIL, other actors on the ground and the
key countries concerned.

Finally, the issue of the serious crimes that took
place in Timor-Leste must also be addressed. My
Government is of the view that the spirit that prompted
the joint establishment of the Commission of Truth and
Friendship by Timor-Leste and Indonesia should be
respected, and we hope that the Commission will
produce results that meet its own aims as well as the
expectations of the international community.

The Security Council requested the Secretary-
General last September to provide his views on justice
and reconciliation for Timor-Leste, adopting a
practical, realistic approach to this issue and taking
into account the views of the two countries. We believe
that this issue can be resolved through the productive
engagement of all parties concerned. The statement we
heard from the President this morning on this very
issue should be an important guide in the handling of
this matter.

Before concluding, my delegation wishes to pay
high tribute to the leadership of the Timor-Leste
Government, to President Gusmao and Foreign
Minister Ramos-Horta, which has enabled the country
to make the sort of progress towards peace, security
and development that we have seen so far.

As a friend of Timor-Leste in the region, Japan
has actively participated in international efforts to help
Timor-Leste maintain peace and consolidate the gains
of peace, through UNMISET and UNOTIL as well as
through other multilateral and bilateral frameworks.
The introduction of the "koban", or police mini-station,
system to the police system of Timor-Leste, and the
transfer of skills related to the disposal of undetonated
bombs are recent examples of our assistance efforts.
Japan will spare no effort in continuing its support for
Timor-Leste's future endeavours aimed at nation-
building and sustainable development.

