Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Jordan for convening this meeting on
behalf of the Arab countries, and Assistant Secretary-
General Zerihoun for his briefing.
Recently, the conflict between Palestine and Israel
has further escalated, leading to a worsening security
situation in East Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza.
China is deeply worried about that development. We
are concerned about the military crackdowns by Israeli
forces, which have led to Palestinian civilian casualties,
including women and children. The excessive use of
force, which causes casualties among innocent civilians,
is unacceptable. Returning violence for violence does
not help resolve issues; instead, it will only erode
mutual trust and exacerbate conflict and confrontation.
China urges both Palestine and Israel to heed the calls
of the international community to exercise maximum
restraint and to take practical measures to avoid further
escalation of the conflict.

China welcomes the efforts by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon to de-escalate the tensions between
Palestine and Israel. In the present circumstances, the
international community, in particular the Security
Council, should have a stronger sense of urgency. It
should assume its responsibility, actively respond to the
legitimate demands ofPalestine and the Arab countries,
take the necessary action and promote efforts by the
parties concerned to immediately cease their clashes
and de-escalate tensions.

Achieving peaceful coexistence between Palestine
and Israel is the right direction to take in order to resolve
the Palestine-Israel question. Peace talks are the only
path forward. We hope that the Israeli Government will
take the lead in taking action in a spirit of good faith.

The legitimate security concerns of the countries
of the region should be taken into account. The
international community should make concerted efforts
to promote the quick resumption of talks by Palestine
and Israel on a broad-based platform, with the direct
participation of all major players, so as to resolve the
deep-rooted issues in bilateral relations.

China has been consistent in its support for the

just cause of the Palestinian people struggling for the
restoration of their legitimate national rights. We are
committed, as always, to the promotion of peace talks.
We will continue to maintain contact and coordination
with the parties concerned, to make unremitting efforts
to ease the tensions between Palestine and Israel and to
promote the resumption of their talks.

