Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Francois Lounceny
Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA), for his briefing, and to
commend the efforts and activities of UNOCA in
Central Africa in its fulfilment of its mandate. I would
also like to thank Mr. Sasha Lezhnev for his valuable
briefing. Today I will focus on three aspects ofthe issue.

First, with regard to the security and political
situation in Central Africa, the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/9l3) gives a clear overview
of the deteriorating security situation in a number of
countries in the region resulting from problems to
do with election processes. We have seen political
and security tensions increase in Cameroon since the
contested presidential elections there in October 2018,
and they are likely to continue to worsen, given the
stark differences in Views in the country's North-West
and South-West regions. In Chad, the postponement of
legislative and local elections since 2015 has continued
to have repercussions affecting the security situation,
especially in the north and some parts of eastern Chad.
We hope that elections will be held in the first quarter
of 2020, in accordance with the announcement by the
National Independent Electoral Commission. We also
look forward to an inclusive national dialogue that can
halt the bloodshed and ensure political and security
stability in the countries of the region that are dealing
with political divisions and deteriorating security.
This is especially important in view of the fact that a
number of major events in the region are approaching,
including the presidential elections to be held in the
Central African Republic and Burundi in 2020, which
we hope will include all political parties, ensure the
participation of international observers, and will be
held in a stable security environment. All of this will
undoubtedly have positive effects for the stability and
prosperity of the region as a whole.

We stress the importance of cooperation
between the Governments of the region and regional,
subregional and international organizations such as
the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community, the Lake
Chad Basin Commission and other relevant actors. The
security situation in the region continues to be a source
ofconcern in the light ofthe ongoing violence and armed
conflicts, which have unfortunately claimed the lives of
many innocent civilians. We stress the need for radical
solutions to end the conflicts and hold those responsible
to account. We condemn in the strongest possible terms
the criminal acts and suicide bombings carried out by
Boko Haram and the Lord's Resistance Army, which
hinder progress on all fronts and constitute a serious
and direct threat, as Mr. Fall said. International and
regional cooperation is essential if we are to overcome
those challenges.

Secondly, we deplore the worsening humanitarian
situation in the region in general, given the large numbers
of those in need of urgent humanitarian assistance and
the growing numbers of refugees and people forced
into displacement as a result of violence and outbreaks
of cholera, Ebola and other diseases. We share the
Secretary-General's concerns about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in a number of countries in the
region and urge them to continue cooperating with
regional and international organizations. They should
work harder to alleviate human suffering and address
the various threats facing the region, including the
environmental risks posed by climate change and its
impact on agriculture, as well as the lack of rainfall and
the drying up of various lakes.

The third and final aspect I would like to discuss
is cooperation with UNOCA and other organizations.
Since this is the Council's last meeting about Central
Africa during Kuwait's membership of the Council, I
would like to take this opportunity to stress that over
the past two years we have seen a number of Central
African countries make good progress, which we
have commended and looked forward to building on.
Other countries, however, still have a long way to go.
There are many and diverse challenges that require
meaningful cooperation among Governments and
regional and international organizations if we are
to meet the aspirations of the peoples of the region
to achieve security, stability and a dignified life,
especially given the fact that those countries enjoy a
wealth of natural resources.

In conclusion, I once again thank Mr. Fall and the
UNOCA team for their outstanding efforts.

