Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Uruguayan presidency of
the Security Council for organizing today's important
and very welcome debate. I would also like to thank
Ms. Christine Beerli, Vice-President ofthe International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and Mr. Bruno
Stagno Ugarte, Deputy Executive Director for Advocacy
of Human Rights Watch, for their presence here today,
their very informative briefings and their commitment
and that of their teams.

I would also especially like to thank the Secretary-
General for presenting his ambitious vision for the
protection of civilians, so central to the prevention
agenda. France fully shares that priority and ambition,
to which the Council must fully contribute.

When we in the Council talk about Syria, about
indiscriminate bombing in residential areas in defiance
of respect for humanitarian law, as has been described;
when we talk about Yemen, Iraq, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic,
Afghanistan or South Sudan, we are all conscious of
the plight of civilians, women, children, journalists and
medical and humanitarian personnel - those who pay
the high price of conflict. The protection of civilians
is one of our highest priorities, and the challenge is
to translate that priority into action. That is why the
Council has made the protection of civilians central
to the mandates of peacekeeping operations that
have to use robust methods. It is also why violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
have been integrated into sanctions regimes. Those
responsible for such violations must be punished more
systematically, and we must go further.

We have specific tools that we should use to do
that. The first is the aide memoire on the protection
of civilians (see S/PRST/2015/23), which was updated
in November 2015 and has become a concrete,
comprehensive instrument. We should distribute it
and make use of it as widely as possible. The second
is the Kigali Principles, which provide guidance on
conducting operations, training and cooperating with
local communities on the ground. France supports
them, and we should all do the same. The third is the
recommendations that the Secretary-General made
in his most recent report (S/2017/414), many of which
are particularly useful. I would like to highlight three
major issues that he raises that we should prioritize and
make progress on.

The first is humanitarian access, which must be
safe, immediate, full and unhindered, which, as we
know, is far from being the case everywhere. In Syria,
restrictions on humanitarian access are used as a
method of warfare, which is unacceptable. In Yemen,
effective and unhindered access must be restored for
humanitarian aid and basic necessities. Needless to say,
we are concerned about the famine not only in Yemen
but also in Somalia, Nigeria and South Sudan, where
nearly 20 million people are at risk. France will be
organizing an Arria Formula meeting on this subject
very soon.

The second priority is disappearances. We have
heard the ICRC's warning, relayed by the Secretary-
General, that in some areas disappearances have
more than quadrupled since 2014. They are the result
of fighting that displaces populations and separates
families, as well as of kidnappings and arrests that
include arbitrary detentions, torture and executions,
as has happened in Syria. In that regard, France
calls on all countries to ratify the Convention on
Enforced Disappearance.

The third priority is justice, because there can be no
protection of civilians without sanctions for violations of
people's rights. We welcome the progress that has been
made in some places. A special criminal court is being
established in the Central African Republic. In Mali,
the Joint Mechanism has already begun prosecutions.
As a complementary measure, when nothing can be
done at the national level, the Rome Statute enables the
Security Council to make referrals to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). In the case of Syria, as we know,
France's proposal that the ICC be involved was vetoed.
We should not forget the Council's responsibility in
that regard, since evidence continues to be collected
in cooperation with the International Commission
of Inquiry and, soon, a dedicated mechanism. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we have taken note

of the statement by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court to the effect that the violence between
local militias and Congolese forces, the killing of many
civilians and non-civilians, kidnappings and summary
executions, including of United Nations experts on
mission and their support staff, could constitute crimes
within the Court's jurisdiction.

I would like to touch on resolution 2286 (2016) more
specifically, because it is emblematic. Indeed, attacks
on hospitals kill caregivers and patients, but they also
condemn to death all those who would require care in
future. The consequences for children, particularly in
Yemen and Syria, are extremely alarming.

You have invited us, Mr. President, to share our
actions to implement resolution 2286 (2016). I will cite
three that concern the French forces.

The first example is notification and communication
to the forces of no-strike lists, elaborated in connection
with the ICRC, whose efforts I again warmly salute.
The latest air campaigns in Libya, Mali and the Levant
have all been carried out by systematically including
personnel, vehicles and health infrastructure on the
lists of protected properties, including their locations.
Moreover, regarding the use of explosive weapons in
urban areas, our very strict rules of engagement make
possible the prevention of humanitarian consequences
of our operations, in accordance with international
humanitarian law.

Secondly, with regard to the training of
troops - ours and those with whom we cooperate - in
Gao, Mali, the legal advisers of the Barkhane force are
raising the awareness of the Malian forces as to the
protection of medical facilities through regular training
in the law of armed conflict, as but one example.

A third example is the protection due to the
injured, whoever they are. Any member of the enemy
belligerent forces who is wounded and collected by the
French forces is cared for by the French army health
service until his wounds have healed. French forces,
when deployed in harsh environments, also provide
medical care to civilians. As an example, I reaffirm
the importance that France attaches to the fight against
sexual abuse through concrete action in prevention,
training and the fight against impunity.

To conclude, I will make a recommendation for
the information of the Council. The Secretary-General
highlighted the importance of early warning and of
the collection of structured data in the implementation
of resolution 2286 (2016). The annual report on the
protection of civilians could include a dedicated
appendix identifying the development and type of
attacks on medical personnel and their facilities. I wish
to recall the role of the World Health Organization
(WHO) in that regard and to take the opportunity to
congratulate the new Director-General of WHO, Dr.
Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, with whom the Security
Council must be fully engaged.

