Ms. Boucher (Canada): I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council. I would
also like to thank Special Representative Yamamoto for
his insightful briefing.

I would like to begin by offering my sincere
condolences to the Government and the people of
Afghanistan affected by ongoing terrorist attacks,
including the bombing in Kabul on 31 May. It is crucial
for us to continue our efforts to counter terrorism and
all forms of violent extremism.

I would also like to congratulate the Afghan
Government on convening the Kabul process for peace
and security cooperation conference on 6 June, despite
extremely challenging circumstances. Canada fully
supports an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process. It is my hope that the Kabul process will
bear fruit and that Afghanistan will soon be free of
such violence.

Canada remains committed to supporting
Afghanistan on its path towards development. In line
with our recently announced feminist international
assistance policy, we will continue to focus on
women's and girls' rights in all of our programming
in Afghanistan. For example, we actively support
women's inclusion and empowerment in Afghanistan.
We provide assistance to help implement the law on
the elimination of violence against women and offer
programmes that provide education, awareness-raising
and capacity-building on women's rights and gender-
based violence. Our partners also help women assume
greater decision-making roles in their households
and communities and build their livelihood skills and
capacities. For peace, security and development to take
root and endure in Afghanistan, women must join men
at the centre of decision-making at all levels in Afghan
politics, society and the economy.

Canada commends the Afghan Government
for pledging to increase the presence of women in
Government institutions to 30 per cent by 2020.
Canada also commends the Afghan Government for
launching its national action plan to eliminate early
and child marriages. On 15 May, Canadajoined women
from across Afghanistan who gathered to discuss
their experiences, vision and contributions to peace
at the fourth Kabul Symposium, held on the theme
"Afghan Women: Messengers of Peace". Women's
participation in the peace and reconciliation process is
essential. I hope that events such as that, along with
efforts to alleviate gender-based violence and provide
more education to girls and young women, will push
Afghanistan closer to peace and stability.

(spoke in French)

Allow me to express my deep concern about the
continuing deterioration of the security situation in
Afghanistan, in particular with regard to the number of
casualties among civilian and aid workers reported thus
far for 2017. We are troubled by the number civilian
casualties. Their displacement, increased vulnerability
and losses are unacceptable. We are dismayed by the
impact of instability and insecurity on women and
children. All parties to the conflict must take urgent
steps to end the killing and wounding of civilians.
We call on Afghanistan's neighbours and partners to
continue to work with the Government of Afghanistan
to increase regional stability and decrease violence
within the country.

Canada supports the Afghan people in their efforts
to ensure a more secure, prosperous and peaceful future.

The meeting rose at1.35p.m.
