Mr. Prosor (Israel): Today's debate is on the
agenda item entitled "Protection of civilians in armed
conflict". There is little protection that we can speak
about. Instead, today we recount the subjugation,
exploitation and attempted annihilation of civilians.
The appalling images coming out every day from
Homs, Hama and Aleppo highlight our failures. The
international community is failing the helpless mothers
and children of Syria. It is failing to protect them from
their own brutal ruler. It is also failing to uphold the
most basic principles implied by a debate on the theme
"the protection of civilians".

The people of Syria look at us with pleading eyes.
They are desperate. We, here in the Chamber, are their
only hope. Today I urge all members of the Council
to hear the voice of Hadeel Kouki, a 20-year-old
student at the University of Aleppo. She was arrested
last year by Al-Assad's secret police for distributing
leaflets that called on Syrians to march peacefully. In
March, she spoke at the United Nations Human Rights
Council - an organization that I hope will soon begin
doing something remotely related to the protection of
human rights. She said:

"I spent 52 days in prison. I was brutally tortured.
I was raped by the security forces... They tortured
me more than usual because I am a Christian... I
want freedom. I have seen too much suffering of
fellow Syrians who spent years in prison merely for
expressing a thought."

Voices like hers should unite the voice of the world
against the tyrannical Al-Assad regime. It is time for
us speak clearly, decisively and truthfully about what is
happening in Syria, and to speak unequivocally against
that evil regime.

Al-Assad is not alone. On his advisory board
sit Hassan Nasrallah and Mahmoud Ahmadinejad,
the Holocaust denier and the self-proclaimed human
rights activist with specific expertise in women, gays
and political dissidents. Those two offer Al-Assad
guidance on how to slaughter the Syrian people more
efficiently and effectively. Together they form a trio of
brutality. The future of that trio of brutality depends on
threatening the lives and crushing the hopes ofmillions
not just in Syria, but throughout the Middle East.

Iran's arm extends from Syria into Lebanon. Its grip
has twisted the Lebanese State into an Iranian outpost for
terror. Today, Lebanon's fastest-growing industry is the
smuggling of missiles. With Iran's support, Hizbullah
has amassed 50,000 missiles that can reach all of Israel
and well beyond. Hizbullah has more missiles today
than many NATO members - all stored in civilian
areas. Hizbullah intentionally puts those missiles in the
basements of homes, in the playgrounds of schools and
in the back rooms of hospitals. Talk about priorities; the
people of Lebanon are more valuable to Hizbullah as
human shields than as human beings.

We see the same pattern of civilian exploitation
by Iran's other terrorist proxies. In the Gaza Strip,
Hamas uses Palestinian schools to launch rockets at
Israeli schools. They use Palestinian hospitals to launch
attacks that send Israelis to the hospital. In the past
week alone, more than 125 rockets have been fired into
the heart of Israeli communities and cities. As we sit
here today in New York, daily life is paralysed for more
than 1 million Israeli civilians. Yet the Council has
not uttered a single word condemning these appalling
attacks - not one word. The silence speaks volumes.

Those who harm civilians are taught to hate and
learn to kill. Yet in this Chamber we hear very little
about the cultures of incitement around the world that
serve as the key ingredient in the recipe for violence
against civilians. Make no mistake - words can kill. It
does not matter whether they are spoken in Farsi in an
Iranian mosque that promotes jihad against the West,
written in Arabic in Hamas textbooks that dehumanize
Jews and Israelis, or taught in Korean in a North Korean
political education centre that glorifies violence against
South Koreans. The Council has a duty to speak with
one voice against those nations and organizations that
fan the dangerous flames of hatred and incitement.

The clock in the Council ticks forward from debate
to debate, but we see little progress in the protection of
civilians. By watching the hands of the clock go by, we
lend a hand to the oppressors. Some of the very nations
that ruthlessly exploit and target civilians in armed
conflicts have the audacity to sit in this Chamber and
speak about their protection. They should find no refuge
here. The Security Council has a responsibility to speak
out against those who callously disregard human life,
and to speak up for all the civilians ofthe world. As Elie
Wiesel once said,

"[I]ndifference is always the friend of the enemy, for
it benefits the aggressor - never his victim, whose
pain is magnified when he or she feels forgotten...
[N]ot to respond to their plight, not to relieve their
solitude by offering them a spark of hope is to exile
them from human memory. And in denying their
humanity we betray our own."

