Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Chinese presidency for
convening today's emergency meeting. My delegation is
grateful for the opportunity to participate in addressing
the serious and urgent issue of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's launch of a ballistic missile of
intercontinental-class range on 3 July.

It is deeply regrettable that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea has responded with yet another
and even more serious provocation to the repeated
messages from the new Government in Seoul, under
the leadership of President Moon Jae-in, emphasizing
the importance of resolving the issue peacefully and
expressing its willingness to engage in dialogue under
the right circumstances. It is also a source of profound
disappointment to us that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea has once again chosen the wrong
path by test-firing another long-range ballistic missile
just a few days after the 30 June summit meeting in
Washington, DC, between the Republic of Korea and
the United States, in which the two leaders called on
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to refrain
from provocative, destabilizing actions and rhetoric,
and to make a strategic choice to fulfil its international
obligations and commitments.

The Republic of Korea condemns in the strongest
terms the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
latest provocation as a flagrant violation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We urge the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to cease testing
the unwavering resolve of both the Government of the
Republic of Korea and the international community
to achieve denuclearization on the Korean peninsula.
Its repeated provocations, in defiance of multiple
Security Council resolutions, will only strengthen the
international community's resolve and be met with
a firmer response. Pyongyang must realize that its
obsessive pursuit of nuclear and missile programmes,
and its continued provocations, will serve only to worsen
its diplomatic isolation and deepen its economic plight.

Given the urgency and gravity of the issue,
we, the international community, must once again
demonstrate our strong resolve not to tolerate the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's nuclear and
ballistic-missile programmes, which have become a
global threat requiring global action. In that regard,
I recall the Security Council's previously expressed
determination to take further significant measures in
the event of a further nuclear test or missile launch by
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We must
indeed take stronger measures, which should include
a new sanctions resolution, to stop the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's provocations. At the same
time, the effectiveness of swift, full and thorough
implementation of the current sanctions resolutions
cannot be overemphasized in the quest to bring the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea back to credible
denuclearization negotiations.
This is the last opportunity for the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to chart a new beginning
in inter-Korean relations and in its relations with the
international community. It must renounce its nuclear
brinkmanship and step back from the point of no
return. Pyongyang should awaken from its delusion
that nuclear and ballistic-missile development can
ensure its security, and instead resolve to choose a path
to denuclearization.

