Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank the United
Kingdom for its valuable efforts during its presidency

of the Security Council this month and for convening
today's important debate.

Nowhere are peaceful solutions and mediation
efforts needed more than in the Middle East, which
has been destabilized by conflict. In order to address
the current conflicts in the region, the United Arab
Emirates remains deeply committed to the work of
achieving political settlements and the United Nations-
led processes that underpin them, particularly in Libya,
Palestine, Syria and Yemen. We know that the surge
in diplomacy for peace that the Secretary-General
has called for is critical not only to achieving lasting
political settlements of these conflicts but also to
preventing similar conflicts from breaking out in the
first place. To that end, the United Arab Emirates is
working to foster diplomatic efforts to establish peace
throughout the region and its surroundings.

While there are many political crises that require
attention, there are some bright spots where diplomacy
has worked, agreements have been signed and mediation
has succeeded. We were especially pleased to see the
recent peace agreement reached between Eritrea and
Ethiopia, and we believe it will have a far-reaching
and positive impact on the whole Horn of Africa. The
United Arab Emirates would like to make the following
recommendations for strengthening mediation, as part
of a robust approach aimed not only at settling disputes
peacefully but also at preventing them from happening
in the first place.

First, the States Members of the United Nations
and the Security Council should give full effect to the
legal framework for the peaceful settlement of disputes
established by Article 33 of the Charter of the United
Nations. While the responsibility for the peaceful
settlement of disputes lies with the parties to a dispute,
the Security Council has an important role to play, and it
should be ready to do what is necessary and appropriate
to support and complement the efforts of Member
States. The United Nations has historically played, a
vital role in the peaceful settlement of disputes and
will continue to do so, and in that regard we support
the Secretary-General's High-level Advisory Board
for Mediation.

Secondly, if we are to strengthen mediation
efforts, they must be inclusive, particularly of women.
There is clear proof that when peace negotiations
include women, peace lasts longer. Women must not
just be at the table during negotiations, they must be
mediators themselves.

Thirdly, we urge the Security Council and United
Nations-led mediators to work closely with regional
organizations in seeking lasting political solutions.
To that end, we echo the Secretary-General's call for
strengthening coordination with regional organizations
as part ofhis ongoing efforts to reform the Organization.
In conclusion, I would like to take a moment
to remember one of the great mediators of our time,
former Secretary-General Kofi Annan. His loss has
occasioned deep sorrow throughout the United Nations.
Mr. Arman, a master of the art of diplomacy, created a
long legacy of successful negotiations with numerous
parties from all walks of life in his efforts to establish
peace across the world.

Finally, I would like to point out that when
developing procedures for settling disputes it is
essential that parties to conflicts participate in good
faith without trying to undermine those procedures or
exploit them for particular political purposes.

