Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for his statement, and I welcome President Jahjaga and
President Nikolic'.

At the outset, I would like to extend my deepest
condolences to President Nikolie following the disaster
of exceptional magnitude that has affected his country
and neighbouring States bordering the Sava. The
international community stands side by side with
them in that ordeal. The European Union (EU) and
its member States have already mobilized and will
continue to bring them the assistance they need.

A year has passed since the historic First Agreement
of Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
of 19 April 2013. It is crucial that the spirit of harmony
and cooperation that has prevailed continue to reign
between the parties in terms of its implementation and
that the dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade remain
regular and of high quality. The parties must remain
committed and engaged and retain a constructive spirit
in the search for compromise.

We will pay attention, as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General invites us to do, to the pursuit
of the effective implementation of the Agreement of
19 April 2013, including the complete dismantling
of Serb parallel structures in northern Kosovo; the
early conclusion of a legal agreement; and finally the
development, in a spirit of openness, of a community of
Serb municipalities in Kosovo, with real responsibilities.

We would also like to welcome the decision by the
Kosovo Parliament, on 24 April, to ratify an exchange
of letters between EU High Representative Catherine
Ashton and the President of Kosovo, whom I commend
for adopting a responsible attitude. That exchange of
letters and its approval by a large majority in Parliament
shows Kosovar parties' and leaders' vision and thus
their political maturity. Thanks to that exchange of
letters, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX), the strategic review of which was
conducted with close cooperation between Pristina and
Brussels, has been extended for two additional years.

Moreover, the exchange of letters establishes a
Kosovar court of law, the mechanisms of which will
enable follow-up, under the best possible conditions, of
the work carried out by Lead Prosecutor Williamson
of the Special Investigative Task Force. That decision
shows the desire ofKosovars to engage in a legal process
that will allow for a credible and impartial response
to serious allegations. By agreeing to shed light on
acts allegedly committed by individuals, Kosovo
thus demonstrates that it is ready to close the painful
chapter of war, contribute to regional reconciliation and
demonstrate its commitment to European values.

We condemn last month's incident involving a
EULEX vehicle, which took place only a few months
after the death of a Lithuanian officer in the Mission in
the performance of his functions. It is unacceptable that
those personnel are endangered, and we recall that all
parties must respect the freedom of movement of troops
and personnel deployed as part of the Kosovo Force
and EULEX. However - and fortunately - Kosovo
continues to enjoy a generally calm and stable situation.

France supports the development of a sovereign,
peaceful, democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo, living in
peace with its neighbours. The parliamentary elections
are planned to take place on 8 June. We invite Kosovars
from all communities to go to the polls and thus
participate in the construction of their common destiny.
We call for the holding of transparent and democratic
elections, for which the European Union has already
deployed a new election observation mission.

It is important to protect the rights of the various
communities throughout the territory of Kosovo,
in particular regarding their cultural and religious
heritage. We strongly condemn any desecration
of Serbian monasteries and cemeteries and, more
generally, any attack against religious or cultural sites.
Such actions should not go unpunished. They must be
unanimously condemned for what they are: an obstacle
to the emergence ofa multi-ethnic State respectful ofthe
rights of its minorities. We encourage fruitful dialogue
launched between the authorities in Pristina and the
Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo. In addition, it is
also important to facilitate the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons in conditions of safety and
socioeconomic reintegration.

The positive developments seen in Kosovo over
recent years must also be accompanied by concrete
measures to strengthen the rule of law and transparency,
and to enable the development of a climate favourable
to business and economic development. Interference in
judicial proceedings is not acceptable.

I conclude by commending the joint progress
of Kosovo and Serbia towards Europe following the
normalization of their relations. An important step in
the negotiations between the European Commission
and Pristina with a View towards the finalization of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement was begun on
6 May. We hope it will soon be concluded.

Serbia, for its part, has made significant efforts
in terms of internal reforms and relations with its
neighbours. These culminated in the launch on
21 January ofnegotiations on accession to the European
Union. It is now up to the two countries to uphold
their commitments in the context of these negotiations
with a view to continuing their respective European
integration.

