Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
We appreciate his active efforts to move the process
forward, as well as those of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General. The
conflict between Palestine and Israel is at the core of
Middle Eastern issues and is naturally of fundamental
importance to peace in the Middle East as a whole. The
international community should have a great sense of
urgency in terms of promoting peace negotiations and
take more substantive actions.

The international community has recently come
up with a series of new approaches aimed at settling
the question of Palestine. In early June, the ministerial
conference held in Paris in support of the Middle East
peace initiative reached a preliminary consensus on
how to promote the next phase of peace talks, and that
has prompted the international community to refocus
on the issue. We commend and support France's efforts
to promote negotiations and peace. In the meantime,
Russia and Egypt have also been working actively on
the issue, and the Middle East Quartet has published a
new report (S/2016/595, annex). China supports every
effort that may help to ease the Palestinian-Israeli
situation and to arrive at a two-State solution.

Right now, the top priority is breaking the impasse
in which the peace talks are mired in order to work to
establish an independent sovereign Palestinian State
based on the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital. That is an inalienable right of the
Palestinian people. Both countries should exercise
restraint, refrain from violent conflict, introduce
initiatives that help to foster mutual trust, meet each
other halfway and strive to resume talks as soon as
possible and arrive at outcomes based on those talks.
Israel should demonstrate goodwill by acting first to
stop its expansion of settlements immediately, lift the
blockade of the Gaza Strip and remove restrictions on
aid to Palestinians. At the same time, Israel's legitimate
security concerns should be respected.

The international community should increase its
coordination in order to translate the current positive
momentum towards settling the Palestine question into
concrete action. We should stay focused on the central
goal of all its efforts, a two-State solution, and work
diligently to achieve a resumption of the peace talks,
with a View to achieving real results. We should draw
on the experience gained through dealing with other
hotspot issues in the Middle East by exploring every
possible pathway to resuming talks under the auspices
of the Middle East Quartet by creating international
synergies. While we should continue to use the
mechanisms that are already in place, we should also
encourage new initiatives. Meanwhile, we should be
mindful of the leading role of the United Nations in this
issue, and any outcomes of the efforts to promote peace
should be approved by the Security Council.

China has always been supportive of the Palestinian
people's just aspirations to the restoration of their
legitimate national rights and interests and has worked
to promote peace negotiations. As a permanent member
of the Security Council and a responsible major Power,
we have contributed constructively to the Palestinian-
Israeli peace process. Earlier this year, President Xi
Jinping of China delivered a speech at the headquarters
of the League of Arab States in which he specifically
discussed China's principled stance on the question of
Palestine. He called for relaunching peace talks at the
political level and promoting economic reconstruction.
At the Paris ministerial conference, China's Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Wang Yi, put forward the "three
stops" and "three explorations" initiative. China has
also been assisting Palestine, to the best of its ability,
to help it revitalize its economy and improve the
livelihoods of its people. China is ready to work with
the international community to continue the push for
an early, just solution to the Israeli-Palestinian issue.

