Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): I would like first of all
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month and to assure
you of our support and cooperation. At the same time, I
would like to congratulate Ambassador Belinga-
Eboutou and his team on the manner in which they
conducted the work of the Council last month.

I extend a warm welcome to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Uganda, The Honourable James
Wapakhabulo.

Today's public meeting provides an opportunity
for all interested parties to comment freely on the
contents of the report of the Panel of Experts on the
Illegal Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other
Forms of Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2002/ll46). As with all panels established by
the United Nations, we expect a high degree of
professionalism in terms of research and
documentation, as well as assessments and conclusions
based on concrete and verifiable evidence. We must all
remember that when such panel reports are issued, they
are immediately referred to as United Nations reports
and become a reference tool for determining the credit-
worthiness of countries. We have no doubt that that
spirit inspired the members of the Panel.

We favour the "name and shame" approach,
which in itself should represent a strong deterrent to
illegal exploiters. At the same time, we must make sure
that such an approach is based on irrefutable and
concrete evidence. Since the publication of the report,
many Governments, companies and individuals have
disputed several important allegations made therein,
calling them baseless, unfounded, politically motivated
and unverified. It is certainly not helpful for Member
States when the Panel makes assumptions and bases
itself on perceptions when finalizing its report. As we
all know, such assumptions and perceptions are not
legally valid.

It is important that all information be fully
verified and that countries named in the report have the
opportunity to provide explanations. We note, for
example, that paragraph 18 of the report makes
reference to a joint Zimbabwe-Democratic Republic of
the Congo company to be set up in Mauritius to
disguise the continuing economic interests of the
Zimbabwe Defence Forces in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Unfortunately, no counter-checking or
verification of that information was ever requested
from Mauritius. Such shortcomings lead to the
undesired conclusion that the report aims at
sensationalism.

The Panel's report constitutes an important basis
that will help in framing a comprehensive strategy to
combat the illegal exploitation of the natural resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is now an
internationally recognized fact that the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
being plundered in the most brutal way and that the
wealth of the country, instead of helping to enhance the
well-being of the Congolese population, has got into
the hands of unscrupulous exploiters. On a number of
occasions, Mauritius has clearly stated that the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
belong to the Congolese people and not to anybody
else. The vicious circle whereby the conflict is
continued so as to better exploit the natural resources
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo should,
therefore, be broken. We deplore the current situation
as described in the report and express our belief that
the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo should be exploited legally so as to benefit that
country and its people.

The report clearly points to the involvement of
neighbouring countries, both at the national and the
individual levels, in the illegal and illicit exploitation
of the resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Mauritius notes with concern that the
plundering continues unabated, and it strongly
condemns all of those illegal activities. We believe that
the countries involved should take necessary measures
to cease such activities or, in cases where their
nationals are involved, to carry out investigations with
a view to apprehending those responsible. We take note
of the work being done by the Porter Commission and
look forward to its conclusions. We are ready to
consider the setting up of a monitoring body to
scrutinize the situation and to ensure that exploitation
activities are significantly curbed.

The report recommends that the Security Council
consider imposing certain restrictive measures on a
selective number of business enterprises and
individuals involved in the illicit exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That recommendation can be implemented only
after the respective Governments have been given
enough time to respond to the allegations in the report
or to take action against practices by companies in their
respective countries.

We all acknowledge the fact that the peace
process has reached quite an advanced stage. But it
remains fragile, as was demonstrated by the recent
fighting in the region of Uvira between the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie rebel
group and local Mai-Mai militias. Any measure by the
Council which would lead to a hardening of the
positions of the parties to the conflict could seriously
jeopardize progress in the peace process.

Mauritius believes, therefore, in a holistic
approach to the resolution of the conflict and all related
problems in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
feel that full implementation of the Lusaka, Luanda and
Pretoria Agreements will in itself result in curbing the
illegal exploitation of natural resources. We also
believe that a transitional government would be a
major step in halting the illicit exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The countries of the region have an important
role to play in achieving a comprehensive peace
settlement. In this regard, we commend the
Government of South Africa for its efforts in the search
for peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as well as in the Great Lakes region. We
also encourage the efforts made by other countries in
the region towards that end. As we suggested in the
September meeting, the Security Council should now
seriously start thinking about how to deal with those
who do not want a voluntary process of disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration and those who are not signatories of the
Lusaka Agreement.

The idea of convening an international
conference on peace, security, democracy and
sustainable development should be looked into when a
post-conflict situation is reached. Such a conference
can only be beneficial once peace has been established
and when there is a strong Government in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that is able to
exercise control throughout the Congolese territory. It
is equally important to have thorough preparation
before actually convening such a conference.

Finally, with respect to the trade in rough
diamonds, Mauritius agrees that universal participation
will make the Kimberly process a more effective
instrument to prevent the illicit trade in this natural
resource.

