Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate and for
initiating work on a resolution on conflict prevention
(resolution 2171 (2014)).

New Zealand is concerned that the Security
Council has been debating conflict prevention as
a thematic issue for over a decade. But, too often,
conflict prevention has been little more than a thematic
vision. The Council has been much less successful in
implementing practical conflict prevention outcomes in
specific cases.

We should recall Kofi Annan's 2006 warning that
"[a]n unacceptable gap remains between rhetoric and
reality in the area of conflict prevention" (A/60/89], para. 4). That unacceptable gap still exists. New
Zealand had hoped that today's debate might be an
opportunity to shift the focus to making prevention
of conflict a practical reality. Resolution 2171 (2014)
is a useful reiteration of some important concepts,
and we welcome the language concerning human
rights, conflict and insecurity. New Zealand welcomes
attempts to move from abstract discussion and start
considering how it can respond differently and respond
better in specific cases.

In 2002, the Council established the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa, which was initially quite successful in
developing practical conflict prevention methodologies.
In 2003 and 2004, under Angola's chairmanship, the
Working Group exercised important leadership on
conflict prevention in Guinea-Bissau and Burundi.
It applied methodologies similar to those now used
in the Peacebuilding Commission's country-specific
configurations.

There is, however, no clear record of why that
innovative leadership lapsed after Angola left the
Council. But the precedent remains. The question at
hand is how to recover that will and those practical
mechanisms. In recent years, changes to the Council's
working methods have made it more difficult to play
the preventive role. Relevant tasks have become more
pre-programmed, more formal and more concentrated
in a few penholders' hands. Innovations, such as
horizon-scanning, have been controversial, but we
welcome continuing attempts to improve the concept.
The prevention gap can be a serious problem in post-
conflict situations, even where there is a large-scale
United Nations presence. That was demonstrated in
2006 in Timor-Leste, and again more recently in South
Sudan and the Central African Republic. We must learn
from those experiences of how the Council exercises its
big picture oversight and acknowledge that a prevention
culture must be more a part of its day-to-day work.
With the right consultation mechanisms and sufficient
resourcing, regional or subregional organizations can
play a very significant prevention role. There is now
significant experience in effective cooperation in
Africa, the Asia-Pacific region and elsewhere.

We must also be alert to the political reality that
prevention will often give rise to concerns about
intervention and sovereignty. Discussing prevention
in the abstract can exacerbate such concerns, but
in specific cases the parties are often interested in
meaningful steps. Yet considerable political sensitivity
will remain on the part of Governments and other parties
and must be handled with discretion, neutrality and
flexibility. Traditional Council working methods are
not well adapted to such tasks. In particular, permanent
members often dominate the discussion on relevant
issues, which can lead to push back and ultimately to
inaction. We must also be mindful of the Council's
traditional tendency to delegate conflict-prevention to
the Secretariat and that the stigma of appearing on the
Council's formal agenda keeps some countries from
seeking early assistance.

The political risks and opportunities associated
with prevention will of course differ from case to case,
so the prevention tools that might be applied in any
situation will often differ as well. But we must clearly
and unequivocally acknowledge that discussion is not
enough. The Council must also demonstrate a sustained
commitment to specific situations. Only then will we
close the gap between rhetoric and reality.

