Mr. Viinanen (Finland): Finland attaches
particular importance to this debate. It marks not only
the tenth anniversary of the first consideration by the
Security Council of the issue of the protection of
civilians, but also a step forward with the adoption
earlier today of resolution 1894 (2009). We
congratulate the Austrian presidency of the Security
Council for its leadership in steering the work of the
Council to ensure better protection for civilians in
armed conflict.

I would like to make a few additional remarks
apart from the statement already delivered by the
representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union, with which Finland fully associates itself. I
would like to concentrate on expressing our strong
commitment to the following three elements.

First, the fight against impunity is crucial in
preventing violations of humanitarian and human rights
law from happening in the first place. Secondly,
children and women deserve special protection in times
of conflict and the mechanisms established to that end
need to be made operational as soon as possible.
Thirdly, the New Horizon initiative is crucial in getting
wide support from Member States for an enhanced
protection role of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations, so badly needed in many parts of the world.

Today, 60 years after their adoption, the Geneva
Conventions have achieved universal recognition, but
we are painfully aware that that has not ensured
effective compliance with, or enforcement and
implementation of, humanitarian law. Instead, those
norms are all too frequently violated with impunity. We
must strive to achieve universal compliance with the
rules contained in the Conventions and their additional
protocols. That includes establishing strong
mechanisms of accountability in cases of violations.
The price paid by the perpetrators or those who allow
atrocities to occur should be as high as the price paid
every day, for the rest of their lives, by the innocent
victims of those violations. Effective and united action
against impunity for such crimes sends a clear
message: violations against civilians will not be
tolerated.

Such actions are needed when a conflict is still
going on but also when the parties come to the table to
discuss peace and the question of amnesty and
reconciliation. We need to be clear that there can be no
sustainable peace without the rule of law and justice.
Finland is a strong supporter of the International
Criminal Court and is satisfied to see its first trial fully
underway and a second one about to begin. We call
once again on all Member States to ratify the Rome
Statute in order to achieve its true universality.
We urge the Security Council to use all means at
its disposal, including sanctions, to compel compliance
by all parties with their obligations. We also wish to
emphasize the role of the United Nations human rights
machinery. The Security Council should continue to
make even better use of the available information, in
order to receive comprehensive, accurate and detailed
reporting on those issues. We believe that that would
further enhance the Council's ability to take timely and
informed action in specific situations.

Already in the Secretary-General's very first
report on the protection of civilians (S/l999/957),
children and women were identified as requiring
special protection measures. Finland continues to fully
agree with that assessment, and we would like to
express our support for the work done by this Council
and by all parts of the United Nations system in the
thematic areas of women, peace and security and
children and armed conflict.

This year we commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. Its principles should also guide us when it
comes to the protection of children in armed conflict.
Finland is highly concerned about the increasing
number of attacks against schools and violence
directed at children - especially girls - attending
schools in many parts of the world. Such violence is to
be universally condemned and countered as a
fundamental violation of the right of every child to life
and development.

With regard to violence against women in armed
conflict, Finland wishes to express its support for the
recent advances made by the Security Council with
resolutions 1888 (2009) and 1889 (2009). We consider
extremely important the timely appointment of a
special representative of the Secretary-General to lead
the United Nations efforts in addressing sexual
violence in armed conflict. There is an urgent need for
coherent and strategic leadership, for enhanced data
gathering and reporting methods and for an operational
rapid response team. At the same time, active
participation of women at all levels of decision making -
in times of conflict and in times of peace - remains the
best tool for preventing violence from happening in the
first place.
Peacekeeping operations are one of the most
important tools available to the United Nations to
protect civilians in armed conflict. The Security

Council's thematic resolutions, the aide-memoire
(S/PRST/2009/ 1, annex) and the inclusion of
protection activities in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping missions have been important steps
forward. However, at the same time, the gap between
the words on the protection mandates and their actual
implementation seems to have grown. The New
Horizon initiative outlines the protection of civilians as
one of the cross-cutting peacekeeping tasks. We hope
that the ongoing efforts to reform United Nations
peacekeeping will help to tackle the gap between the
mandates and resources, expectations and available
capacity.

Also, a shared view of what protection of
civilians really means is needed. In our view, effective
protection requires a comprehensive approach that
includes troops and police units that can be called upon
in critical situations and have clear guidance on how to
tackle the situation. It includes long term monitoring
and protection of human rights, as well as activities
aimed at building the rule of law and in support of
security sector reform. It also means ensuring that
humanitarian actors can carry out their work based on
principles of neutrality and impartiality.

We find it encouraging that at its most recent
session, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations addressed for the first time the issue of the
protection of civilians in its report (A/63/ 19). We find
the increased interaction between this Council and the
troop- and police-contributing countries, as well as the
work of the Special Committee, crucial in getting wide
support from Member States for an enhanced
protection role for the United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We hope that with the New Horizon and
other ongoing reform initiatives as a basis, Member
States will be able to make progress on this important
issue this year in order to give the women and men
serving in the United Nations missions the guidance
and tools they need to carry out their courageous task
of protecting civilians in the midst of a conflict.

