Mr. Sinclair: Since the briefing given to the
Council on 28 March 2003 by Mr. Danilo Turk,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
implementation of the Bougainville Peace Agreement
has taken some dramatic steps forward. The most
significant of these was the completion of stage II of
weapons disposal, as required by the Agreement. Since
there could be no numerical criterion to follow to
determine that completion, the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) decided to base itself
on the principle of effectiveness - how the people of
Bougainville feel as a result of what has been achieved.

UNPOB therefore undertook an island-wide
process of consultations, in the course of which it was
able to ascertain that the people of the island were
feeling a level of confidence and security that they had
never felt at any time since the crisis ended. The people
expressed a uniform desire for UNPOB to verify the
end of stage II of weapons disposal, so that elections
for their autonomous Government could be held as
soon as possible. They were, of course, aware of the
presence of uncolIected weapons in the various
communities, held by former combatants, by
businessmen, by criminals, and also by supporters of
Francis Ona, Whose continuing separation from the
peace process is a source of concern to them all.
However, they did not consider that these factors
should delay implementation of the Peace Agreement.
They expressed much faith in what their autonomous
Government could do to deal with the challenges posed
by outstanding weapons and by Francis Ona.

Recognizing the very fundamental and serious
nature of the responsibility for verification, and
recognizing also the consequences of that act, UNPOB
gave the most careful and detailed consideration to the
views expressed by the people, weighing the risks
involved in going ahead with the Agreement against
those involved in not doing so. On the basis of such
reflection and analysis, UNPOB formed the
judgement- and so informed the Peace Process
Consultative Committee - that stage II of weapons
disposal had come to an end and that the weapons
disposal plan had served its purpose.

On 30 July last, UNPOB made this verification
and certification to the National Government. The
Minister of Bougainville Affairs gave the appropriate
advice to the Governor General, and the internal
procedures required for the head of State to gazette the
relevant notice have been observed. It is expected that
very shortly the constitutional amendments and the
Organic Law on Peace-Building on Bougainville will
become fully operational. With that act, a new era will
have dawned in the relations between the National
Government and Bougainville, and a significant
milestone will have been reached in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. The stage will
have been set for the next steps to be taken, including
the holding of elections for a Bougainville autonomous
Government, in the context of the autonomy
arrangements.

Where preparations for autonomy are concerned,
consultations have been taking place between the
National Government and the Bougainville
Administration on a number of fronts
simultaneously- on the making of a Bougainville
Constitution, on law and justice, and on the Interim
Joint Supervisory Body, which is responsible for
overseeing the implementation of arrangements for the
establishment and operation of the autonomous
Bougainville Government.

Where the funding of constitutional and electoral
activities is concerned, the Bougainville side is
currently preparing a detailed budget that would cover
further meetings of the Bougainville Constitutional
Commission and of a Constituent Assembly, which
would finalize and adopt a Constitution, as well as
other elections-related expenses. Following the
approval of the budget by the provincial authorities,
decisions need to be made on the sources of funding.

Some work still needs to be done in all of these
areas, but UNPOB believes that the completion of
verification and certification will serve as a stimulus
for the advancement of these activities. The Minister
for Bougainville Affairs is due to visit the island very
shortly. UNPOB expects that this visit will be an
opportunity for all outstanding obligations to be
cleared, so that movement towards the full
implementation of the autonomy arrangements can
proceed with all deliberate speed.

Meanwhile, the process of weapons collection
continues, and will continue - for verification of stage
II does not mean the end of that process. UNPOB is
therefore pushing ahead with its Operation Continuing
Vigilance and Final Phase programmes, which seek the
collection of greater numbers of uncontained weapons
and their storage in secure conditions. Last week we
contained 20 such weapons in two locations on the
island.

According to the Peace Agreement, the parties
have four and half months after the coming into effect
of the constitutional amendments to make a decision on
the final fate of the contained weapons. The National
Government and the Bougainville Resistance Force
have both indicated a preference for destruction, while
the Bougainville Revolutionary Army prefers secure
storage. The two factions are due to meet shortly in
order to seek a unified position on the question of the
final fate of the weapons. UNPOB has been requested
to preside over that consultation, which will take place
during the last week of August.

In keeping with the concerns expressed by the
people in the pre-verification consultations, it is
essential that efforts be intensified by all concerned to
ensure Mr. Ona's participation in the peace process, or,
at the very least, that he maintains his position of
respect for that process. UNPOB, for its part, will do
all that is possible to help achieve that goal.

In the remaining months of our mandate, UNPOB
will continue to work hard to ensure that the peace
process keeps moving forward. This will require
sustained effort and continuing commitment by the
parties to the Peace Agreement. On the basis of
experience, we are confident that we will be able to
continue to rely on all of the parties to manifest these
attitudes. We believe also that we will be able to
continue to rely upon the support of the regional
partners and of the international community in general.

In this process, we are happy to have the
cooperation and support of the newly established
Bougainville Transition Team, the successor to the
Peace Monitoring Group, which completed its mission
on 30 June last. We already have a relationship of solid
cooperation with the BTT. We exchange Views and
information on developments in the peace process. We
cooperate in contacts with Bougainvilleans throughout
the island, and the BTT played a most valuable role in
getting the majority of the participants in the last PPCC
meeting to Buka and back to their villages. The BTT is
also assisting UNPOB in checking and recording
weapons collected, and it also presented its first report
on ceasefire violations to the Committee. UNPOB is
very grateful for that cooperation of the BTT, and we
express our sincere gratitude and appreciation to the
contributing Governments.

With the withdrawal of UNPOB at the end of this
year, a special responsibility will devolve on the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in terms of
providing continuing international support for
Bougianville's peace consolidation efforts. It is
essential that UNPOB and the Department of Political
Affairs work closely with UNDP in order to ensure
continuity of United Nations activities on a sound and
sustainable basis after December 2003. To that end, the
consultations are under way with UNDP on various
issues so as to develop a joint approach for the smooth
transition. Meanwhile, UNDP itself is in the process of
formulating phase II of its rehabilitation, reconstruction
and development programmes on the island.

In summary, therefore, the situation in
Bougainville is that stage II of the weapons disposal
plan has been declared completed. The parties have
already begun to talk seriously among themselves
about stage III, for which they have a deadline in the
middle of December. While the Bougainvilleans work
on this aspect, they are at the same time working to
advance the autonomy aspects of the Agreement, most
importantly finalization of the Constitution and the
holding of elections. There are challenges in all those
areas, some of which are huge, but the will is there to
persevere and to overcome.

Within the limitations imposed by its current
financial situation, the National Government is
showing a high level of sensitivity to maintaining its
record of compliance with its obligations under the
Agreement. The people of Bougainville are showing
determination to move beyond weapons and to begin to
concentrate on elections, on building institutions and
on taking charge of their destiny.

Undergirding all those efforts, UNPOB's
impartiality, neutrality and energy remain available to
the parties, as we try to ensure that weapons that are
collected are kept secure, that outstanding issues in the
relations within and between communities are resolved
in accordance with Bougainville traditional methods
and that Bougainvilleans are well informed about what
is happening where implementation of the Agreement
is concerned, what the developments signify and what
role they can play in advancing them. Closer towards
the end of this year, Council members may wish to turn
their attention to ways in which the Council can render
support to them as they seek to strengthen their peace
and make it irreversible.

