Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
fully associate the United Kingdom with the later
intervention by France in its capacity as Presidency of
the European Union, and Ambassador Levitte will
express, and I warmly support, a very sincere tribute to
the work of the Special Representative and the whole
team of the United Nations Transitional Administration
in East Timor (UNTAET) on the ground, which
continues to do marvelous work in very difficult
circumstances. The United Kingdom is fully in support
of what they are doing.

Ijust want to make one or two extra points. We
think that UNTAET and the East Timorese leadership
continue to make steady progress towards establishing
a viable State in East Timor, but it is quite clear where
the main threat to their efforts is coming from, and
Sergio Vieira de Mello's report has graphically
illustrated both the unresolved fate of tens of thousands
of the compatriots of the East Timorese in West Timor
and the dangers in the security situation there. The
Indonesian Government has told us more than once that
they are disarming the militias and interviewing
suspects for the Atambua murders; and yet, as Mr.
Vieira de Mello has pointed out, the comprehensive
plan of action - and I quote him - "cannot succeed
until the militias holding the refugees through threats
and misinformation are removed." (supra) He has
repeatedly called not just for the disarming of the
militias, but also for the arrest of their leaders and their
disbanding and relocation. I think it is time for the
Security Council to express very explicitly our
agreement with the Special Representative that these
are benchmarks we cannot do without.

We have noted the Indonesian Government's
commitment to brief the Security Council regularly
over compliance with Security Council resolution 1319
(2000), but I have to say again that the proposed date
of 12 October for the Foreign Minister to come to New
York is too late for us to check the action being taken
against these benchmarks - against the picture that
Mr. Vieira de Mello has depicted for us. We continue to
believe that we have to work in partnership with the
Indonesian Government and that the Security Council
mission to help verify for international credibility what
is happening in West Timor is necessary at an early
date. Yet, as the Special Representative has said this
afternoon, we are still waiting.

I think it is also important that we go to East
Timor at the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General's invitation for the reasons he gives, not least
to give support to what the United Nations
administrative team is doing and what the incipient
authorities of East Timor are doing to establish their
own community. These events have reinforced the
United Kingdom's view that the international
community has to get on with considering East Timor's
defence needs.

The study that has been done by the United
Kingdom's King's College has made a number of
proposals, and we entirely agree with the Special
Representative that preparatory work must now swiftly
begin. The United Kingdom will do what it can to
contribute to the follow-up work, and we look forward
to the proposed meeting in Dili.

Finally, I, too, should like to note that the United
Kingdom is certainly included in the part of the
international community that is ready to help Indonesia
with all of these problems, but we would find it hard to
do so - and this is a statement of fact, not a threat -
at the forthcoming meeting of the Consultative Group
in Tokyo in mid-October if there is no real progress in
West Timor. At the most, between now and 12 October,
there may be time to show that real progress has begun,
but we do not believe that it has yet begun.

