Mr. Jagne (Gambia): My delegation would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report. We find it to
be very instructive in its analysis of the problem of
protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations. We would also like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on arranging this open
discussion of this burning issue.

There are adequate legal mechanisms designed by
the international community for the protecting of refugees
and other persons affected by conflict and for the
protection of humanitarian assistance to such persons.
Notwithstanding this body of laws, we are increasingly
burdened by the problem of access of refugees and other
vulnerable populations in conflict situations to
humanitarian assistance, and the related problem of the

 

safety and security of the personnel of the United Nations
and humanitarian organizations.

It is disheartening to note that between 1 January 1992
and 31 August 1998, 153 United Nations personnel have
lost their lives and 43 incidents of hostage-taking of United
Nations personnel have been reported. This trend cannot
continue; it should not be allowed to continue. The Security
Council and other concerned bodies and organs of the
United Nations system should do everything possible in
accordance with their respective mandates to bring to an
end this perennial problem.

My delegation believes that first and foremost the
issue of compliance with international law should be
addressed. States and non-State actors in conflict situations
must respect their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law. In this context, we
agree with the Secretary-General's recommendation that
Member States should reaffirm their commitments to the
international law regime that deals with the subject.
Member States which have not yet acceded to the relevant
legal regimes should endeavour to do so.

With regard to non-State actors, we agree that
knowledge of or respect for the international law regime
governing people in conflict situations is generally lacking.
We must not, however, overlook the fact that in some
instances violations of these laws mainly result from factors
other than lack of knowledge of them.

In any case, dissemination of the norms and principles
of international law is a very important step. We welcome
the advocacy activities of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC), the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the
Emergency Relief Coordinator, the Division for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). My delegation would
welcome a stepping up of these promotional activities and
a better targeting of the audience.

Enforcement of the relevant international norms and
principles should be a priority. The culture of impunity
must be brought to an end. Individuals responsible for
crimes against humanity and violations of international
humanitarian law must take personal responsibility for their
actions. That is why my delegation welcomes the
establishment of the International Criminal Court to ensure
an appropriate international response to gross violations of
human rights and humanitarian law. Henceforth, no army,
no ruler, no junta anywhere will be able to abuse human
rights continuously with impunity. My delegation looks
forward to the coming into effect of the Statute of the
Court and encourages Member States to consider signing
the treaty.

The burden of hosting refugees is often very great.
Its political and socio-economic impact on developing
countries that receive large populations is often heavy.
We agree that solidarity and burden-sharing are important
to encourage States to respect humanitarian principles as
well as their international obligations. We also recognize
that the international community should be ready to assist
these States, and that such assistance should not be at the
expense of official development assistance.

The creation of a secure environment for civilians
endangered by conflict and for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance is a matter that requires thorough
and urgent consideration. Many States, particularly in
Africa, lack the capacity to do this. The options
articulated in the report of the Secretary-General are
numerous. My delegation would like to take special note
of the need to build local capacity in this regard. An
international mechanism to assist host States to deal with
these issues would be in order. Since the ad hoc Working
Group of the Security Council established pursuant to
resolution 1170 (1998) is considering these issues as part
of the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on Africa, my delegation eagerly awaits
the product of its work.

Of equal importance to the issues of access to and
protection of refugees and vulnerable groups in conflict
situations is the security of humanitarian personnel. While
we agree that Member States should ratify the Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel
and the Statute of the International Criminal Court, other
concrete measures should be adopted to ensure their
safety. One such measure is mandatory training of
humanitarian personnel on security procedures prior to
deployment.

In this connection, my delegation welcomes the joint
training package on security training by the United
Nations Security Coordinator and UNHCR. We hope that
the organizations concerned will come up with the
necessary funds to undertake this training. We also
encourage States to contribute to the trust fund for
security.

Finally, in our View the Security Council has a role
to play in protection for humanitarian assistance to

 

refugees and others in conflict situations. There is, however,
no definite position by the Council on this issue. It is not
enough that the Council merely condemns or, even less,
just expresses concern over these issues while the United
Nations and other humanitarian personnel are increasingly
attacked and sometimes killed in conflict situations. The
time has now come for the Council to be more action-
oriented in dealing with these issues. In this context, my
delegation would support the development of clear-cut
guidelines to deal with the pressing problems raised in the
Secretary-Generals report. The very first step in this
direction is to deal with the root causes of conflicts.

