Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking the President for convening this meeting,
jointly requested by the United States, the Republic of
Korea and Japan. I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing,
and I also thank Ambassador Cardi, as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006), for the presentation of the
Committee's 90-day report to the Council.

On 29 November, North Korea once again
completely ignored the repeated calls of the
international community to abandon its nuclear and
missile development programmes and launched another
ballistic missile with the range of an intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM), in flagrant violation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. North Korea
later claimed that it conducted a successful launch of
the new ICBM. Hwasong-lS with "technical capabilities
far superior to the previous Hwasong-14". North Korea
even stated that they can load the heaviest warhead and
strike anywhere in the mainland United States.

This launch is totally unacceptable. Japan lodged
a strong protest against North Korea immediately after
the launch and condemned the act in the strongest terms.
Japan demands that North Korea immediately cease
all ballistic missile launches and nuclear development
programmes and provocations. Japan will never tolerate
a nuclear-armed North Korea.

The missile reached the highest-ever apogee of
well over 4,000 kilometres, flew for 53 minutes and
fell within the Japanese exclusive economic zone,
approximately 250 km west of the Aomori prefecture.
The local fishery association hastened to check the
safety of all fishing vessels that were operating in the
sea at the time of the launch. We were lucky that no one
was hurt, however this does not change the fact that
this was an extremely dangerous and irresponsible act
by North Korea.

This ballistic missile launch, with the range of an
ICBM, was the third of its kind this year. Considering
its estimated range, it has become abundantly clear that
this is not merely a regional threat but a global threat
to all Member States. This most recent provocation
made it ever more evident that North Korea is nowhere
near ready to give up its nuclear programmes, nor is
it interested in coming back to a meaningful dialogue.
There is no other choice for us but to work together to
put maximum pressure on North Korea so that it alters
its course of action and works towards denuclearization.

Due to this new launch, some Security Council
members may feel frustrated that the sanctions do not
seem to be working yet. However, the full implementation
of all existing Security Council resolutions, including
the recently adopted resolutions 2371 (2017) and 2375
(2017), can bring about a significant impact on North
Korea's calculus. It is extremely important that the
Council urge all Member States to fully implement the
relevant resolutions. Without faithful implementation,
we cannot achieve the intended policy change of
North Korea.

We should also not lose sight of the fact that it is
the North Korean regime that is diverting its resources
towards pursuing nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles
instead of the welfare of its people, who have great
unmet needs. We must send a clear, consistent message
that it is North Korea that needs to change. Japan will
continue to work very closely with Council members
and all other Member States to reach a comprehensive
solution to the problems related to North Korea.

