Mr. Poukre-Kono (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): The Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Regional Integration and Francophonie of the Central
African Republic, Mr. J ean-Paul Ngoupande, has asked
me to apologize for not being able to be present at this
meeting of the Security Council on the Great Lakes
region. He wishes it every success.

We deem positive and welcome the initiative to
convene, at the request of the Government of the
United Republic of Tanzania, this meeting of the
Security Council, at the ministerial level, to assess the
significant progress made since the preparatory bodies
of the International Conference on the African Great
Lakes region became operational, and, at the same
time, as set out in the Dar es-Salaam Declaration of
20 November 2004, to move forward towards the
achievement of a common vision that will transform
the region into a space of sustainable peace and
security, political and social stability, and shared
growth and development - a space of cooperation
based on joint strategies and policies within the
framework of a common destiny. I should like here to
pay tribute to the commitment of the Government of
Tanzania, within the Security Council, to seeing that
the major decisions of the Council are translated into
reality - the goal of the draft resolution that is before
us for adoption.

The Central African delegation also welcomes the
dialogue initiated by the United Nations, which placed
the issue of the Great Lakes region under a specialized
Office headed by Mr. Ibrahima Fall, whose
commitment is beyond doubt.

At least 7 of the 11 countries in the area have
gone through the horrors of armed conflicts that had
their origins in diverse factors including recurrent
fratricidal wars, endemic poverty, chronic
underdevelopment, power struggles, and others. To
varying degrees, these countries are benefiting from
post-conflict programmes, but the economic and
strategic stakes in the Great Lakes region, which is rich
and bursting with natural resources that are illicitly
exploited and plundered, have placed the region at the
centre of the interest of the United Nations.

The serious human and social consequences of
these crises and armed conflicts are shown by the large
number of refugees and displaced persons throughout
the Great Lakes region, and by the endemic poverty.

Peace, security and development are closely
linked. No crisis is limited to a single country, because
of the direct or indirect effects on neighbouring
countries. As we can see in some countries, political
stability and good governance can ensure sustainable
development and prosperity, which can end the
suffering of thousands of people wandering through the
countryside, seeking security. With determination, the
Great Lakes countries must overcome their inertia and
give hope to their suffering peoples by acting on the
sacred principle of human dignity.

Furthermore, the issue of humanitarian assistance
should not be the subject of lengthy debate, because
what is needed is to rapidly provide assistance to
human beings. The consolidated appeal for refugees
and displaced persons should not be held up in any
way.

The principles of the peaceful settlement of
disputes between States and good-neighbourly relations
should prevail during the ongoing consultations on
adopting an integrated comprehensive strategy for
these policies. To do this, the Central African Republic
supports the proposal to adopt two protocols to
strengthen security cooperation among the States in the
region: a regional non-aggression pact and a regional
protocol on good-neighbourliness, This option of
dialogue between States could lead to reliable regional
reconstruction projects.

When we talk about reconstruction, we are
talking about funding. Now that the Dar es-Salaam
Summit has declared the Great Lakes region a
reconstruction and development zone to be
accompanied by a specific fund, the countries
concerned are aware of their primary responsibility to
cooperate in assembling those funds. However, we
must not forget that most of these countries emerging
from sometimes latent conflicts, which harmed their
economic structures, are experiencing great difficulties
in recovering.

At the world summit held during the sixtieth
session of the General Assembly last autumn, His
Excellency General Francois Bozize, President of the
Central African Republic, therefore launched an appeal
for solidarity. He said that "in the face of the
difficulties of every kind that may be encountered by
Member States, large or small, solidarity must remain
the key word" (A/60/PV.5, p. 7).

The reasons for engagement of the Central
African Republic in this geographic space relate to
security, geo-strategic, economic and humanitarian
criteria. We have a more than 1,400-kilometre border
with the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have
welcomed more than 20,000 Rwandan, Burundian and
Congolese refugees during the crisis in the Great Lakes
region. We have commercial relations across the
Congo-Ubangui river with the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and with the Congo. These trade relations
were severely upset by the 1997 war, the second in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which affected
export products such as coffee and palm oil. The
Central African Republic's fuel shortages in 1999
contributed to the breakdown of our economy, much of
which had been stricken by the destruction of industrial
infrastructure since 1996. In 1994, the Bangui-Mpoko
airport provided an airbase for the French Operation
Turquoise, which was mandated to restore peace to
Rwanda. The intervention in the Central African
Republic from 2001 to 2003 by troops from the former
rebellion of Jean-Pierre Bemba's Movement for the
Liberation of the Congo is illustrative in many ways of
how conflicts in the Great Lakes region can spread to
the Central African Republic.

This brief analysis suffices to show that the
Central African Republic is affected by the crisis in the
Great Lakes region. Co-opted in 2004, the Central
African Republic will, like two other countries in the
region - Angola and the Congo - become a full
member of the process, with the same decision-making
power as the others.

The National Preparatory Committee of the
Central African Republic has taken a very active part
in all the work of the Great Lakes Conference process.
Twenty-eight projects inspired by or proposed by the
Central African Republic were among the 63 adopted
at the last Regional Preparatory Committee meeting,
held in Mombasa.

The Central African Republic will host in Bangui,
from 20 to 23 February 2006, the third Regional Inter-
Ministerial Committee meeting. This important
meeting will focus on adopting projects and protocols
considered by the regional preparatory committees.
The preparations have begun with the establishment of
an inter-ministerial committee under the chairmanship
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

The International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region has significant advantages for all countries
concerned, with regard to the projects to be
implemented at the end of this process. For this reason,
the Central African Republic appeals for additional
resources for the United Nations Office for the Great
Lakes Region. We would also like to thank the Group
of Friends of the Great Lakes Region for its major
ongoing contribution to the Conference process, with
the support of the United Nations and the African
Union.

