Mr. Kolga (Estonia): First of all, allow me to
thank the Secretary-General and other speakers for
their interventions today. Estonia welcomes this timely
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
and thanks the presidency of the Republic of Korea for
its comprehensive concept paper (S/2013/75, annex).
Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

I shall concentrate today mainly on the two
important issues raised in the concept paper: compliance
with international humanitarian law and human rights
law to protect civilians, and accountability.

Despite a strong international normative framework
and steps taken by the Security Council, as described
in the concept paper, civilians, particularly women and
children, still constitute the majority of the victims in
conflicts. Estonia agrees that the achievements at the
normative level must now be translated into deeds.

We acknowledge that the primary responsibility to
protect its people lies with the State. By the same token,
international humanitarian law and human rights law
must be obeyed not only by national authorities, but by
all parties involved. Unfortunately, too often parties to
armed conflicts fail to comply with their obligations,
resulting in devastating loss of human lives.

Estonia is particularly concerned about the
implications of an armed conflict for the most
vulnerable groups. There is a growing understanding
that women and children are impacted uniquely and
disproportionately by the effects of conflict and its
aftermath. Due to the changing nature of conflict,
children are often killed and injured in the course
of military operations, including in crossfire, aerial
bombardment and shelling. Another most worrisome
trend is the rise in suicide attacks and the use of
children to carry them out that lead to the death or
serious injuries of children.

We are deeply concerned that, according to the most
recent report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2012/732), sexual violence and
the threat of sexual violence continue to be employed as
a tactic of conflict across a range of contexts. Although
sexual and gender-based violence is a gross human
rights violation, in many areas there is still a culture of
silence and denial in that regard. Changing it takes time
and much effort on the part of all parties: the United
Nations, non-governmental organizations and, most
importantly, local leaders and national authorities.

In light of the aforementioned concerns, I would
like to commend the invaluable work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflicts, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui. Their work and commitment can in no way
be underestimated.

In his most recent report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2012/376), the Secretary-
General points out the devastating consequences that
non-compliance with international humanitarian law
and human rights law has on health care and education.
Estonia strongly condemns the violence against health
workers. Speaking more concretely about education,
according to a recent UNICEF assessment in Syria,
21 per cent of schools were not serving as learning
environments because they were either damaged,
destroyed or used as shelters. Where schools remain
open, parents have been reluctant to send younger
children and girls due to insecurity. Estonia therefore
commends the decision of the Council, taken in
resolution 1998 (2011), to extend, in 2012, the scope of
grave violations for which parties to conflict were listed
in the Secretary-General's reports on children and
armed conflict to include recurrent attacks on hospitals
and schools and recurrent attacks or threats of attacks
against protected persons in relation to hospitals and
schools.

Estonia has focused its development coordination,
humanitarian assistance and human rights activities
on supporting the most vulnerable groups, including
through continuity of education for children in conflict
areas such as Afghanistan, South Sudan, Mali and Gaza.
I am pleased to inform the Council that, just recently,
at the Kuwait conference, Estonia pledged €300,000 to
support Syrian refugees in neighbouring countries. Part
of that pledge will be donated to UNICEF to support
continued education for children.

We believe that the international community
can do more in enforcing compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights
law at both the national and international levels. The
Secretary-General's report contains very relevant
recommendations in that regard. The increased use of
accountability mechanisms is one ofthe most important
tools to strengthen compliance with international law
by all parties to conflict.

Despite the growing proportion of civilian
casualties, individuals responsible for war crimes and
other atrocities are rarely being held accountable.
Peace is often presented as a precondition for justice,
but there can be no lasting peace without justice and
there is no justice without accountability. Estonia
recognizes the critical role the Security Council
can play in ensuring and promoting accountability
and encourages the Council to consistently promote
individual accountability for international crimes.

Two recent resolutions on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict adopted by the Council underline the
essential relationship between the protection of civilians
and ending impunity for the most serious crimes.
Estonia strongly commends the mandate given to the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali to
support national and international efforts, including
the work of the International Criminal Court (ICC), to
bring perpetrators of serious human rights abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law to justice.
That is a clear acknowledgement that justice must be an
integral part of the solution to the crisis in Mali.

Serious violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law and alleged crimes against
humanity and war crimes have been committed in
Syria. Those responsible for those crimes must be held
accountable. Many actors have underlined the need for
accountability, which requires strong commitment from
the international community. The Security Council can
take action to make that a reality. We commend the
consistency of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, who was
among the early proponents of a Council referral of
the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court. Ms. Pillay's call for a referral was joined by
58 countries when they co-signed the petition initiated
by Switzerland that was sent to the Security Council
on 14 January 2013 requesting it to refer the situation
in Syria to the ICC. Estonia would like to reiterate its
support for the initiative and recall that expressions of
support and association with it are highly welcome.

Independent fact-finding is an important tool in
the fight against impunity. The invaluable work of the
independent international commission of inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic in collecting and preserving
evidence and keeping track of violations is necessary
to ensure that the alleged perpetrators of violations
do not go unpunished. The results of its work shock
our conscience and encourage action. At the upcoming
Human Rights Council session, Estonia will support
the extension of the mandate of the commission of
inquiry in Syria.

Estonia acknowledges the important role of
peacekeepers in protecting civilians. There are a
growing number of missions that have the protection
of civilians as an integral part of their mandate.
Peacekeepers are also the first to observe and promote
compliance with international law and human rights
law by all parties. Mandating peacekeeping missions to
protect civilians is among the most important actions by
the Council to enhance the protection of civilians on the
ground. Estonia would encourage the Council to take
even stronger leadership in guiding the international
response in cases where the civilian population is in
danger.

In conclusion, I express my sincere hope that
today's debate will contribute to enhanced compliance
with international humanitarian law and human rights
law, including by ending impunity for international
crimes.

