Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
would like first of all to express my gratitude to Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno and to our
colleague the Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste
for their clear briefings.

I would also like to state that my delegation fully
endorses the statement that will be made shortly by my
Slovenian colleague on behalf of the European Union.

With an eye to the effectiveness of our work, I
will read only part of the text of my statement; copies
of the full text have been distributed.

At this difficult time for Timor-Leste, my
delegation would like to express its full support to it in
restoring stability. We would also like to pay tribute to
President Jose Ramos-Horta, who has sought by all
means to bring about a negotiated solution. We wish
him a speedy recovery.

Belgium welcomes the fact that, despite this
attack against men who embody the democratically
elected institutions, the Timorese institutions have
continued to operate and provide continuity. In the
past, we have repeatedly underscored how important it
is that the parties present a united front against the
challenges the country is facing. The position of the
parliament and of the opposition is, in this context, to
be welcomed. We welcome the 14 February joint
statement by the heads of all of the political parties, in
which they condemned together the attacks of
11 February and agreed that the perpetrators must be
arrested and tried.

Last week's attacks are a tragic illustration of
how essential it is that the recommendations of the
United Nations Independent Special Commission of
Inquiry on the events of 2006 be effectively
implemented. Impunity is not a solution. It is most
praiseworthy that the Timor-Leste authorities sought to
achieve the surrender of Alfredo Reinado and of his
group. Unfortunately, the path of negotiations failed.
Everything must be done to bring about the arrest and
trial of those responsible for crimes of the past. The
fight against impunity is a prerequisite for bringing
about reconciliation and sustainable peace. With
respect to last week's attacks also, justice must follow
its course.

Other consequences of the 2006 crisis persist;
they call for resolute action from the Government and
for the full support of the international community. The
plight of the petitioners was on the verge of being
resolved. We fully encourage the Government of
Timor-Leste to continue the negotiations that had
begun.

Another of those consequences is the high
number of displaced persons; they represent more than
10 per cent of the population of the country. Beyond
the material considerations, their return to their home
Villages is closely tied to a sense of security and justice
with respect to the 2006 crisis.

But we should not focus solely on the
consequences of the 2006 crisis. To avoid any further
risk, the causes of the crisis must also be resolved. One
of those causes, as we know, lies in the weakness of the
institutions, in particular the security sector.

In this framework, the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) needs to continue
with training and monitoring the national police, while
continuing to maintain law and order. We welcome the
fact that the transfer of responsibilities in this area
from UNMIT to the national police has already begun
in a number of neighbourhoods in Dili. Furthermore,
we encourage the Government to make full use of
UNMIT's expertise with respect to comprehensive
security sector review.
The diversity and multiplicity of the challenges
that the country faces call for renewed commitment by

the United Nations. Here, Belgium fully supports the
extension of UNMIT's mandate for a period of
12 months. We have every confidence that this
renewed presence will be able - and here I quote the
Secretary-General and paraphrase our colleague from
Timor-Leste - "to support Timorese-owned solutions"
(S/2008/26, para. 61).

