Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's open debate.
Allow me to commend the remarks made by the
Secretary-General, who has been personally committed
to peace efforts in Somalia. We would also like to
commend the Government of the United Kingdom for
having organized the international London conference
on Somalia last month. The conference was important
in consolidating the determination of the international
community to support the process in Somalia. Turkey
welcomes the conference and fully supports its
communique.

The Somalia issue has been on the agenda of the
international community for far too long. Today, thanks
to our joint efforts and those of the Somali people, we
have come very close to a point of success for the first
time after so many turbulent years. Now is the time to
concentrate and enhance those efforts to solidify peace
and stability in Somalia.

As agreed by all parties, the transition period will
end on 20 August, without any further extensions. With
less than six months remaining, there are a number of
key tasks that must be achieved by the transitional
authorities in Somalia. Those responsibilities are
clearly outlined by the Kampala Accord, the road map
and the Garowe Principles. We believe that transitional
federal institutions should spare no effort in realizing
the set objectives. In the same vein, finalizing and
adopting the draft constitution on time, selecting a new
and representative Parliament and choosing the new
Government of Somalia are the most critical tasks to be
completed. Military gains without political progress
will be in vain and will create a political vacuum,
which will only serve the spoilers in Somalia.

Turkey firmly believes that the main priority of
the international community must be to support Somali
authorities in fulfilling their responsibilities to
successfully complete the transition period. In other
words, Somali transitional institutions and the people
of Somalia must feel the support of the international
community more than ever for the remaining period.

The significant efforts and sacrifice demonstrated
by the forces of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the African Union in Somalia
undoubtedly constitute the best and the most visible
example of the support given by the international
community. In that regard, Turkey commends the
efforts of AMISOM. and very much welcomes

resolution 2036 (2012). We also welcome the
increasing political, logistical and financial support
provided to AMISOM. and to Somalia by donor
countries and organizations.

Turkey attaches the utmost importance to the
territorial integrity of Somalia. Bearing that in mind,
we believe that the following steps must be taken for a
better future in the country. First, all Somalis should
work out their differences so as to reach genuine
reconciliation, which is the recipe for long-term peace,
stability and prosperity.

Secondly, the development of security sector
institutions in Somalia is an urgent necessity for
sustaining security in the country. Somalia should be
assisted in that field.

Thirdly, it is equally important to establish public
institutions, such as regulatory and administrative
bodies, for a functioning State and economy.

Fourthly, special attention should be given to
development and reconstruction efforts in Somalia, so
that the Somali people feel a sense of normalization in
their lives. Turkey believes that public services -
particularly in health, education, water and sanitation
and infrastructure projects, such as roads, power
generation and irrigation - should be carried without
delay. Likewise, policies for job creation and the
promotion of industrial and agricultural development
must be put in effect. Once in place, such policies will
also help eradicate extremism, marginalization and
piracy.

Fifthly, humanitarian assistance should continue
to work to prevent a recurrence of last year's famine.

On its part, Turkey has launched a comprehensive
programme to support the Somali people, including
reopening our Embassy in Mogadishu in November
2011. I am particularly happy to announce that,
beginning today, Turkish Airlines will start flying
regularly between Istanbul and Mogadishu.
Furthermore, Turkey is planning to establish regional
development offices in Garowe and Galkayo. The
offices will focus on development and infrastructure
projects.

Finally, I would like to mention that Turkey will
organize the second Istanbul conference on Somalia on
1 June. The Istanbul Conference will discuss the
progress made on the conclusions of the London
conference. It will also address the post-transition
strategy. In doing so, Turkey will work closely with the
United Nations, especially with the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Mahiga, who has the full
support of the Turkish Government.

Now is the time to end the two-decades long
suffering of the Somali people. They deserve to see
their country rise from the ashes of the past to a bright,
peaceful and dignified future. It is our common
responsibility to make that possible.

