Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russian has always defended and will
continue to defend the interests of international justice,
including fairness, impartiality and honesty.
Recent events concerning the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), together with the
report of the Tribunal (see S/2012/592) containing
requests concerning the format and methods of the
Tribunal's future work and its Residual Mechanism, are
of deep concern to my delegation.

In its work, the ICTY has been neither fair nor
effective. We perceive only an excessive self-regard.
We were surprised at how blithely, even carelessly, a
three-to-two voting result quashed a unanimous trial
verdict, justified by many years of investigation, in
the case of two Croatian generals who were indicted
on charges of crimes against humanity, including war
crimes, mass killings and the repression and deportation
of the Serbian population. As a result, the question of
the identity of the party guilty of hundreds of killings
and the exile of a quarter of a million Serbs from their
homes remains open. In that case, justice was not done.
As was stated in the dissenting opinion of one of the
judges, a reversal from a conviction to an acquittal is at
odds with any notion of justice.

A similar assessment is merited by the acquittal
in the case of Prosecutor v. Ramush Haradinaj et al..
In that case, witnesses were subject to unabashed acts
of blackmail and intimidation, all in an atmosphere
of full impunity alongside a pandering international
presence in Kosovo. The resulting killings and torture
undoubtedly took place, yet there were no perpetrators.
Both of the referenced verdicts of the ICTY discredit
the idea of international criminal justice. Faith in the
possibility of restoring peace through the dispensation
ofjustice has been substantially undermined.

Such actions of the ICTY only generate mutual
distrust among peoples across the former Yugoslavia.
In that situation, a legitimate question arises: how
to deal with the ongoing requests of the ICTY for
indefinite extensions of the terms of its judges? Once
again, no justification has been provided for the various
scenarios put forth to convince us that the ICTY
should once again extend its existence, in volition
of resolution 1966 (2010).

An obvious example of the absurdity of such
developments is the appeal in the case of Prosecutor
v. Jadranko Prlic' et al.. Very recently here in the
Council, the President of the ICTY assured us that the
trial would be completed in 2016. Its completion has
now been delayed to 2017. It therefore turns out that the
innovative technologies for litigation do not reduce but
rather extend the existence of the ICTY. In that vein, we
are convinced that ifthe ICTY so desired, it could draft
a decision by which a legally correct method could
be used to transfer the Prlic' appeal to the Residual
Mechanism.

Justification of our criticism is confirmed by data
from the recent report of the United Nations Board
of Auditors on the ICTY (A/67/5/Add.l2), which is
now is being analysed by the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly. The Auditors have calculated that
the average time of one trial in the Trial Chamber is
four and a half years. That is unprecedented in criminal
justice. In the light ofrecent events, there is no way that
the Tribunal could be exonerated on the basis of its high
standards of justice. The ICTY should take a lesson
from its confrere, the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), which is now managing to wind up
its work within the prescribed timetable. Its standards
are just fine.

It is our firm intention to seek completion of the
work of the ICTY in accordance with the deadlines
set down in resolution 1966 (2010), focusing on the
following measures. According to the report of the
Board of Auditors, to date the ICTY has not provided a
consolidated plan of action for finalizing its work under
resolution 1966 (2010). That plan should be prepared as
soon as possible and submitted to the Council.

Moreover, the Tribunal needs additional
administrative support in the form of independent
experts. As one possible option in that context, we
note the experience of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone which was assisted by an independent expert,
Judge Antonio Cassese, who provided an alternative
assessment of the situation of the Special Court and a
number of useful recommendations for improving the
quality of its work.

For the next six-month report to the Council, we
call on the President of the ICTY to provide an extended
individual timetable for the prosecution of each case,
with a roster of daily activities. We will be prepared
to consider extending the terms of permanent judges
and ad litem judges only upon consideration of these
timetables. We also intend to strictly link all decisions
on the Tribunals' future budgets to the deadlines set in
resolution 1966 (2010).

