Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): First, let me convey to you,
Madam President, the warm regards and greetings of
my Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ambassador Aminu
Wali, with whom I was in Abuja just two days ago. He
wanted to be here in person, but because of pressing
matters and engagements of State, he could not come,
so he extends his regrets for not joining the Council. I
should like to thank your presidency for organizing this
important debate. My delegation also thanks Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador Murmokaite
of Lithuania and Ambassador Gary Quinlan of
Australia for their respective briefings. Let me also
join the Secretary-General in congratulating your
Prime Minister, yourself, Madam President, and your
Government on the successful hosting of the Group of
Twenty Summit.

Terrorism and violent extremism are two of the
gravest threats to international peace and security today.
Those threats have been compounded in recent times by
the growing problem of foreign terrorist fighters. They
have also been exacerbated by the vacuum created by
forcible changes in Governments and the overthrow
of constitutive authority in some regions of the world,
where the collapse of such authority has opened space
for the emergence of terrorist groups. That is all the
more so in the case of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. Experience shows that no country is immune
from terrorist acts and violent extremism. Experience
also shows that no one country can fight those threats
alone. Only through international cooperation can
terrorists and violent extremists be defeated. That
requires cooperation at various levels, global, regional
and subregional. It also requires critical actions at the
national level.

At the global level, the United Nations has shown
remarkable leadership in the effort to fight terrorism
through the various Security Council resolutions
and through the actions of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force. The United
Nations has also provided the strategic framework for
comprehensively addressing issues pertaining to the
fight against terrorism through its Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.
At the regional level, in Africa we have the
Organization of African Unity Convention on the
Prevention and Combating of Terrorism, adopted in
July 1999, and the African Union Plan of Action on
the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism, adopted
in September 2002. Those instruments have enhanced
cooperation among African countries in the fight
against terrorism. At the institutional level, there
is the African Centre for the Study and Research on
Terrorism, based in Algiers. The Centre works with
national focal points in African Union (AU) member
States and has a mandate to strengthen the capacity of
the AU to fight terrorism in Africa.

At the subregional level, in 2013 the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) adopted
a counter-terrorism strategy and implementation plan
within the framework of the Political Declaration
on a Common Position against Terrorism. One of the
key goals of the strategy is to promote cooperation,
coordination, harmonization and synergies in the
national counter-terrorism actions of member States.
That shows a realization on the part of ECOWAS
member States that countries must come together at the
subregional level as well to fight terrorism.

For us in Nigeria, terrorism has come with
considerable challenges and a price. That fact was
stated by President Goodluck Jonathan during the
debate on this topic in September in this very Chamber
(see S/PV.7272) when States members of the Council
met at the summit level to discuss the threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters. He also underscored the
commitment and underlined the resolve of the Federal
Government of Nigeria to fight terrorism on both the
local and the global stages. We have drawn inspiration
from resolution 1373 (2001) and the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy as we work to
address the challenges confronting us.

Terrorism compels us to review and update our
laws, review and strengthen our institutions, and create
platforms for greater coordination and cooperation
within and across national security agencies. We are
also developing capacity to work in collaboration with
civil society and the international community. We have
devised a new national security model that is inclusive
and premised on the provision of peace, security and
development.

When we started to deal with the Boko Haram
threat, our laws were not so clear on a number of
fundamental points. The situation has now changed with
the adoption of the Terrorism Prevention Act (2013),
which clearly defines what constitutes terrorism. With
the act in effect, we are now able to block some avenues
of financing, thereby quelling the activities of some of
the terrorists. We have developed a national counter-
terrorism strategy, while working with key stakeholders
and the international community.

We thank Australia for its support and cooperation
in the elaboration of our National Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, which is organized around five pillars, each
with key objectives and indicators. We have also
developed a benchmarking framework for evaluating
the implementation of that strategy, which includes
the respect for human rights and the rule of law, the
successful prosecution of violent extremist offenders,
capacity-building of all relevant institutions, including
the criminal justice system, and public participation
and the creation of awareness with regard to preventing
terrorism.

In order to achieve the objectives of the National
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and build community
resilience, we designed a soft approach to countering
violent extremism. That approach focuses on several
aspects of deradicalization, which includes the
implementation of a prison-based deradicalization
programme for convicted terrorists and other terrorist
suspects awaiting trial. Our objective is to reform,
rehabilitate and prepare violent extremist offenders for
re-entry into society.

Significant challenges still continue to confront
us in our fight against terrorism. We are, however,
determined to sustain and indeed intensify our
efforts in that fight. We appreciate the importance of
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism.
In that regard, we will continue to count on the support
and cooperation of friendly countries and nations and
relevant multilateral institutions as we deal with the
scourge of terrorism.

This is going to be a long, drawn-out and difficult
fight. The underlying or root causes ofterrorism and the
allure of extremism must be studied, understood and
addressed. Alienation and frustration are two powerful
forces that pull young and impressionable people
into the embrace of the ideology and make terrorism
and extremism appealing. All outstanding conflicts,
especially in the Middle East, must be brought to an
end expeditiously, without further prolongation. The
problem of inequality between and among nations that
perpetuates global instability must also be addressed
through the adoption of a universal right to development
framework that has at its core the ending of poverty,
illiteracy and unemployment.
