Ms. Ramyar: Many people dream of seeing
helicopters or riding in one; I pray to God I never see
one again. They remind me of the tragic moment in my
life during the civil war when a helicopter dropped a
bomb on our home in Kabul and destroyed its floors in
1995. Traumatized and scared, my siblings and I found
each other safe in the yard after the dust settled, and we
started to look for other members of our family.

I thank you, Mr. President, for your kind invitation
to me to brief the members of the Security Council. It is
such an honour to be here; it is a dream come true. Please
allow me to outline my speech today. I will share why
I have a passion for peace, introduce the large youth-
led organization that I lead, talk about how resolutions
2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) support my work and
explain what it is like to be a leader in Afghanistan as
a young woman. I will conclude my speech with a few
modest recommendations for the United Nations.

My passion for peace traces back to the tragic
experience I just narrated. War forced my family to
flee to Pakistan and live in a refugee camp, without
papers and away from our homeland, when I was only 4
years old. That war continues until today, and my story
is being recreated every single day in other people's
lives. Life in refugee camps stirred a desire in me to
work for peaceful coexistence in Afghanistan, where
all citizens can enjoy their basic human rights, access
quality education and contribute positively to society.

I could not wait to return to Kabul, rebuild our home,
enrol at a local school and prepare myself to pursue my
vision. The creation of a democratic Afghanistan in
2001 allowed me to come back to the country and to
work through the challenges of the war for a peaceful
country. I joined Afghans for Progressive Thinking
(APT), which was founded by an Afghan youth in the
belief that youth are not just victims or perpetrators of
violence but an active contributor to peace processes. I
joined the organization and became Executive Director
in 2014.

In a male-dominated Afghan society, my leadership
has not been accepted or respected by most men. That
experience has also stirred a passion in me to also
seek theories and practices to challenge the existing
prejudices among people towards women's leadership.
The result of our work is that there are now more women
taking leadership positions and are being supported by
men at the same time.

Youth form the majority of the Afghan population,
and they are strategically placed in the society to create
change in their communities and to push for structural
changes at the policy level, particularly at this important
juncture of our society now that we are closer to a peace
agreement than ever before.

I want to affirm that the youth, peace and security
agenda is preparing a generation of young men and
women in Afghanistan that will lead our country
towards peace, development and prosperity.

The organization that I lead - Afghans for

Progressive Thinking - is one concrete example of an
entity that has been encouraged by the United Nations
policy positions to work for peace in Afghanistan. Being
a woman who works to create peace in Afghanistan
has never been easy but the motivation that I have
received from our partners, particularly the United
Nations partnership with our umbrella organization,
the United Network of Young Peacebuilders, and
the Civil Society Platform for Peacebuilding and
Statebuilding, have given me the energy to pursue my
vision with confidence.

Young Afghan women and men have the potential
to lead our country and create not only a peaceful
Afghanistan but also a stable region, in which our
country's unique geographical location serves as a
bridge for ideas, ambitions and cooperation. With that
belief and vision, at APT we work to promote critical
thinking and a culture of peace among young Afghans.
Since APT's inception in 2011, more than 20,000
youth and university students have participated in
our activities, most of whom come from the rural
parts of the country. Also, as a leading organization
in the implementation of resolution 2250 (2015), we
have held many debates and dialogues that support
its implementation in Afghanistan since 2015 and
have worked with the Government of Afghanistan
on a practical action plan for the youth, peace and
security agenda.

I would like to take the opportunity to recognize
and appreciate the positive efforts of the Government
of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan to include
young people in decision-making processes, including
efforts to allow them to assume leadership positions.
Ambassador Adela Raz, who is a young Afghan woman
serving as Afghanistan's Permanent Representative to
the United Nations, is a testament to how far Afghans
have come along. Nonetheless, the notions of exclusion
and hierarchical relationships between men and women
and elders and youth still dominate the societal,
cultural, political and economic landscape across
Afghan society. That needs to change.

On behalf of APT and the Afghan youth, I am
pleased to thank the Security Council for adopting
resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). My colleagues
and I had the honour to partner with the United Network
of Young Peacebuilders on behalf of the Afghan youth
and advocate for resolution 2250 (2015) until it was
adopted in 2015.

Subsequent to our activities to implement
the resolution, along with the Government of the
Netherlands represented in Kabul and with the support
of the Afghan Government and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, APT pioneered
an initiative to select the first-ever Afghan Youth
Representative to the United Nations last year. This
year, we are working closely with the Embassy of
Germany in Kabul to select the second Afghan Youth
Representative, whom the Council will meet later in the
year. Let me conclude by stressing the following points.

First, the United Nations needs to take a long-
term approach and develop policies that make youth
an integral part of the decision-making process. The
inclusion of youth in the Afghan Government in the past
few years has been encouraging but it is not sustainable.

Secondly, young people must be allowed to play
a key role in the peace process in Afghanistan, from
the negotiation stage to the implementation. Since the
youth forms the largest segment of society, we have the
highest stake in the process.

Thirdly, youth must be seen as an equal partner, not
as project implementers or grantees.

Fourthly, the Office of the Secretary-General's
Envoy on Youth is uniquely positioned to encourage
national coalition and strategies with regard to
resolution 2250 (2015) and to evaluate the effectiveness
of their implementation. Well-established local youth
organizations will be ideal partners for that activity.

I wish to affirm once again that the young Afghans
whom the Council has met in settings such as today's are
testament to a new Afghanistan - a partner to the global
community. We desire to move forward, not backwards.
We thank the Security Council for partnering with our
people, particularly the youth, in our vision to create an
inclusive and peaceful Afghanistan.

