Mr. Boubacar Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): First of all, Madam, I should like to say how
pleased my delegation is to see you presiding over this
meeting. I should like also to thank the Secretary-
General for agreeing to devote some of his valuable
time to attending today's meeting, as well as for his
very interesting introductory statement.

I should like also to welcome Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Iraq, and to convey to him our deep
appreciation for the commitment and competence with
which he has been carrying out his delicate mission
since he was appointed on 27 May last.

We would like also to thank Mr. Adnan Pachachi,
Mr. Ahmad Chalabi and Ms. Aqeela Al-Hashemi for
attending this very important meeting.

The report before us - a very comprehensive
one - makes clear the scope and the difficulty of the
task entrusted to the United Nations under paragraph
24 of resolution 1483 (2003). My delegation would like
in particular to note the excellent work done in
bringing together the various sectors of Iraqi society
with a View to ensuring a smooth political transition,
promoting respect for human rights, strengthening
humanitarian assistance and helping in economic
reconstruction in Iraq.

As we see it, the establishment of a broadly
representative interim Government is one of the top
priorities. We would therefore urge Iraqis of all
orientations and all persuasions to work together to
prepare a broad political programme in which they all
can be involved.

The establishment of the interim Governing
Council on 13 July last is part of that approach, and it
is encouraging. The establishment of a constitutional
commission charged with drafting a constitution
supported by all Iraqis is an equally important aspect of
the process that is now under way.
However important all of these goals are, they
cannot be attained unless there is an appropriately
supportive environment. The overall insecurity in the
country is a source of major concern to my delegation
in this connection. Unless there is an atmosphere of
reliable security, no efforts can be carried out
successfully. Moreover, the effectiveness of the
contribution of the United Nations depends totally on
such an atmosphere of security. As we know, insecurity
persists, inter alia because of the uncontrolled
circulation of all kinds of weapons and because of the
current legal vacuum, to which urgent solutions must
be found.

We believe that the many human rights violations
of the past three decades justify the adoption of
appropriate measures so that light can be shed on what
has happened. We believe that this would help to
promote national reconciliation and to lay the
foundations for lasting development in Iraq.

As the report indicates, the serious humanitarian
situation of the Iraqi people must be dealt with. Past
sufferings and current day-to-day difficulties have
increased the people's vulnerability. Given that
situation, we urge the donor community to ensure that
the financial resources pledged at the revised
Humanitarian Appeal on 23 June last be made available
as soon as possible, so as to meet the basic needs of the
people.

We would like to thank the United Nations
system and to non-governmental organizations working
on the ground for the significant contribution they have
made to improving the living conditions of Iraqis. We
believe also that the reintegration of refugees, some
400,000 of whom are abroad, and of displaced persons,
whose number is estimated at 1 million, are yet another
topic to which we should devote our full attention.

We agree also that the cumulative impact of wars,
international sanctions and a policy whereby the State
was in total control have seriously damaged the Iraqi
economy. We take note of the initial steps that have
been taken, but it is clear that Iraq will need the
assistance and expertise of the United Nations and of
the international financial institutions in order to move
to a market economy. This means that there must be a
joint, long-term undertaking that focuses first of all on
the establishment of an appropriate institutional and
legal framework.

In conclusion, we would like to say that Iraq,
which is currently at a crossroads, represents a
tremendous undertaking that will require, in addition to
the will and the efforts of its people, the continuing
support of the international community support. There
is no doubt that such a synergy will enable Iraq soon to
put an end to recent nightmares and to regain its place
in the community of nations.

