Mr. Sareer (Maldives): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on
its accession to the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of February, as well as for convening
this timely debate on the respect for the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations as a key
element for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

From the ashes of the Second World War, the
Charter of the United Nations birthed a new vision
and hope for the global community; a promise for
humankind to rise above the devastation and despair
of the past. Though in our seventieth year, we find time
and time again that we, the nations of the world, have
collectively failed to fulfil that promise. The scourge of
war rages on - maybe not between nations on the scales
we have seen before, but within and between States in
terms of proxy wars, in the actions of non-State actors,
in massive humanitarian crises, and in our failure to
protect the Earth, its peoples and its resources for
future generations.

At its most basic level, the Charter is meant
to guarantee sovereignty, the equality of States,
non-interference, the peaceful settlement of disputes
and fundamental respect among the nations of the
world. Enshrined in its Preamble is the assurance that
it will protect the equal rights of men and women and
of nations large and small. But at the very heart of the
Charter of the United Nations, its spirit cries out for
justice and dignity, not just between Member States
but between all peoples - justice embodied in the
opportunity for economic prosperity; justice in the
establishment of social equity; justice as is necessary
for the establishment of a peaceful and inclusive society
based on the rule of law. Its spirit calls out for a life of
dignity for all the world's peoples.

As we walk these hallowed halls, we should
remember that the diplomats, the international civil
servants, the passionate few who have strived to make
the world better have, over 70 years, had milestone
successes. Today, the United Nations feeds over
104 million people in 80 countries, in war zones,
natural disasters and in health emergencies. Everyday,
the United Nations helps 17 million asylum seekers and
refugees. Despite these achievements, the key purposes
and principles, as enshrined in the Charter, are not
always respected and adhered to by Member States
These failures weigh upon our global conscience:
five years of inaction in Syria; half a century of
failure in Palestine; and a late-come awakening to our
responsibilities towards future generations.

That our greatest failures are concentrated in the
Middle East highlights the priorities, or lack thereof,
that have consumed the Organization, and especially
the Council. Our world views must expand in order to
produce real results for those who are most vulnerable
and most in need. The humanitarian consequences
of these conflicts are beyond belief, and the hollow
promises we have made scream our collective shame.
For instance, a recent report published by the Syrian
Centre for Policy Research found that, since March
2011, 11.5 per cent of the Syrian population had either
been killed or injured, with the number of casualties
amounting to 470,000. Furthermore, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has
now registered more than 3 million Syrian refugees
and, as of July 2015, there were at least 7.6 million
internally displaced people within Syria alone.

In fact, clocking in at 60 million refugees and
displaced people worldwide, there are more refugees
in the world today than existed following the Second
World War. Though the United Nations was founded
with the goal of addressing such travesties, in that area
the situation has worsened. And yet, if there is more
glaring an example of our collective failure, it is the
emerging threat posed by the existence of Da'esh, the
so-called Islamic State, which represents a clear threat
to international peace and security.

According to the report of the Secretary-General
for the World Humanitarian Summit, entitled One
Humanity, Shared Responsibility" between the late
1990s and early 2000s the number ofcivil wars declined,
before increasing from 4 in 2007 to 11 in 2014. The
report states that one-third of today's civil wars involve
external actors. Consequently, these wars have become
more deadly and prolonged.

Da'esh is not merely the consequence of conflict,
but instead, is the product of the hatred that has
consumed the region for decades. Violence is the result
of that hatred, fostered by a fear that is consecrated by
fundamental injustices between peoples. Though its
manifestation is ever evident in the atrocities Da'esh
commits across the globe, nowhere are these injustices
more prominent than in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The occupied territories have formalized a system
of apartheid that is inherently unjust and that fosters
fear among both Palestinians and Israelis alike. That
situation has institutionalized hate, creating a cyclical,
self-sustaining system that feeds upon itself and ensures
a vision for the region that consumes all that is light,
good and hopeful.

And yet, those of us who are most committed
to progress and prosperity, find some solace in the
incremental steps the Organization has taken in other
areas envisioned by the spirit of the Charter. In 2007,
the Security Council held a high-level debate on the
relationship between energy, security and climate (see S/PV.5663). It was the first time the Council addressed
the potential impact of climate change on security. In
2009, the General Assembly held a debate on climate
change and its possible security implications (see A/63/ PV.85), later adopting resolution 63/281, inviting the
relevant organs of the United Nations to intensify their
efforts in considering and addressing climate change.
In 2015, the Council held an open debate on the peace
and security challenges facing small island developing
States (see S/PV.7499), of which none is greater than
the challenges posed by the effects of climate change.
Although the Maldives has been beating that drum
since 1987, it has taken almost three decades for the
Organization to hear the wake-up call.

Our collective late-awakening to the dangers posed
by climate change and the need to protect our world
and its resources for future generations has not come
too late. In the Paris Agreement, we have taken a bold
step forward, but the threats posed to our food security,
water security and, ultimately, our territory and even
our sovereignty need greater and more serious attention.
Similarly, just a few months ago, we adopted the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1) and the Sustainable
Development Goals. It is hoped that the 2030 Agenda,
in its holistic approach to development, will provide
foundations for peaceful, just and inclusive societies,
for it is only with peace that there can be development
and only development that brings lasting peace. The
promise that these recent developments make to leave
no one behind gives us hope for peace and security, as
envisioned in the true spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations, as we enter this new era of global development.

