The President: I shall now make a few points in
my capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

We fully subscribe to the statement that Denmark
will make shortly on behalf of the European Union,
which sets out our collective policy priorities, fully
founded on resolution 1244 (1999). With our European
partners, we regard the Secretary-General's judgement
that a big step forward has been taken in this reporting
period as the right one. There is absolutely no doubt
that much remains to be done, but we regard the
progress made thus far as a glass half full rather than a
glass half empty.

We continue to support the Special
Representative's priorities for the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We thank him for his statement and for his very
detailed briefing this morning, which has brought us
usefully up to date. Likewise, we support the Kosovo
Force's (KFOR) excellent work on the ground in the
security field; it is doing absolutely essential work in
that regard. We are also very grateful for the Deputy
Prime Minister's statement to us this morning. It is
very good to see him and the Special Representative
working together on the remaining issues of some
difficulty for the Serbian community.

Strengthening the rule of law, promoting
economic progress and creating conditions to ensure
sustainable returns of internally displaced persons
remain the key challenges for the immediate future.
The United Kingdom welcomes the update that we
have had on implementation of the benchmarking
exercise, which we fully support, and we look forward
to further regular reports in the future.

We welcome Mr. Covie's continued commitment
to work for results on Kosovo issues. We are glad to
see recent agreements between Belgrade and UNMIK
to bring Serb judges into UNMIK's judicial
structures - a good example of deeds being done on
the ground to follow up words of commitment - and
we hope to see that trend spread. It is also a good
example of avoiding illegitimate parallel structures.

We regard it as essential that Kosovo develop
good relations with others in the region - not least in
order to boost trade and prosperity - but the Kosovo
Assembly must act at all times within the terms of
resolution 1244 (1999) and the constitutional
framework. The Special Representative has been quite
right to declare null and void any Assembly regulations
falling outside their remit.

We listened carefully to Mr. Steiner's words
about the Kosovo economy, and we take careful note of
his plea for access to credit for the economy, which
will need further thought and study. That is something
which, with our European partners, we would be glad
to look at. As far as the future is concerned, we also
agree with his precept of standards before status, which
is the right order of priority.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council and turn to the rule 37 list.

I call on the representative of Denmark, whom I
invite to take a seat at the Council table and to make
her statement.

