Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I am very pleased to be able
to greet and welcome His Excellency Mr. Coulibaly,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali. I would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix for his comprehensive
briefing on the activities of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) in supporting the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
as well as on the findings of the recent independent
strategic review.

We note with satisfaction the renewed momentum
that the Prime Minister has brought to the peace
process and the other measures that have contributed to
progress in implementing the Peace Agreement, as the
Secretary-General mentions in his report (S/2018/541).
We believe that the Secretary-General's solidarity visit
to Mali from 29 to 31 May gave impetus to that positive
momentum and sent a strong message in its recognition
of the contribution that MINUSMA's sacrifices have
made to peace and stability in Mali. We welcome the
progress made in the operationalization of the mixed
units of the Operational Coordination Mechanism in
Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu, and the commitment that
the signatories have made to the Mechanism. We also
commend the Government's efforts to work with the
signatories and the various stakeholders to foster an
environment conducive to the holding of peaceful,
credible and transparent elections throughout the
country, especially the upcoming presidential election.
However, in the light of the recent violent clashes
sparked by the holding of demonstrations by opposition
parties, we call upon all Malian parties to exercise
maximum restraint, defuse political tensions through
dialogue and work for the creation of a conducive
environment for the smooth conduct of the elections.
We also urge the speedy completion of the preparations
for the conduct of peaceful and inclusive elections
within the time frame set by the Constitution.

Despite the progress registered, the continuing
deterioration of the security situation in Mali and
the intercommunal clashes in the central parts of the
country and violent attacks mainly targeting Tuareg
communities in the south of the Menaka region remain
a source of concern. We strongly condemn the terrorist
attacks against MINUSMA, the Malian defence and
security forces, as well at the international forces
and civilians in the north and centre of Mali. The
destructive actions of the terrorists and armed groups
are undermining the State's authority and worsening
the humanitarian situation. Urgent action is needed to
quickly reverse the situation.

Despite all the enormous political and security
challenges and constraints related to human resources
and equipment, MINUSMA forces are undertaking
commendable tasks in supporting the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
We appreciate the continued support of MINUSMA, in
cooperation with other international partners, for the
Malian authorities' efforts to combat terrorism and
international organized crime, including information
and intelligence sharing, as well as planning, training
and capacity-building. The role of MINUSMA
continues to be indispensable, and we support the
extension of its mandate for another 12 months in line
with the recommendations of the Secretary-General.

We note the outcomes of the independent strategic
review of MINUSMA and we believe the Mission's
robust posture should be maintained. We also note
with great interest that the review recommended, as
did the Secretary-General, strengthening MINUSMA's
support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel through assessed contributions. We look forward
to engaging in the discussion on the renewal of the
mandate of the Mission.

