Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): As this is
Ambassador Greenstock's last Security Council
meeting in his capacity as the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, I would like,
before I address the issue under consideration, to
convey to Ambassador Greenstock my delegation's
gratitude for his invaluable contribution to the success
of our work. His constant presence, sense of
moderation and many talents have had a special impact
on our deliberations by helping us to work our way out
of difficult situations on numerous occasions. In
particular, I would like to commend the momentum he
has brought to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. His example should be emulated.

This meeting on the situation in Cote d'Ivoire is a
further welcome step towards supporting the peace
process in that friendly country since the signing of the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. I would like to welcome
the presence here today of the important delegation
from Cote d'Ivoire, which is headed by Prime Minister
Seydou Elimane Diarra. I wish to extend to him our
gratitude for the informative briefing he has just given
us on the achievements that have been made, in
particular since the establishment of the Government of
National Reconciliation. Those achievements must be
fully supported. I would also like to thank the
authorities of C6te d'Ivoire for the warm reception they
extended to the Security Council mission during its
recent visit to West Africa. I would also like to
welcome the presence here today of Mr. Albert
Tevoedjre, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General.

As a neighbouring country, Guinea is pleased to
note the gradual return of normalcy in cote d'Ivoire
after many months of serious instability. That positive
development was possible due to the political will of
all parties, as well as the sustained support of the
international community. Despite the complexity and
sensitive nature of the conflict in cote d'Ivoire, we are
fortunate to have been able to count on the timely and
positive involvement of France and the Economic
Community of West African States in providing a
successful solution to the crisis. Those efforts should
be continued for the sake of the people of Cote
d'Ivoire.

Nevertheless, we must acknowledge that the tasks
still to be accomplished are both enormous and
decisive, and that much sacrifice must still be made.
There can be no doubt that the restoration of lasting
peace in Cote d'Ivoire, as well as its economic
recovery, depend on completing those tasks. In
carrying out that historic mission, each actor will be
judged according to his contribution.

Despite a number of differences on several key
issues, there is reason for hope given the progress that
has already been made. In that regard, I would like to
mention the progress mentioned by Prime Minister
Seydou Elimane Diarra, especially the joint declaration
of 4 July announcing the end of the war made by the
Forces armees de Cote d'Ivoire and the Forces
nouvelles. I would also mention the adoption by the
Council of Ministers of a draft amnesty law to be
considered early next month at a special session of the
National Assembly.

My delegation believes that meeting the
challenges confronting the people of Cote d'Ivoire
involves all of us: the people of Cote d'Ivoire, the
people of the subregion and us at the international
level. We must acknowledge that achieving this joint
mission is primarily up to the parties in Cote d'Ivoire
themselves. Everyone must work towards peace and
national reconciliation, the path towards which has
now been charted. The international community has
great expectations for the final restoration of normalcy
and stability in Cote d'Ivoire, a country in which,
regardless of background, every member of the civilian
population will be reconciled for the sake of all.

