Ms. Power (United States of America): For months
the Security Council has clearly and unequivocally
demanded that the Houthi withdraw from Government
institutions, cease hostilities and return to Yemen's
agreed-upon political transition. As recently as our
22 March presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/8), we
condemned unilateral actions taken by the Houthi to
undermine Yemen's security, stability and unity. In
response, the Houthis, working in close coordination
with former President Ali Abdullah Saleh, have
intensified their military campaign, bombed Aden
and extended their offensive to Yemen's south. Those
actions have caused widespread violence and instability
that threaten the security and welfare of the Yemeni
people, as well as the region's security.

As a result, the United States strongly supports
the adoption of today's resolution 2216 (2015), which
imposes consequences on the Houthi and former
President Saleh, demands that the Houthi cease
military operations and calls on all sides to once again
return to the negotiating table. The imposition of a
global assets freeze and travel ban on Ahmed Ali Saleh
and Abdulmalik al-Houthi, as well as a targeted arms
embargo, ShOW that the Security Council will take
action against those who continue to undermine efforts
towards reconciliation.

The resolution further recognizes the costs of
Yemen's rapidly deteriorating humanitarian conditions.
In response, the resolution affirms that all parties
must comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law, and it urges all parties to facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to civilians in
need, including by working with the Secretary-General
to establish humanitarian pauses. The Council cannot
lose sight of the human consequences of this conflict.

A legitimate transition in Yemen can be achieved
only through political negotiations and a consensus
agreement among all political parties based on the
Gulf Cooperation Council initiative and the outcomes
of Yemen's National Dialogue Conference. The United
Nations must continue its efforts to hold talks to find
a consensus solution to this crisis, and all parties
must commit to taking part in the talks. There is no
alternative.

