Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I too would like to join
others in expressing our appreciation to Special
Representative David Shearer, Assistant Secretary-
General Andrew Gilmour and Ms. Lydia Minagano
for their briefings. I would also like to welcome
the Permanent Representative of South Sudan to
the Chamber.

We can see a number of positive trends in South
Sudan, as attested to by the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/491). A permanent ceasefire
has largely taken hold across the country, made possible
by confidence- and trust-building at the sub-national
level, much of it facilitated by the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). There has been a
decrease in armed conflicts, although sporadic clashes
persist. We see refugees returning home and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) voluntarily leaving UNMISS
protection-of-civilian sites. But we are mindful that
those gains are fragile and that their sustainability
hinges on the full implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. My delegation would like to
make three points today.

First, the Revitalized Agreement is the best and
only option for South Sudan. We have made it clear
before in this Chamber that we believe there is no
plan B. We commend the continued engagement of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
to preserve the Revitalized Agreement and bring
non-signatories into the peace process, and my
delegation applauds the convening of a spiritual
retreat for the South Sudan presidency in the Vatican
in April. The extension of the pre-transitional period
must be used to expedite all pending tasks, including
transitional security arrangements, the resolution of
boundary issues and the incorporation of the Agreement
into the Transitional Constitution. Important steps
have been taken on security arrangements over the
past month, including the inspection and assessment
of cantonment sites. Indonesia fully endorses the role
of UNMISS in supporting the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement, using its good offices and by
providing advice and technical assistance. We echo the
call for the South Sudanese Government to disburse
the funds for critical pending tasks in a timely and
transparent manner.

Secondly, Indonesia stresses how vital it is
to protect civilians and observe international
humanitarian law. We are concerned about the increase
in intercommunal Violence and the continued human
rights violations across the country. Restrictions on
its movements have repeatedly prevented UNMISS
from implementing its mandated tasks of protecting
civilians and investigating human rights violations,
and we believe that accountability for such Violations
must be upheld. Ordinary citizens will not feel peace
dividends if the perpetrators escape justice. UNMISS
should continue to support capacity-building in the
rule of law and to strengthen the judicial presence,
including through mobile courts. My delegation
recognizes the efforts made to promote human rights
in the country, including through its recent ratification
of the International Covenants on Civil and Political
Rights and on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.

Thirdly, we appeal for enhanced humanitarian
assistance for South Sudan. A durable solution is
needed for the 1.9 million IDPs and 2.3 million
refugees. More than half of the South Sudanese
population, about 6.45 million people, are facing
acute food insecurity. A further 45,000 are on the
brink of catastrophe. South Sudan needs resources
to enable it to prevent and anticipate the possible
spread of Ebola from neighbouring countries. All the
stakeholders on the ground must provide humanitarian
actors with the necessary space for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.

We are at a critical juncture in South Sudan's quest
for peace. The role of UNMISS is now more valuable
than ever, and Indonesia is proud to have contributed
both military and police peacekeepers to UNMISS.

