Mr. Guehenno: I will make this statement to the
Security Council on behalf of the Secretary-General.

"Let me start by welcoming the Council's
adoption of a resolution authorizing the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in
Sudan (UNMIS). We look to UNMIS to play a
key role in assisting the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, signed on 9
January between the Government of Sudan and
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement.

"This is a crucial moment for the Sudan,
and a decisive one for the international
community, in the resolution of decades of civil
war in Africa's largest country. I am heartened
that, after lengthy deliberations by the Council,
the text takes into account proposals that I made
in my January report.

"Those proposals were based on a thorough
analysis of what we believe is required from the
international community to give effective support
for the implementation of the Peace Agreements.
Although there are some areas where the
resolution does not match my recommendations,
we in the Secretariat are prepared to fulfil our
obligations.

"But let us be clear: the people of the
Sudan, the donor community and the United
Nations face extraordinary challenges in
implementing the Peace Agreement. These must
be addressed quickly and with determination.
Serious political hurdles still confront the peace
process, and we must have the full cooperation of
the parties to overcome them.

"Moreover, we will face unprecedented
logistical obstacles in establishing a United
Nations peace support operation in a country
famous for its extreme climate and prohibitive
terrain.

"The United Nations is looking to members
of the international community - in particular
those who have already generously supported the
peace process and humanitarian relief - to
provide further sustained assistance in key areas.
These include security sector reform; the return
and reintegration of internally displaced persons;
the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of combatants; and longer-term
economic development.

"Recovering from more than 20 years of
civil war will be a lengthy and a costly process.
Yet even the United Nations appeal for $560
million to cover immediate funding of relief and
recovery in the south remains woefully
underfunded, with only 10 per cent pledged or
contributed so far.

"Next month's meeting in Oslo will be an
important test of our commitment. But we need
immediate and generous support even before
that - especially with the approach of the rainy
season, which threatens to impede our operations.

"The resolution that the Council has
adopted today rightly expresses the Council's
utmost concern over the dire consequences of the
prolonged conflict in Darfur. I welcome the
Council's explicit wish to reinforce efforts to
foster peace in Darfur, especially through support
by UNMIS for the African Union mission.

"I have just received the preliminary report
of the assessment mission led by the African
Union, in which the United Nations also
participated. I am studying the report and will
hold urgent consultations with Chairperson
Konare before making recommendations.
"It is clear that the present state of affairs in
Darfur is unacceptable; its problems are
immediate, and we cannot accept the status quo.
The violence and destruction must stop. Impunity
must end. If security does not improve quickly,
the killings and rapes will continue. We must not
allow this catastrophic scenario to become a
foregone conclusion.

"We must make clear to those responsible
that they will be held accountable. I support the
Council's efforts to give this message real
meaning. As members are aware, there is a clear
recommendation from the International
Commission of Inquiry on Darfur that the
Security Council immediately refer the situation
to the International Criminal Court. Sanctions
must also be kept on the table.

"While I welcome today's resolution, I also
look forward to the Council's decision on these
issues.

"As we meet here today, humanitarian
workers and the African Union mission are on the
front line of the international community's
response to the Darfur crisis. They are working
together courageously, with dedication and at
great personal risk. The Council owes it to them
to act with courage and determination.

"Our work to help bring peace and stability
to Sudan as a whole is still only beginning. For
the sake of the men, women and children of that
nation, let us all act firmly and decisively to
complete our mission."

