Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): It is clear that the Council is gravely
concerned by the deaths of Palestinian civilians in the
strike on Beit Hanoun. It is absolutely right that the
Council should meet on this issue, and we thank Qatar
and you, Sir, for convening this meeting.

On a personal level, nobody could remain
unmoved by the suffering of families that the

Palestinian representative movingly described. They
are not in this Chamber, but I ask him to convey our
condolences to the families of those killed and to the
injured.

Like others, we have difficulty understanding
what the action was meant to achieve and how it can be
justified. It is particularly worrying that it happened
after the military operation was declared over. We have
raised our concerns with the Government of Israel.
Israel must respect its obligation to avoid harming
civilians. We remain gravely concerned over the
mounting casualties and the civilian suffering in the
whole Gaza Strip. We recognize Israel's legitimate
right to self-defence, but urge it to exercise the utmost
restraint. We underline the importance that any action
taken by Israel must be proportionate and in
accordance with international humanitarian law.

We welcome the news that the Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) has launched an investigation into Beit
Hanoun. We heard the Israeli representative's
description of this tragic accident. We look to Israel to
pursue vigourously the reasons for the attack and to
offer confidence that measures are in place to ensure
that such an event cannot recur, however difficult those
measures might be. If it transpires that there has been
culpability, we look to individuals to be prosecuted in
accordance with the law.

We continue to call for Palestinian militants to
cease their rocket attacks on Israeli civilian targets.
Israeli families, too, have the right not to be targeted.
We call for the release of Corporal Shalit.

In her briefing, the Assistant Secretary-General
referred to the call from the Hamas leader in Syria.
Such language is not acceptable and we hope that Syria
can use its influence constructively to advance the
cause of peace.

There is no justification and no political cause
that justifies terrorism and attacks against innocent
civilians. So much effort is put into death and little by
comparison into peace. Did those who fired the rockets
on Israel want to disrupt President Abbas' efforts to
bring about national unity?

We support President Abbas in this endeavour. If
based on the Quartet requirements, it offers the
possibility of re-engagement by the international
community and the United Kingdom would look
forward to being able to work with such a Government.
As the Assistant Secretary-General and others said, this
whole incident underlines the necessity of finding a
political solution to the current situation in Israel and
the occupied territories. We continue to believe that the
Road Map offers the best chance for a lasting peace. I
note the call around the Chamber today for early
meetings of the Quartet, and we would be very happy
to consider that idea.

The situation in Lebanon was also raised. Again,
there has been too much suffering on both sides. I can
assure Mrs. Goldwasser and the Council that we are
committed to the full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006), including the release of the Israeli
soldiers. We commend the Secretary-General's efforts
to implement that resolution in full.

I return to the point of the Quartet and the Road
Map. We are not asking for Hamas to make
concessions on final status issues, but rather to accept
that for negotiations to happen and be meaningful,
there must be a common basis from which they start:
namely that the goal is a two-State solution achieved
through talks between two parties which mutually
acknowledge each other. We hope every effort can be
exerted now to finding that comprehensive settlement.

