Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Like the Ambassador of Japan, I will deliver a shortened
statement, for which the full text will be posted on the
Mission's web page.

I would like to thank Mr. Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and my good
friend Ambassador Tanin for their statements.

I also fully associate myself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

My statement will focus on four areas. I will first
discuss Afghanistan from the Spanish perspective,
and Spain's commitments regarding Afghanistan.
Secondly, I have some comments on the internal
situation in the country. Thirdly, I will look at things
from an international perspective, concluding with a
firm condemnation of terrorism.
Concerning Spain and Afghanistan, there have
been two very important developments in recent days
in my country. First, the Vice-President of Spain,
Ms. Soraya Saenz de Santamaria, visited Afghanistan
to meet with the Spanish troops in the country and the
Afghan authorities. It was a significant and relevant
gesture.

Secondly, this past Friday the Council of Ministers
approved a decision to again participate in Afghanistan,
via the NATO Resolute Support Mission, in accordance
with resolution 2189 (2014). We trust that the Congress
of Deputies will adopt the decision in the days ahead.

Thirdly, concerning Afghanistan's domestic
situation, we have repeatedly spoken in this Chamber
about the recent elections, the important progress in
women's participation and the election results. Now we
are facing a new and important challenge, namely, that
the Government fully establish its Cabinet. That step is
critical and absolutely urgent.

Fourthly, from the international perspective, the
London Conference just took place. There we were able
to warmly welcome the reform agenda presented by the
Government of Afghanistan. The priorities established
by the Government of President Ghani comprise the
toolkit of the Afghan Government and the international
community. Among the priorities, the Spanish
delegation has underlined two ofparticular importance.
The first is support for rule-of-law initiatives; the
second concerns strengthening progress in ensuring the
rights of women and girls.

I also take this opportunity to emphasize the
importance we attach to the Beijing Ministerial
Conference and the determined support of Spain in the
Istanbul Process where, as Council members know, we
participate in the support group.

Lastly, my most vigorous and emphatic words
go to condemn and reject the recent terrorist attacks
committed in Afghanistan and in Pakistan, which
represent the most bitter and sad face of humankind.

