Mr. Neritani (Albania): Let me thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Joachim
Rucker, for presenting a clear picture of the reality on
the ground in Kosovo. His continued steadfastness at
the helm of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), at this very critical stage
as one chapter comes to a close, has established a
proven record of keeping all stakeholders engaged in
the necessary transition to the forthcoming stage.

The Albanian Government will continue to
support efforts towards the goal of a democratic and
multi-ethnic Kosovo. I take this opportunity to extend
our appreciation to Secretary-General Kofi Annan for
his hard work and commitment to finding a solution to
this matter. We also thank UNMIK, the Kosovo Force,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the European Union for their continuing
dedication and commitment in Kosovo. The latter's
ongoing resolve is an extremely important contribution
to the smooth and harmoniously coordinated transition
that will shape the basics of the post-status period.

I would also like to welcome the presence of
Prime Minister Ceku in the Security Council. We
congratulate him on the commitment he has shown
throughout this year to the implementation of
standards, and especially to the 13 priority points
identified by the Contact Group, as the UNMIK report
explicitly states. The implementation of the
programmes, by reaching out to all the people of
Kosovo, has strengthened Kosovo's institutions and
helped build a future foundation for the hard work
ahead. We are confident that the established institutions
and those to come will continue to offer effective
governance in building a viable, multi-ethnic and
prosperous Kosovo for all its citizens.

I also welcome the presence of Ms. Raskovic-Ivic
as the representative of the Serbian delegation.

I thank the Secretary-General for his latest report
and express my delegation's appreciation for that
realistic and substantive document.
We are pleased with the overall assessment that
further progress and significant achievements continue
to be the dominant rationale in Kosovo. The successful
implementation of standards; the institutional ability to
understand and to advance progress by reaching out to
all the people of Kosovo; the improvement of services
delivered; and a clear orientation towards democratic
principles and values are some of the elements
underlined in the report. It is to be welcomed and
encouraged that the standards programme has been
incorporated into and become an integral part of the
European Partnership Action Plan and that the
Government has already created structures and
concrete plans to implement it. This clearly reflects the
fact that, even at this critical stage, Kosovo is pursuing
the chosen path of institution-building and minority
accommodation.

It is also to be emphasized that the security
situation has not been adversely affected by the
ongoing future status process. We share the view that
this situation must not be taken for granted over an
unrealistically extended period of time and that it has
to be adapted accordingly as the evolving situation on
the ground in Kosovo dictates.

Keeping pace with the current political
momentum requires bold and determined action by all
parties and actors involved in the process. Further
backsliding after the important deadline of January
2007 may seriously jeopardize an orderly Kosovo
settlement and exhaust many bonds that have to date
kept the process a promising one in a good cause. We
are pleased that the need to deliver results sooner
rather than latter is commonly understood and widely
accepted by the Council and key Member States. Their
unity and level of certainty is an indispensable element
in delivering a result that will be acceptable to the
people of Kosovo.

We share the view explicitly stated in the report
that it is equally essential that Kosovo Serb leaders
participate fully in the political process in Kosovo.
Remaining outside of the process is a disservice to
their community. As the report so clearly states,
Belgrade authorities should respond to the coherent
policy of the international community by removing all
impediments to Kosovo Serb participation in Kosovo
institutions. Now is the right time to solve the issue
and not to try raising the stakes at the negotiating table.

At the same time, we appeal to the Kosovo
Albanians to redouble their efforts to ensure the
freedom and rights of minorities and to increase their
outreach to all communities. We hold the view that
Albanians and Serbs alike in Kosovo should leave their
past behind, engage in reconciliation, strengthen their
cooperation and look to their common future.

The Albanian Government continues to support
the substantive dialogue between the representatives of
the Albanians and the Serbs and calls upon both sides
to exhibit a realistic understanding. The dialogue has
started and will have to produce a result based upon the
reality on the ground in Kosovo. An understandable
exhaustion does not have to keep the necessary
outcome in limbo indefinitely. We are pleased with the
moderate progress on technical issues.

The political process to determine Kosovo's final
status has objectively and by definition entered its final
stage. The success or lack thereof towards an orderly
political settlement will greatly depend on the
continued constructive approach of all parties and
actors involved. Albania will continue to play an active
role and offer a constructive approach. We continue to
hold the view that the status process should proceed
steadily and swiftly. Further delay or any artificial
status quo would prolong instability, uncertainty and
institutional paralysis and serve nobody's interest, in or
out of region.

We continue to share the international support for
President Ahtisaari and his team. We reiterate our
strong support for the Contact Group's guiding
principles that there should be no change of borders, no
partition of Kosovo, and no union with any other
country or part of any other country.

We support a realistic solution acceptable to the
people of Kosovo, fully grounded in the current reality
of that specific case. The solution should be clearly
defined in its political and legal aspects, and without
any ambiguity; otherwise, it would tend to undermine
the orderly process of reaching an acceptable status
and rehabilitation thereafter. The outcome should
contribute to ending the unpredictability and
uncertainty that stem from the current lack of status,
and strengthen the stability and security of Kosovo and
the entire region.

We stress our strong conviction that the most
realistic, pragmatic and just solution to this matter is
independence, with a supportive continuation of the

06-6573]
civil and security presence of the international
community. In other words, it must include the
promotion and protection of Serbs' and all other
minorities' rights and their cultural and religious
heritage, and build a society in which all the people of
Kosovo can live in dignity and prosperity and without
fear.

We are encouraged that the Kosovo leadership,
civil society, media, other relevant institutions and the
broader community are demonstrating political and
social cohesion, growing unity and cooperation with
the international community in sharing responsibilities
for building such a democratic and multi-ethnic
Kosovo, integrated into the Euro-Atlantic structures.
We are confident that independence will generate and
guarantee social and economic stability and security
for Kosovo and the whole region, and help to establish
a sustainable, multi-ethnic and democratic society
there. It will pave the way for the European
perspective. Albania shares the broader view that the
international military and civilian presence in Kosovo,
even after the determination of the final status, will be
essential to the success of all those endeavours.

In conclusion, let me assure this body that the
Albanian Government will continue to take a
constructive approach by actively playing its helpful
and moderating role in the region. We will continue to
be a reliable partner in full support of Mr. Ahtisaari and
his mission throughout the upcoming process and
beyond.

