Mr. Thoms (Germany): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Nicholas Haysom for his briefing and for his
outstanding leadership at the helm of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
During his tenure as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and prior to that as Deputy Special
Representative, he has played a key role in bringing
the international community together to support
Afghanistan, especially at pivotal moments such as the
latest presidential elections.

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

Germany is committed to continuing its support for
Afghanistan, together with its international partners
and in close cooperation with the Afghan Government.
Under the chairmanship of our Special Representative
for Afghanistan and Pakistan, the International Contact
Group reaffirmed this support at its most recent
meeting, held in Istanbul on 5 June. Afghanistan in
turn needs to make substantial progress on the agreed
reforms before the Brussels conference in October.

The implementation of electoral and economic
reforms, as well as the fight against corruption, are at
the heart of the Mutual Accountability Framework. The
Afghan people and international community deserve to
see tangible results in these areas: reforms to bolster
the private sector, the creation of job opportunities
and a clear and realistic timetable for electoral reform
and parliamentary elections, which also need to be
communicated to the Afghan people.

All actors in the Afghan political system bear a
responsibility to implement the reforms, as the National
Unity Government enters its third year in office this
fall. In that context, we commend yesterday's decisions
by the Afghan Parliament to confirm the appointments
of Acting Director Muhammed Masoom Stanekzai and
Minister of Defence Abdullah Khan Habibi. Those
decisions send out an important signal of national
unity. Visible progress on the political and economic
reform agenda is the only ground on which to justify
to donor constituencies the exceptional level of support
to Afghanistan.

The need for economic and political reform brings
me directly to my second point - migration. Afghan
migrants were the second-largest group of asylum
seekers in Germany in 2015. Overall, the German
authorities registered around 154,000 Afghans last
year. This is a cause of grave concern to us also in
light of our long-standing effort to help stabilize
Afghanistan. Since the start of this year, another
38,000 Afghan nationals have arrived in Germany. In
this situation, it is crucial to make quick progress in
reducing migratory flows. It is in our joint interest that
young Afghans can see a future in their own country.
We note Afghanistan's commitment to honouring its
international obligation to readmit nationals who are
not in need of international protection.

An inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process remains the only viable path to a sustainable
solution of the conflict. There is no exclusively military
solution. Although talks with the Taliban remain elusive,
there is much that Afghanistan and its partners can do
to lay the groundwork. It is absolutely crucial that doors
remain open. In that regard, we support all efforts of
the Quadrilateral Coordination Group and others.
In our view, progress will be possible only if all
key stakeholders in peace in Afghanistan, especially
the countries of the region, unite around basic common
positions and the joint endeavour. Negotiations with
Hezb-i-Islami Gulbuddin are a welcome development,
and a successful outcome would send a strong
positive message.

We are highly concerned by the high toll that the
conflict continues to take on Afghan civilians after
the record number of civilian casualties registered last
year. Children suffer particularly from the continued
brutality of the conflict. As the Secretary-General
notes in his recent report on children and armed conflict
(S/2016/360), the number of children killed or maimed
in Afghanistan rose by 14 per cent last year - an
abhorrent and highly worrisome development. While
the vast majority of those casualties are caused by
non-State actors, the Government can do more to
protect children as well. We are encouraged by the
Government's proactive engagement with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict; at the same time, there is an urgent
need to implement the agreed commitments.
Another area in which we hope to see more
progress before Brussels is women, peace and security.
The adoption last year of the national action plan on
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), and the
recent symposium on Afghan women's empowerment
in Kabul, sent the positive message that women have
made great strides in Afghanistan over the past few
years as parliamentarians, doctors or businesswomen.
But again, implementation of the national action plan
is key; for instance, Germany hopes to see, as agreed,
the swift roll-out of prosecution units specialized on
violence against women and girls in 26 provinces
this year.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank
UNAMA and Nicholas Haysom personally for their
excellent work in the area of human rights, especially
in the monitoring of violations against children in the
Afghan conflict.

Germany joins all of Afghanistan's friends and
partners in sending the clear message that we will not
abandon Afghanistan at this critical time. Germany
remains committed to supporting Afghanistan, in close
cooperation with the Afghan Government and our
international partners.

