Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by conveying to you, Sir, the regret of His
Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign
Affairs ofMali, who, because ofconflicts in his schedule,
was not able to be with us this afternoon. Nevertheless,
he has asked me to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on
behalf of Mali on the assumption of your beautiful
country, the Republic of Senegal, to the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of November, as well
as to welcome the convening of this ministerial-level
debate on the problem of asymmetrical threats to United
Nations peace operations. Before continuing, allow me
to commend the Russian delegation for its outstanding
presidency of the Council last month. In the same vein,
I acknowledge and thank those who spoke and shared
their knowledge with us this morning.

On behalf of the Government of Mali, I thank all
those delegations that expressed their compassion and
solidarity with my country following the deadly attacks
of the past several days. I also take this opportunity to
express the heartfelt condolences of the people of Mali
to the Governments of France and Togo for the loss of
their soldiers in Mali. I also acknowledge the mourning
families of my own countrymen.

The timeliness and relevance of this subject are
self-evident, particularly with regard to Mali, which,
as everyone knows, has hosted the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) since 1 July 2013. Yesterday, a
MINUSMA logistical convoy was unfortunately once
again the subject of a new attack from improvised
explosive devices. We deplore that act, which resulted
in three deaths, including a Togolese Blue Helmet and
two Malian civilians, as well as seven wounded. On the
same day, a camp of Malian armed and security forces
was attacked at 2 am. by unidentified armed men. On
5 November, a French soldier unfortunately fell in the
field of honour, following the explosion of a mine as his
convoy drove through it.

That has been the situation day after day in Mali;
the indiscriminate asymmetric attacks are the daily
reality of the civilian population, the Malian defence
and security forces, the French Operation Barkhane
force and MINUSMA. As the President stated this
morning, the toll in human lives and property from these
indiscriminate asymmetrical attacks are very heavy.
With more than 58 MINUSMA personnel lost between
2015 and 2016, Mali is the country considered the
most dangerous for United Nations personnel. The
French force has lost 18 men since January 2013.
The Malian defence and security forces, as well as
the civilian population, have paid the highest price,
with hundreds dead or wounded. And I cannot fail to
mention the contemptible targeting and desecration of
my country's historic monuments, which have suffered
substantial damage.

Those statistics send shivers down one's spine.
They cry out to the human conscience, especially as no
one can predict the end of such multiple asymmetrical

attacks and attacks using improvised explosive devices,
followed by a barrage of automatic weapon fire.

The people of Mali are not proud that Mali, once a
haven of peace and stability, has been called the most
dangerous country, particularly for children, by friendly
nations coming to aid us to re-establish peace in our
country. The Government of Mali has therefore not
ceased alerting the United Nations and other partners
about the need to adapt the MINUSMA mandate to its
difficult, dangerous and complex environment. In that
regard, the Government of Mali welcomes the fact that
the Security Council acted to accede to its demand by
adopting resolution 2295 (2016), which gives a more
proactive and robust posture to MINUSMA in the
execution of its mandate. In that regard, I would like
to note that the adaptation of the MINUSMA mandate
to its environment aims first at protecting the Mission
itself, its personnel and its facilities against repeated
attacks carried out by hostile forces, in a way that
allows it then to face other dimensions of its mandate,
including the protection of civilian populations.

It is not, as we have often understood, a matter of
MINUSMA carrying out a counter-terrorism mission.
We know that a peacekeeping mission is not supposed
to carry out counter-terrorism activities. Nevertheless,
it has the duty and the responsibility of taking all
useful measures to protect and to normally carry out
its mandate.

It is worrisome to observe that, five months after
its adoption by the Security Council, the relevant
provisions of resolution 2295 (2016) have yet to come
together. How could we but not be worried at seeing
the alarming lack of equipment, in particular in terms
of armoured vehicles to transport troops and logistical
support, as well as other essential logistical equipment.
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
Herve' Ladsous noted as much during his presentation
of the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2016/819) on
the the situation in Mali (see S/PV.7784) on 6 October.
Along the same lines, the announced withdrawal
of three of the five helicopter units currently in the
theatre of operations and the lack of attack helicopters
constitute serious sources of concern. I would like to
welcome the ray of hope provided by Germany and
Canada in that regard.

The theatre of operations in Mali also requires that
deployed contingents be provided with appropriate
equipment and tailored training, while meeting United
Nations standards, including on aerial equipment. It
also requires intelligence-sharing and the use ofadapted
technology, in particular when it comes to drones and
surveillance cameras.

The Government of Mali is fully aware of its
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
and for securing its national territory. It is also aware
that the fight against terrorism in our country falls first
and foremost to Mali's defence and security forces and
the relevant competent national institutions - in such
sectors as the judiciary, the financial and intelligence
services and customs. The Government is therefore
working tirelessly every day, with the very appreciated
support from partners, to rebuild and strengthen the
operational capacity of our forces and that of the whole
host of national agencies concerned, with the aim of
enabling them to fulfil their sovereign duties to protect
the civilian population and their property and to secure
the entirety of our national territory. In that regard, I
would like to commend the significant support from
our bilateral and multilateral partners, notably the
European Union through the European Union military
mission to contribute to the training of the Malian
Armed Forces, as well as that of the United Nations.

However, there must be no mistaking that
effectiveness in the fight against terrorism, violent
extremism and all types of trafficking that fuel
organized crime lies in cooperation with neighbouring
countries and in subregional, regional and international
cooperation. In that regard, the Group of Five for the
Sahel is a prime example. Its joint force has been put
together as a tool adapted to the security environment
in the region. However, other important subregional
and regional mechanisms are planned, including the
African Standby Force - the military pillar of the
African Union Peace and Security Architecture 4 as
well as the Joint Military Staff Committee of the Sahel
Region, charged with coordinating counter-terrorism
military efforts in Algeria, Mali, Mauritania and
the Niger.

That subregional cooperation dynamic also includes
mixed andjoint patrols along the common borders with
neighbouring countries, which also includes the right
of pursuit and intelligence-sharing. It is also quite
important to work together to prevent and combat the
root causes of those criminal activities in our societies,
among them extreme poverty, unemployment especially
among youth, exclusion, marginalization, ignorance
and so on.

The Malian people remain eternally grateful to all
friendly nations for the ultimate sacrifices paid by their
children for peace and stability in Mali. We will never
forget these blood sacrifices, and we pay tribute to all
the victims who have fallen on the field of honour in
Mali. Finally, on behalf of the Government of Mali, I
welcome the outstanding work done by MINUSMA in
an environment that I know is especially difficult.

