Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the Council
for giving me the opportunity to express the viewpoint
of the Government of Canada on this important issue.

Over the past few days, we have witnessed a
positive turn of events in the Middle East. We
particularly welcome the announcement made in
Washington by the "quartet" of the intention to
organize a peace conference this summer, and we hope
that such a conference will be based on work already
carried out, including the draft agreement reached at
Taba. Only a broad diplomatic effort will bring about
the long-term political solution that we seek and need.
The situation is urgent and we must begin to work
seriously, without delay.

(spoke in English)

We are also encouraged by the lifting of the siege
of the President of the Palestinian Authority and the
withdrawal of Israeli troops from Ramallah. Canada
calls on Chairman Arafat to use his authority to prevent
further violence; attacks against innocent civilians are
never justifiable. We call on both parties to ensure that
the stand-off at the Church of the Nativity ends without
further violence or destruction.

Regrettably, in the past week there have also been
some very negative developments. Israel has not yet
fully withdrawn from cities in the West Bank, as it is
called upon to do in resolution 1402 (2002). Under
Article 25 of the United Nations Charter, United
Nations Members bind themselves to accept the
decisions of the Security Council. Canada believes that
Israel must accordingly complete its withdrawal
immediately.

Further, Canada viewed resolution 1405 (2002),
in particular, as an important expression of the will of
the international community. With the prior
concurrence of Israeli leaders, the Secretary-General
adopted the fact-finding team concept and the Council
gave its endorsement of the initiative unanimously. The
team that the Secretary-General has assembled is
distinguished and has wide-ranging experience. We
commend him for his efforts. We also express our
sincere gratitude to the members of the team for their
willingness to participate, and at such short notice.

Canada has supported the fact-finding team
initiative because we believe it is vitally important that
the facts surrounding the events in Jenin be brought to
light. We have registered our views directly with the
Government of Israel. It is in the interests of both
parties, as well as of the entire international
community, that a credible and transparent finding of
the facts take place. Canada believes that such an
exercise must include an examination of all alleged
wrongs, whether Israeli or Palestinian.

The Israeli position has implications beyond the
tragedy of the conflict in the Middle East. The Security
Council is at the heart of the international architecture
for the preservation of international peace and security.
Some countries may feel that an effective Security
Council is optional to the maintenance of international
peace and security. Canada is not one such country.
The Government of Canada therefore profoundly
regrets the continuing Israeli position not to receive the
fact-finding team, which is compromising the authority
of the Council.

As always, we stand ready to support this Council
in bringing genuine and lasting peace to the region.

