Mr. Matussek (Germany): Germany fully aligns
itself with the statement delivered this morning by the
representative of France on behalf of the European
Union.

Let me start by commending the Vietnamese
presidency of the Security Council for putting the
important item of children and armed conflict on the
agenda of the Council. I would also like to extend my
gratitude to the Secretary-General and to his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict for
their dedicated engagement in taking this important
issue forward. I would also like to again thank France
in its capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Working Group.

As the Council is aware, the German Government
has always attached great importance to the promotion
and protection of the rights of children, and in
particular to the situation of children affected by armed
conflicts. In the context of conflict prevention and
post-conflict rehabilitation, Germany finances and
implements a number of projects to counter the
recruitment of child soldiers and to promote their
reintegration into civilian life, for instance in the Sudan
and Nepal. We welcome the very significant progress
made by the international community on that issue, but
at the same time we are acutely aware of the necessity
to redouble our efforts and to move the agenda
forward.

The Security Council has made impressive
progress on this issue since it was first put on its
agenda, 10 years ago. In particular, the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005) in 2005 is rightfully regarded as
a milestone in creating an effective international
monitoring and reporting mechanism on the issue of
children and armed conflict. Progress so far shows that
the mechanism is working well. Some parties to
conflict listed in the annexes of the Secretary-General's
reports have shown increased consideration of the
issue. Some have even adopted action plans
commensurate with the United Nations
recommendations pertaining to the use of child soldiers
and illegal recruiting practices. What is more, the
monitoring and reporting mechanism also provides
Member States with ample information and evidence of
grave Violations in the six major categories of
violations against children, while focusing on the
illegal recruitment and use of children as child soldiers.

However, important challenges remain. We
believe that the Security Council should seriously start
to discuss ways to take the issue of children and armed
conflict forward. In our View, such a discussion should
take up the following three points.

First, we should address all aspects related to
grave Violations against children in armed conflict,
including the issue of sexual Violence against children.
That issue deserves our undivided attention.
Perpetrators should be included in the annexes of the
Secretary-General's reports. In that context, we
welcome the recent adoption of resolution 1820 (2008)
on sexual Violence in situations of armed conflict.

Secondly, we must speak in clear language with
parties to conflicts that keep appearing on the lists of
perpetrators and with those parties that have chosen to
ignore persistent calls to cease their illegal practices
with regard to children in armed conflict. In our View,

the Security Council should consider ways and means
of imposing targeted measures against the main
perpetrators. That should also imply the referral of
serious violations to the International Criminal Court
in cases where national systems fail to provide
adequate protection for children in armed conflict.

Thirdly and finally, more attention should be paid
by the Security Council to the mainstreaming of the
issue of children and armed conflict in United Nations
peacekeeping and political missions alike, for instance
through child protection advisers and enhanced
cooperation with the relevant United Nations actors,
such as UNICEF, the United Nations Development
Programme, the Office of the United Nations High
commissioner for Refugees and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

Finally, although it is of the utmost importance
that the United Nations system as a whole continue to
address the root causes of conflict affecting children -
such as, inter alia, poverty, the lack of development
and the lack of good governance - we believe that the
Security Council should remain focused on a rights-
based approach. That means the full implementation of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children
and armed conflict, as set out in resolution 1612
(2005). Germany will remain engaged on the issue of
children and armed conflict within the Security
Council and with like-minded partners beyond.

