Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Mr. President, and the other members of the
Security Council for responding positively, by
convening this meeting, to the request by the Group of
Arab States and the sisterly country of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
presence and for the important statement he has just
made.

For the fifth consecutive day, Israeli military
aggression continues against the Palestinian people in
the Gaza Strip. As I address the Council, the
Palestinian people - the elderly, children and
women - are facing a criminal military campaign that
has claimed the lives of more than 380 people and
injured more than 1,800 others, not to mention
innocent women and children who have fallen victim
while asleep in their homes.

We are at a very dangerous crossroads in the
Middle East as a direct consequence of this Israeli
aggression, which daily increases in ferocity, which
threatens the lives and prosperity of 1.5 million
Palestinian, and which threatens to undermine peace
efforts. It is of the utmost importance that decisions be
taken immediately by all actors, in particular the
Security Council, which bears responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Such
decisions must restore the reason, calm and stability
that are necessary to make peace. The alternative is a
more deeply entrenched cycle of violence, destruction
and killing, a cycle that has many times brought
tragedy to our peoples and that, if not halted, will
definitely lead to the destruction of our hopes for
peace.

Despite the momentum generated by the Security
Council's adoption of resolution 1850 (2008), Israel,
the occupying Power - instead of opening a new page
and continuing on the road of peace, and in blatant and
flagrant violation of the norms of international law -
began its brutal aggression on 27 December. Israeli
military aircraft - F-16 fighters and Apache
helicopters - have dropped hundreds of bombs on
numerous sites in Gaza. Israel continues to defy
appeals from every corner of the world - including
the statement issued by the Security Council on
28 December; the repeated appeals of the Secretary-
General, including the appeal he made this evening;
and the appeal of the Quartet - that it cease its
aggression, which has been condemned and which
threatens to claim more lives and plunges the region
into a cycle of violence and hatred. And Israel
continues to kill, paying no heed to any appeals and
trampling on every human value and every norm of
international law.

What we are seeing today is the realization of the
repeated threats made by several Israeli officials over
the past few months. They threatened to launch broad
military attacks against the Palestinian people in Gaza,
which is under Israeli occupation. Those threats have
now been fulfilled in the military aggression launched
by the occupying Power, killing innocent civilians.

Those threats and the ongoing attacks must be
taken very seriously. They must be condemned, and
they must be stopped immediately by all available
means. That requires immediate measures by the
international community, including the Security
Council.

Under the guise of withdrawing from the Gaza
Strip, Israel tightened its siege of the Strip and imposed
a policy of collective punishment of Palestinians in
Gaza. From the beginning of 2008 it continued to use
brute force - excessive force - against the
population, further exacerbating the humanitarian
situation. Weeks before the most recent campaign,
Israel crippled all spheres of activity in Gaza, notably
the medical services, and prevented international and
other humanitarian agencies, including the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), from bringing
aid into Gaza. Israel has made absolutely no response
to reports from the United Nations, from United
Nations agencies on the ground and from Mr. Robert
Serry warning of the disastrous consequences of this
irresponsible policy. Everybody has confirmed those
reports: that the unprecedented closure of the Gaza
crossings is causing an unacceptable disaster for the
civilian population.

UNRWA has had to cease the distribution of aid
to 800,000 people, resulting in dire shortages of food,
fuel, electricity and water throughout Gaza.
Infrastructure construction projects, including those
initiated by the United Nations, have come to a halt for
lack of materials. Those are but a few illustrations of
the hunger and despair that have been imposed on the
Palestinians in Gaza for an entire year. Let me provide
some additional tragic details to illustrate life in Gaza.

Gaza's tragedy did not begin today; it has been
taking place for a long time. Throughout that time, we
have come to the Security Council time and again to
warn of imminent aggression and of the fact that
Israel's siege would lead to a disaster. We asked the
Council to adopt practical steps to compel Israel, the
occupying Power, to halt its policy of collective
punishment against the civilian population of Gaza.
But the Council took no serious measures to stop
Israel. Prior to the commencement of the current
aggression, the situation in Gaza was on the verge of
becoming a genuine humanitarian disaster.

As can be seen on television screens, we now
face that disaster. Live broadcasts include images of
children killed in their beds, decimated families and
human organs retrieved from underground. Allow me
to repeat what I have already said: there is absolutely
no justification for such criminal acts or for the
immoral and illegal collective punishment of an entire
people.
08-67507

The Israeli side has publicly rejected the
Council's appeals for a halt to the aggression. It has
also rejected every appeal by the leaders of the world
and is continuing its aggression. All of that is in
defiance of the Security Council, international law and
international humanitarian law. The question now is:
What does the Council intend to do? We believe that
the Council must adopt a binding resolution that
condemns Israel's crimes, ends the military aggression,
provides protection for the Palestinians, lifts the siege
and ensures a lasting ceasefire. We would like the
Council to consider and adopt the draft resolution that
my brother from Libya will introduce shortly.

There must be an immediate ceasefire, and
international protection must be provided for our
people in Gaza, which is the only way genuinely to
ensure respect for a ceasefire and to calm the situation.
The international community, the Quartet and the
Secretary-General have repeatedly expressed their
views on this disaster and have called for an end to the
aggression. They have done so in line with their moral
and political responsibility. We pay tribute to their
appeals and urge the Council to respond to them
positively by adopting the draft resolution.

The Council's failure to express its view with
regard to this situation and to play its Charter role to
address an issue of such centrality to the maintenance
of international peace and security would result in
enormous damage to its credibility and deprive us of its
contribution, at the expense of innocent victims and the
collective efforts to end the aggression. Once again, the
peace process and developments on the ground are
both linked and mutually reinforcing. Negative
developments only serve to undermine efforts to
achieve peace.

In conclusion, mothers and children in the Gaza
Strip are today looking towards the Council to halt this
barbaric aggression and to protect them from
criminality, deliberate starvation and killing. We hope
that the Council will not let them down. We hope that
their fate will not be that of the five brothers in J abalia
or the martyred Hamdan children - Lama, five years
old; Haya, 12 years old; and Ismail, also 12 years of
age - or of the other 60 martyred children.

