Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation welcomes the opportunity
afforded us by the Council's consideration of the
fourteenth report on the activities of the Office of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
on the situation in Libya. We thank Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda for the clarity of her presentation.

Mr. President, you are Vice-President of the
Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute, and
you are Italian and therefore from Rome.

I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the ongoing efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor
aimed at prosecuting the perpetrators of international
crimes and at delivering justice to the Victims. The
Prosecutor may rest assured of Senegal's unwavering
support, as a State party to the Rome Statute, for the
Court's mandate of fighting impunity and delivering

justice to the victims. There are, unfortunately, many
innocent victims, and they are clamouring for justice.

In this regard, we welcome the cooperation of the
Libyan Prosecutor-General's Office thus far within the
framework of this investigation and the determination of
the Libyan Prime Minister to uphold the rule of law and
to cooperate with the Court. We call upon the Security
Council to also resolutely support the Prosecutor and
help her to carry out her investigations effectively
and efficiently, in accordance with the mandate she
has been assigned pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
Indeed, it is incumbent upon us all - collectively
and individually - to fulfil our obligation under that
resolution to cooperate with the ICC and to assist in
the arrest and trial of all individuals indicted of crimes
under the jurisdiction of the Court.

The delegation of Senegal echoes the concern
expressed by the Prosecutor about the cases of alleged
crimes committed against migrants and ongoing
hostilities among the parties to the conflict, as indicated
in the Prosecutor's report. Although the security
situation is unstable, which has made it necessary to
limit of the scope of the investigation to certain parts
of the Libyan territory, the Office of the Prosecutor is
continuing its work and achieving important results,
such as the execution of the arrest warrant issued during
the proceedings against Mustafa Busayf Al-Werfalli.
On 1 August, the Prosecutor filed a sealed arrest
warrant with the Pre-Trial Chamber. On 15 August,
the Chamber made public the warrant for the arrest
of Mr. Al-Werfalli for his alleged involvement in the
execution of detainees. Similarly, an arrest warrant was
issued earlier this year for Al-Tuhami Khaled, while
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi
remain at large and are still being actively sought by
the Court.

All this testifies to the important progress achieved
by the Office of the Prosecutor in its investigation, as
well as to the determination of the Prosecutor to make
progress as quickly as possible on the task that the
Council has referred to her in the name ofjustice and
the fight against impunity.

The political and security situation in Libya
remains unstable and fragile and requires genuine
political will from both national and international
actors to reach a peaceful and lasting solution, on the
basis of resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011). In
this regard, we commend the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
Mr. Ghassan Salame, whom we encourage to maintain
and strengthen the assistance he is providing to the
Office of the Prosecutor in the framework of the
investigation. We extend the same encouragement to
INTERPOL for its valuable contribution to the conduct
of the investigations, in particular in the search for
suspects. These cooperation efforts must be redoubled
if we want to promote dialogue between the parties and
to establish a culture ofjustice, which is the foundation
for lasting peace in Libya.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to recall that
our common goal of peace and security in Libya goes
hand in hand with the imperative of accountability and
delivering justice to the Victims. To achieve this, the
international community, the Security Council and all
stakeholders must work together to create a stable and
secure environment underpinned by the rule of law.
Combating impunity in Libya, and elsewhere, is not up
to the International Criminal Court alone; we must all
fight it. I would like to conclude by quoting Prosecutor
Bensouda herself in her briefing today:
(spoke in English)
"Justice is an important component of sustainable peace."

I should add that justice is a sine qua non condition for
sustainable peace.

