Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to convey my gratitude to the
Secretariat for the report that Under-Secretary-General
Le Roy has just presented on the work undertaken by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) (S/2010/ 127), and to thank Ambassador
Tanin for his statement. Allow me, Mr. President, to
make the following comments.

We welcome the appointment of Mr. Staffan de
Mistura as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, and we support the
renewal of UNAMA's mandate for another year, with it
adapting its functions to the new challenges. We affirm
the importance of the United Nations playing a leading
role in coordinating international assistance for
Afghanistan, aimed at strengthening its sovereignty
and independence.

It is essential that the Afghan Government play a
leading role in the security, political and economic
fields, and that the United Nations Mission play an
assisting and supporting role so as to enable the people
of Afghanistan to increasingly ensure their future. We
call for stronger coordination between UNAMA and
the other international actors present in Afghanistan.

At this time it is important to promote
international and regional support in order to help
Afghanistan achieve stability and prosperity. In that
context, we welcome the high-level conference on
Afghanistan, organized by Turkey in Istanbul on
26 January 2010, and the outcome of the London
Conference of 28 January 2010, in which 78 States and
institutions participated. We hope that the Kabul
conference scheduled for later this year will also be a
success. At that conference, the Afghan Government is
to present tangible plans and programmes.
We support the certification of the provincial
council elections and the parliamentary elections,
which are scheduled to be held on 18 September of this
year. We hope they will be transparent, free and
credible. Before then, electoral reform is necessary, in
particular with regard to the establishment of a credible
independent election commission and the lessons that
need to be learned from the earlier presidential
elections. We must also identify the assistance that the
United Nations Mission can provide in that regard.

Afghan military, civilian and judicial institution-

building must be completed, and we must fight

impunity and corruption. Women's rights must be

promoted, and the Afghan army and police must be

strengthened in order to ensure that they can fully
assume their security functions.

We underscore the complementary nature of
security and development, and in that regard parallel
efforts must be undertaken to address the underlying
causes of that conflict. We should foster an internal
political process and reconciliation with anti-
Government elements, as long as they renounce
violence and respect the Constitution and all
institutions established since 2002.

We are concerned about the increasing security
tensions and terrorist attacks against Afghan civilians
and Afghan and international forces. It is regrettable
that 2009 was the worst year since 2001 as concerns
the loss of civilian lives. We urge the international
forces to continue their efforts to protect civilians
during their military operations. We underscore the
importance of counter-narcotic activities, well aware
that such illicit trafficking is linked to financing
terrorist activities.

