Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to address each Tribunal in turn, beginning
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY).

Like others, I thank the President and the
Prosecutor for their reports on the progress made by
the ICTY towards meeting its completion strategy and,
in particular, on the completion of investigations by the
Prosecutor by the end-of-2004 deadline, both of which
are very welcome. We note the Tribunal President's
indication that it is too early to say accurately when
ICTY will complete its work, but that trials are likely
to slip beyond the 2008 deadline into 2009. I know that
the President will want to keep the Council closely
informed as that position becomes clearer.

The United Kingdom warmly welcomes the
establishment of working groups of judges to examine
procedures and practices to speed up trials and appeals.
We look forward to hearing about the implementation
of their recommendations.

The Prosecutor's review of indictments to see
whether cases can be joined and the number of charges
reduced is very much welcome. It would be helpful to
have more details on the projected savings in trial time
if they are available.

The President of the Court has mentioned the
possibility of building a fourth courtroom to increase
trial capacity. The remarkable speed and cost-
effectiveness of the installation of such a courtroom at
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
may indeed be a good precedent. Fully costed ideas on
that would indeed be very welcome. The recent referral
of one case to the Sarajevo War Crimes Chamber is
welcome, as is the commitment of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe to assist the ICTY
in monitoring any such transferred cases.

This has been a remarkably good six months for
the ICTY. Twenty indictees have arrived in The Hague,
and now only 10 are at large. It is particularly welcome
to hear the Prosecutor's comments on the cooperation
which he is now getting from regional leaders. But, as
others have underlined, it is a fact that Karadzic,
Mladic and Gotovina have still not reached The Hague.
A requirement set out on numerous occasions by the
Security Council is full cooperation, and that is clearly
not yet the case. The United Kingdom agrees very
much with the comments made by Ms. Del Ponte.

As we approach the tenth anniversary of
Srebrenica, all the countries involved in the conflict of
the 1990s have an opportunity to put behind them the
events of the past and to move forward. Let us hope
that the recent showing in Serbia of a graphic video
bringing home the brutality and the actuality of events
will actually have the required impact, because the
clearest evidence that we can have of meaningful
reconciliation is the delivery of those three individuals
to The Hague. So, the acknowledgement by the
Croatian Government, through the adoption of an
action plan, that it can and must do more to locate and
arrest Gotovina is welcome. But an action plan in itself
is not enough, and we look to the Croatian authorities
to take the decisive action required to deliver Gotovina
to the ICTY. Croatia will be judged on the concrete
results of its action.

The reduction in financial arrears owed to the
ICTY over the past 12 months is certainly very
welcome, but $71 million remains outstanding. It is
incumbent on all Member States to bring their
contributions up to date without delay.

Turning to the report of the ICTR (S/2005/336, enclosure), I again thank the President and the
Prosecutor for the briefings they have given the
Council this morning. I particularly congratulate
President Mose on his reappointment as President.

Steady progress is being made towards
implementation of the completion strategy. The
establishment of the fourth courtroom will further
enhance the Court's already good performance in trial
turnover. The assistance and the contribution of the
Government of Tanzania is very much welcome. For
our part, the United Kingdom was pleased, with the
Government of Norway, to co-fund the project. But the
speed and the cost-effective manner of its
implementation has been quite remarkable.

The Prosecutor set out some ideas on an active
programme for tracking and arresting the remaining
fugitives likely to be brought to trial by the ICTR. It
would be very welcome if we could have more
information on that. As well, the increasing demands
on the Appeals Chamber and the need to increase the
number of appeals judges in the future is something
which ought to concern us. It would be useful to know
whether or not there has been cooperation and
consultations between the two Tribunals; it would help
to get clarity on that, as well as an estimate of the
increase we think would be needed to take us forward
on the whole completion strategy.

The transfer of a number of case files to Rwanda
raises the question of the death penalty and the
capacity of the Rwandan judicial system to cope when
faced with perhaps a great many legal cases connected
with the genocide. Could we have some comments on
that? How does the Prosecutor intend to handle related
issues? Those are my detailed questions.

In conclusion, I thank both Tribunals for the
tremendous work they are doing and their
representatives for the part they play in that.

