Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir, for having convened today's
debate on peace and security in Africa.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the European Union and would like to make
the following remarks in its national capacity.

Although the number of crises and conflicts
in Africa on the Security Council's agenda remain
regrettably high, it is also true that over the past
few decades, peace has been restored in many of the
continent's regions. The United Nations, the African
Union and many regional organizations played an
important role in that achievement.

There is no single model for cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union; there
are various situations. options and types of support
possible, as demonstrated by past experience and the
models highlighted by the Secretary-General in his
May report (S/2017/454). We eagerly await additional
proposals from the Secretary-General on reforms in
the areas of peace and security, which should focus
in particular on achieving greater efficiency on the
ground. We also commend the efforts of the African
Union to strengthen accountability mechanisms for
monitoring human rights, conduct and discipline within
its own operations.

The Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership on Peace
and Security, signed on 19 April, is broad-based and
ambitious. It focuses on sustainable peace and covers
all aspects of conflict cycles. We believe that it is
important to maintain that broad-based approach. I
would like to underscore three points that we believe
deserve particular attention.

The first point is mediation. The African Union
and subregional organizations play an increasingly
important role in the area of mediation - and that
is a good thing. We believe that the region is often
ideally placed either to play the role of mediator or to
contribute to national or international mediation efforts.
In February, Belgium organized an international
conference on mediation. It hopes to continue the
discussion on effective mediation and intends to
organize another event in the coming months that will
focus on mediation efforts in Africa.

The second point relates to human rights. The year
2016 marked the African Year of Human Rights. It is
essential that operations mandated by the Security
Council respect the highest standards of the African
Union and the United Nations in the area of human
rights, conduct, discipline and monitoring. We
commend the commitments and efforts made in that
regard. The United Nations and the African Union cold
also strengthen their partnership in that area.
The third point relates to young people. More than
60 per cent of Africa's population is under 25. Young
people are the future and investing in them is crucial
for lasting peace. Education, training and employment
are crucial to preventing radicalization and to shielding
them from being influenced by hate speech and
recruited by violent groups. It is therefore important to
continue to invest in young people and children during
conflict to prevent an entire generation from being lost
once conflicts end. As the Peacebuilding Commission's
focal point on youth, Belgium continues to attach great
importance to that issue.

The lofty goals of the United Nations-African Union
partnership must translate to progress in operations
on the ground. In that regard, Belgium welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2359 (2017) that covers the
establishment of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) joint force, at the request of the African Union.
This is an important stage in the implementation of the
Joint United Nations-AU Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership on Peace and Security. Alongside and in
line with the efforts of the United Nations in the region,
the G-5 Sahel joint force is a security initiative that the
region needs to counter terrorism. Belgium, along with
other countries, expects considerable action to be taken
to allow for a speedy launch of that initiative.

The establishment of the G-5 Sahel joint force
is an opportunity to be seized upon in order to move
fully towards the development of a joint framework
for planning, operations coordination, reporting
and monitoring, as stipulated in the Secretary-
General's report. It will be necessary to develop the
necessary capacities in that regard. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) will have to work closely with the
armies of the G-5 countries. The two entities will need
to enter into a genuine partnership while respecting
the same norms, including in the area of human rights.
Besides ensuring the command of MINUSMA and that
of the European Union Training Mission in Mali, my
country is committed to promoting effective cooperation
among the African Union, the G-5, the United Nations
and the European Union. Each has its own added
value and, through optimally using the specificities
of each organization, the response of the international
community will be at its the most effective.

