Mr. Mikser (Estonia): I would like to begin by
thanking the Polish presidency of the Security Council
for convening this open debate on a timely and very
important topic.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

Maintaining international peace and security
is a vital question for the whole international
community. The role of the Security Council is, and
has been, pivotal in that regard. However, since the
end of the Cold War, it has perhaps never been as
difficult for the Security Council to fulfil its primary
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security as it is now. The crisis situations to which the
Council must respond have become more complex,
transnational and multidimensional. Furthermore,
modern conflicts threatening international peace and
security are characterized by an ever-broader use of
new technologies.

Estonia is firmly of the position that crimes have
to be prevented. When they take place, they must be
investigated and prosecuted irrespective of the way
they are committed, be it by using kinetic force or
cybermeans, for example. By its resolution 68/243,
the General Assembly welcomed the report (see A/68/98) of the Group of Governmental Experts that
confirms the applicability of international law to the
use of information and communication technologies.
International law is therefore applicable when
cybermeans are used to threaten international peace and
security. It is our view that the Security Council can,
and should, use all powers deriving from the Charter of
the United Nations to take action in such cases.

Estonia is committed to promoting respect for
international law and the rules-based international
order. For us, international law is an existential matter.
It is crucial to make full use of all available instruments
and to act with full responsibility to prevent and end
conflicts. That includes in situations involving mass
atrocity crimes. In order to make the whole system
work, every country must play its role. We must
strengthen our common efforts to end conflicts and
make the perpetrators accountable.

It is unfortunate that the rules-based international
system, the foundation of the international community,
is being increasingly challenged and questioned. In
recent times, we have witnessed growing disunity and
disagreement on a number of topics. Yet it is clear that
the international community needs the Security Council
to uphold and promote international law by responding
decisively to grave violations of international law,
including humanitarian law and human rights law. In
that regard, I would like to highlight the code of conduct
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group regarding Security Council action against
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
So far it has been signed by 116 Member States in the
expectation that the Council should act in a timely and
decisive manner to prevent and end atrocity crimes.

Furthermore, in ensuring respect for international
criminal law, Estonia is convinced that we need a
more productive relationship between the Security
Council and the International Criminal Court (ICC).
International criminal justice needs greater political
support, in particular from the Security Council. The
Rome Statute reserves a unique role for the Security
Council, as it can refer situations to the International
Criminal Court that would otherwise not fall under
its jurisdiction, such as the situation in Syria. The
Court is an important tool for ending impunity for the
most serious international crimes, but its efficiency
inevitably depends on States' cooperation in enforcing
its decisions. When States parties do not comply, the
ICC must be able to rely on the Security Council to
intervene with full support.

In conclusion, let me emphasize that we must
keep up our efforts to strengthen the legitimacy of the
Security Council resolutions and their implementation.
In that regard, it is important to strive for deeper
cooperation both within the Security Council and with
the wider United Nations membership and other actors.
Estonia stands ready to engage in that partnership in
order to better uphold international law and maintain
international peace and security.

