Mr. Ka (Senegal) Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
(interpretation from F ranch); At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of March.
I am sure that under your enlightened guidance the
Council's work will be very successful. I would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Mahugu, Permanent Representative of Kenya,
for the exemplary manner in which he presided over the
work of the Council in February 1997.

I should like to thank the members of the Council for
giving me this opportunity, as Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, to participate in this important debate on the
decision taken by the Israeli authorities to build housing
for Jewish settlers in the area of Jabal Abu Ghneim in the
southern part of East Jerusalem.

Our Committee vehemently deplores this decision,
which is a violation of international law, the Fourth
Geneva Convention and many relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions on the situation in
occupied Palestine. The decision was particularly untimely
in that on 15 January the Israeli Government and the
Palestine Liberation Organization had reached agreement
on redeployment in Hebron; that agreement, which was
regarded as a major event by the international community,
had given new impetus to the peace process.

The decision of the Israeli Government runs counter
to the letter and the spirit of the Declaration of Principles
on the Interim Self-Govemment Arrangements, which the
Israeli Government and the Palestine Liberation
Organization signed on 13 September 1993, as well as to
agreements reached later, particularly the Interim
Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, signed
in September 1995.

Moreover, this decision, along with the closing of
four Palestinian offices in East Jerusalem, has come at a
time when the Israeli army continues to seal off
Palestinian territories and is delaying its withdrawal from
some sectors in the West Bank, thereby jeopardizing the
continuation of the peace process. As these measures
Were taken just before the new stage of negotiations on
Jerusalem, they seem to take on the character of
faitaccompli. In short, this decision undermines the
credibility of the entire peace process and has created
undesirable tensions in the region at this crucial stage of
the status negotiations on the final status of the
Palestinian territories. '

This new attempt to Judaize Jerusalem, coming after
the attempt in May 1995 and the various confiscations of
Palestinian land to establish or expand Israeli settlements,
have all provoked the general disapproval of the
international community and confounded sensibilities.

The sponsors of the peace process, as well as the
European Union, the League of Arab States and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, have all
unanimously condemned this policy. The Organization of
African Unity, whose Council of Ministers was meeting
at the time, also adopted a resolution reflecting the
concerns of the international community.
Security Council 3745th meeting
Fifty-second year 5 March 1997

 

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, through me, would like to
associate itself with this great movement in order urgently
to call upon the Israeli Government to refrain from altering
the physical character, the demographic composition and
the institutional structure of the city of Jerusalem and the
status of the Palestinian territories and other Arab territories
occupied since 1967. It calls upon Israel above all to
implement quickly and comprehensively the agreements
already concluded betWeen Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization in order to create the necessary
conditions for a just and lasting settlement on the basis of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 465
(1980) and 478 (1980).

The Committee believes that real political will is
essential to relaunching the peace process and to preventing
the current situation from deteriorating further, thus
damaging the efforts of many persons of good will to
establish an era of peace and stability in the Middle East.

As has been forcefully reaffirmed by previous
speakers, if we wish to achieve reconciliation, establish a
commonality of interests and realize the desire to live
shared by the Palestinian and Israeli parties, there is no
alternative to the agreements already reached.

History has often shown us over the course of the
centuries that attempts to impose demands solely by force
can only unleash a bloodbath and are usually doomed to
failure. The sooner the Israeli leaders recognize that peace
and stability are based on compromise and that mutual
interests and the establishment of a partnership cannot be
imposed unilaterally, the better it will, be for all the
peoples of the region. The policies and attitudes of the
occupier and the denial of the legitimate rights and
aspirations of the Palestinian people are incompatible with
efforts to pursue the current peace process.

In convening this meeting, the members of the
Security Council have shown that the decision taken by
the Israeli Government is a source of major concern for
the international community as a whole. The Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People therefore hopes that, at the end of this
debate, the Council will demonstrate to world public
opinion its unshakable will to annul the Israeli decision to
build housing for Jewish settlers in Jabal Abu Ghneim
and to put an end to the policy of the Judaization of the
Holy City of JeruSalem, a symbol of peaceful coexistence
of peoples and religions.

It is time for all the peoples of the region, who have
brought such transcendental messages to the world, to
learn to live together, respect one another and create the
necessary conditions for peace and trust, the benefits of
which will redound to the entire region.
