Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
The French delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution now before us for action. This draft resolution
provides first of all for further extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) until 28 February 1997. It will also mark the agreement
of the Security Council regarding the plan for phased
withdrawal of the United Nations force after the expiry of
its mandate in accordance with the Secretary-General's
proposals.

Above all, the draft resolution will once again recall
to the Angolan parties, and in particular to UNITA, that
they have a responsibility to make the final essential efforts
to implement the Lusaka Protocol. Indeed, two years have
now passed since this Agreement was signed. The attitude
of UNITA has resulted in the loss of a great deal of time.
However, progress has been made thanks to the continued
pressure exerted by the Council and to the tenacity of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Blondin Beye. France shares the view expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report of 2 December 1996 that
the accords as a whole could be implemented before the
end of December.

A long road still lies ahead for Angola after the 20
years of war which have destroyed the economy of the
country, despite its unquestionable potential for success.
France is ready to provide assistance to the Angolan
people to regain the road of development and progress. At
the meeting in Brussels in September 1995, France stated
that it was ready to make available 570 million francs -
that is, more than $110 million - for programmes for the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of Angola. Discussions
are now under way within a bilateral framework with the
Angolan authorities so that this promised aid can rapidly
take concrete form. The French aid will be focused on
reconstruction projects, but it will also obviously have an
impact on the reintegration of demobilized combatants.

The French Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Herve
de Charette, went to Angola less than two weeks ago. As
a result of the contacts he was able to establish in Luanda
with President Dos Santos, he was able to assure the
Government of Angola of Frances full support in the
pursuit of the peace process.

It is now up to the Security Council to see to it that
all the efforts that we have made for nearly four years
towards the restoration of peace bear fruit soon. We also
hope that the institutions for national reconciliation will
be able to begin to function as soon as possible. These
necessary stages will allow Angola fully to resume its
place in southern Africa and to rejoin the group of
democratic African countries of that part of the continent
which have undergone radical and exemplary changes
since 1989.

