Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the holding of this important briefing on the evolution
of events in Yemen and wishes to express its gratitude
to the Russian Federation for convening this meeting
at a critical moment for that nation on the Arabian
peninsula. We are also grateful for the important and
illustrative briefings made by Mr. Martin Griffiths and
Mr. Mark Lowcock.

Allow me to begin by expressing our strong
condemnation and total rejection of the drone attacks
perpetrated on Saturday, 14 September, against two
ARAMCO oil facilities located in the eastern region
of Saudi Arabia. Those and previous attacks, including
those against certain parts of Yemen, only afflict the
civilian population in the affected localities and further
exacerbate the tense and delicate situation currently
existing in the subregion, as well as undermine all
efforts made and progress achieved on the road to a
peaceful settlement of the conflict.

With regard to the situation in Yemen, Equatorial
Guinea continues have faith in the work of the United
Nations, which, last December, through the good
management of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, opened a new chapter in the process of
bringing about a peaceful resolution to the conflict
with the signing of the Stockholm Agreement, the
implementation of which has seen some progress in
the first half of this year, thanks to certain cooperation
between the parties, whom we have been encouraging
to be bold and give more of themselves, so as to make
this historic agreement more effective.

At the Council's meeting in August, we, like other
members of the Council, expressed our deep concern
about the escalation in bloody clashes in the city ofAden
and other parts of Yemen (see S/PV.8598). Although
since then we have received information on an apparent
calm, we hope that the parties to the conflict have
reached out to each other to engage in steadfast and
stable negotiations with a view to bringing sustainable
peace to the people of that city and Yemen as a whole.

The resurgence of attacks by violent extremist
groups is yet another disturbing aspect of the hostile
environment in Yemen. On 1 August, the same day as
the missile attack on the Al-Galaa base, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant claimed responsibility for
a bomb attack on a police station that resulted in the
deaths of 12 policemen in Aden. An attack by Al-Qaida
on the Arabian Peninsula the next day in Abyan killed
at least 20 Government soldiers. In order to fight that
violent extremism, it is imperative to have a stable
Government, backed by the main political parties in the
country, resulting from a comprehensive and inclusive
peace agreement.

Yemen's humanitarian and economic conditions
are increasingly oppressive. It is estimated that almost
22 million people are in need of some form of assistance.
In that tragic context, we wish to express our full support
for the humanitarian work of the United Nations system
and other agencies deployed in Yemen and to reiterate
the moral and legal duty to allow them full access to
those in need. We therefore continue to look forward
to the full implementation of the agreement reached
between the World Food Programme and the Houthi
authorities on selecting and registering those who will
receive humanitarian assistance.

Before concluding, we urge the Yemeni Government
and the Houthi movement to continue to work on the
ongoing and full implementation of the important
commitments set out in the Stockholm Agreement. At
this very moment, the composition of the local forces to
take over the security of the city of Al-Hudaydah and
the ports is crucial.

In that regard, we hope that all members of the
Council will continue to support the mediation efforts
of Special Envoy Griffiths and that the international
community, as well as States that are interested in and
have influence over Yemen, will exert the necessary
pressure on all parties to the conflict with a view to
finding a sustainable and definitive solution that frees
the population from this conflict, which has caused so
much damage to the country.

