Mr. Dumitru (Romania): We are grateful for
your initiative, Mr. President, to convene this timely
briefing. I would like to join other members of the
Council in thanking Under-Secretary-General Jan
Egeland for his comprehensive presentation.

The humanitarian challenges facing the African
continent have once again called for the Council's
attention and careful consideration. The practice of
providing periodic briefings to the Council on
humanitarian developments in Africa is indeed very
welcome and useful. We commend in particular the
work done by Mr. Egeland. The periodic missions he
has undertaken to Africa are proof of his dedication
and of the special emphasis placed by the United
Nations on the need to address, as effectively and
urgently as possible, the humanitarian needs of that
continent.

Against that backdrop, I should like to focus here
on three issues. First, with regard to the Sudan, we
were particularly anxious to hear the briefing on the
situation in Darfur, as the recent period has been rich in
developments. Among them, the most encouraging is
the seventh round of inter-Sudanese peace talks on the
situation in Darfur that started in Abuja in November
under the proficient mediation of the African Union.
While we seem to have progressed politically, we want
to see that translated on the ground into an improved
humanitarian situation in Darfur. It is unfortunate,
however, that violence and atrocities are daily
occurrences and that they are directed at civilians,
including women and children, humanitarian workers
and international peacekeepers. At the same time,
given the prevailing climate of insecurity in Darfur, it
has become considerably more difficult to provide
assistance to those who need it most.

We commend the crucial role played by the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan and the valiant
efforts of its personnel to provide comfort in that
human tragedy. We also appreciate the constant
presence of the African Union mission in Darfur. It is
encouraging indeed to see regional ownership at work.

Secondly, with regard to northern Uganda, we
agree that the conflict there has important regional
dimensions with the potential to further destabilize the
already fragile security in the region and to disrupt the
ongoing humanitarian efforts. It remains our belief that
the resolution of that conflict is possible only
politically, not militarily. Furthermore, the prospects
for humanitarian improvement depend closely on the
progress made on the political front, with the
Government living up to its responsibilities to protect
the population in the North and the Lord's Resistance
Army ceasing immediately all acts of violence and
pursuing political talks.

Like others, we share a specific concern for the
situation of the nearly 2 million displaced people in
northern Uganda. In that regard, I would like to ask Mr.
Egeland about United Nations plans to meet the needs
of the internally displaced persons, given that the
majority of them relies extensively on international
assistance to survive.

Thirdly, regarding Zimbabwe, we highly value
the information just provided by Mr. Egeland,
following his timely visit there in December. Romania
shares the deep concern about the situation in
Zimbabwe. The humanitarian response seems critical
to that country, with the situation steadily worsening,
the food shortage becoming chronic and the number of
people in need of assistance increasing. In that regard,
we urge the Government to work with the international
community and the humanitarian agencies to address
the needs of the vulnerable population. We accordingly
welcome the progress reported by Mr. Egeland
concerning the agreements reached with the
Government on many issues, which will facilitate the
United Nations response to the humanitarian crisis in
Zimbabwe.

Finally, given that this is Romania's last
intervention on this issue as an elected member of the
Security Council, we would like to emphasize that, be
it with respect to Zimbabwe or to northern Uganda,
Romania believes that there is no excuse for the
Security Council and the international community to
simply hide behind the label of so-called forgotten or
silent crises and to do nothing but neglect serious
ongoing developments that, although perhaps silent
and unknown, claim untold numbers of lives and cause
unspeakable levels of human suffering. That is true, of
course, not only for the African continent, but for other
parts of the world, too.

