Mr. Osmane (Algeria) (spoke in French): Permit
me at the outset to welcome you among us, Mr. Minister,
and to congratulate your country and your delegation
on having organized a debate on an extremely sensitive
issue that the Security Council has been compelled by
circumstances to address: humanitarian crises
generated by armed conflict. I also thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations for his
very interesting briefing.

Over the past 15 years, the world has experienced
very serious conflicts that have shattered the lives of
tens of millions of individuals, causing mass
population movements, exposing millions of women
and children to every kind of danger and generating
often unbearable humanitarian crises. Given that
situation, the United Nations, including the Security
Council, has a responsibility to shoulder and a role to
play, together with the agencies and institutions that
are competent in this area.

Therefore, the Security Council's addressing the
humanitarian dimension of crises and conflicts through
peacekeeping and peacebuilding is a development that
we must welcome. We are also pleased that
coordination among the political, humanitarian,
military and socio-economic sectors is recognized as
essential in the prevention of conflict and the
establishment of lasting peace.

The crises of the past 15 years have shown that
the transition between the phase of intervention by the
international community and that of rehabilitation,
recovery and reconstruction can be fragile and
sometimes inadequate. Although there are situations
that provide reasons for satisfaction regarding the
progress made in transitional processes, we must note
that there are others in which efforts have not been
fully successful, particularly in the three key areas that
we are discussing in today's debate: the rule of law,
security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR).

In that regard, it is important that our overall
action with respect to managing post-conflict situations
be shaped by holistic strategies; as it devises the
mandates of peacekeeping missions, the Security
Council can and must play a leading role. Such
strategies should incorporate broad support for social
and economic intervention aimed at avoiding the
recurrence of conflict as well as reform of the security
and transitional justice sectors, reductions in small
arms and light weapons, the disarmament and
demobilization of former combatants and the
protection of civilians, in particular vulnerable groups.

The restoration and strengthening of the rule of
law, good governance, the promotion and protection of
human rights, the fight against impunity, respect for
international humanitarian law and the promotion of a
culture of peace and tolerance all continue to be of
fundamental importance. Strengthening the justice and
security sectors in crisis situations or in areas emerging
from conflict is also crucial. Further, it is important to
stress the development dimension in peacebuilding in
countries in crisis or emerging from conflict, as well as
to build the relationship between development and
peacebuilding; that is a task for the entire United
Nations system.

Here, we stress once again the need for in-depth
study of the root causes of the conflicts and
humanitarian crises that are shaking the planet, in
particular the African continent, and to work to contain
them. In that connection, I want to emphasize again the
key role of regional and subregional organizations both
in conflict prevention and in peacebuilding.

Implementing a comprehensive approach to
conflict prevention remains the most effective - and
unquestionably the most economical - way to avoid
the humanitarian tragedies brought about by conflict.
To do this, the international community must be
vigilant and must stand ready to provide support to
vulnerable countries. Such support must be coordinated
and multidimensional. It must also be timely and must
continue until the threat is dispelled once and for all.

But although the Security Council has a role to
play, it cannot, by virtue of its mandate, always try to do
everything, everywhere. In our View, the PeacebuiIding
Commission - whose role, mandate and place within
the United Nations are now under discussion within the
Organization - could be the appropriate body for
crafting and implementing strategies for addressing
pre-conflict and post-conflict situations, including in
their humanitarian aspects, in a consistent and
integrated manner. My delegation is ready to contribute
to that discussion in an open and constructive way.

Finally, we thank the Greek delegation for
preparing the draft presidential statement before us
today; we support it fully.

