Ms. Sanders (United States of America): We
welcome the presence here of you, Sir, and your
Foreign Minister to preside over the Council's debate
on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations.

This topic is timely and of growing importance as
the agenda of this Council grows ever longer and the
issues of peace and security grow more complex. We
share your interest in exploring ways to enhance that
coordination and burden-sharing as part of our
continuing joint efforts to identify efficient and
effective methods to help international peace and
security. We welcome in particular the opportunity that
today's debate represents to review cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
as well as ways to increase the impact of such
cooperation on advancing Security Council objectives.
The activities of regional organizations, when
properly planned and capably implemented, can
strengthen and reinforce a variety of critically
important objectives, such as the resolution of conflict
and the maintenance of peace, promoting democracy
and human rights, strengthening international security
cooperation, countering terrorism and transnational
crime, and even supporting economic development.

Regional organizations can bring unique and
important connections, knowledge and experience to
any effort to address problems and conflicts in their
regions. A cooperative multilateral approach between
the appropriate United Nations organs and the
appropriate regional organizations has the potential to
create valuable synergies and to significantly increase
the probability of successful interventions. Enhanced
cooperation between regional organizations and the
United Nations can be valuable especially when they
share lessons learned and information about
peacekeeping missions.

We should encourage the Security Council and
the Secretariat to consult with appropriate regional
actors when necessary, to exchange information and to
search for ways to better utilize their expertise in
conflict resolution and prevention. However, we
believe in general that this should be informal and
should not detract from the important relationship
among the Member States within the United Nations.
We must be careful about imposing any requirements
that would limit our ability in a time of crisis.

