The President: I shall now make some brief
comments in my national capacity as the representative
of Bangladesh.

First, I wish to thank Mr. Jacques Paul Klein,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for his comprehensive statement and
presentation of the report of the Secretary-General, as
well as for sharing with us his perception of the
situation in that part of the world.

The international community has invested
considerable effort and energy over the last six years in
promoting ethnic reconciliation, democratic institution-
building and revitalization of the economy in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Continuation and redoubling of these
efforts is an imperative. Failure to achieve the targets
of institution-building and the rule of law will have
repercussions throughout the region.

It is recognized, however, that to achieve
substantive progress the leadership of Bosnia and
Herzegovina has to be fully committed to the speedy
achievement of a durable peace, mutual
accommodation and the establishment of political,
human and legal rights. Unfortunate incidents,
including multiple instances of violence, have occurred
in recent months, which has not helped but has, rather,
made it difficult to sustain progress. Any upsurge in the
pursuit of ultra-nationalistic strategies and different
political views will be counter-productive and will
rapidly roll back the progress achieved so far. The
continued presence of indicted war criminals in the
territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina is also a
destabilizing factor.

We are encouraged by the continued efforts of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), despite difficult circumstances, to make
progress in the implementation of its mission. One such
laudable measure was the successful handling of the
impact of Croat self- rule on political structures.
Progress is notable in the establishment of a State
Border Service and in the areas of police cooperation
and the recruitment of minority police. As mentioned
by the Special Representative, major success is
expected in creating conditions for refugee return,
100,000 of whom are expected to return in a year.

Economic activity for real growth and progress
has to be boosted in order to consolidate peace. Efforts
for bringing the infrastructure and institutions to the
level of the rest of Europe may be arduous, but this is
the only course to pursue.

In conclusion, I would like in particular to
support the three points mentioned by the Special
Representative at the end of his presentation. First, the
success of multi-ethnicity in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
crucial for this country and for the region. Secondly,
there should be an effective strategy before exit. In his
words, "We cannot get out without getting in". Finally,
the continued support of the Security Council is
important for peace and reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the greater region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

At this point, I will come back to Mr. Klein and
give him the floor so that he can respond to comments

and make any other additional points that he would
like.

