Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening today's ministerial-level open debate on a
very timely and critically important topic.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

As described extensively in the Secretary-
General's annual report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2018/462), we continue to witness the
grim reality of growing numbers of civilians killed in
conflicts, as well as ongoing violations ofinternational
humanitarian law and human rights law.

Over the years, a number of landmark resolutions
have been adopted, such as 1894 (2009), which
prioritizes the protection of civilians in the context of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations, as well
as 2286 (2016), which is dedicated to the protection
of medical care in conflict situations. We recognize
the progress that has been made, but at the same time
emphasize the need to take further steps in fully
implementing those and other relevant resolutions. We
need full and unimpeded humanitarian access to the
people in desperate need of it, and we need to ensure
that those helping will be safe as well.

The primary responsibility of States is to ensure
the protection of their people. In that regard, I would
like to emphasize the paramount importance of conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. More needs to be done
in addressing the root causes of conflict, finding
avenues to promote political dialogue and creating
truly inclusive societies. Estonia fully supports the
Secretary-General's reform agenda and the concept
of sustaining peace, as well as placing prevention
and sustaining peace at the core of the work of the
United Nations.

Furthermore, in terms of preparing peacekeepers
and other United Nations staff to be deployed on
missions, education and training in international
humanitarian law has an important role in supporting
efforts to halt and prevent acts of violence, attacks and
threats against the wounded and sick and medical and
humanitarian personnel, as well as medical facilities.
References to mission-specific legal issues prior to
deployment could prove to be valuable and lead to
better application of international law, as well as
complement the overall troop-training procedure and
raise awareness.

For our part, Estonia has ratified the main
instruments of international humanitarian law
with regard to the protection of civilians and has
introduced the necessary domestic regulations for their
enforcement. Every measure has been taken to ensure
that our military personnel do not violate international
law when carrying out their duties and that they are
trained to comply with the obligations to protect
civilians as agreed in the Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians.

Finally, let me emphasize the importance of
accountability. Perpetrators must be brought to justice
and States must ensure that those responsible do not
operate with impunity. In that regard, let me also
underline the role of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in cases where investigations or prosecutions at
the national level are not possible. We encourage States
to cooperate with the ICC, and the Security Council
to refer matters to the ICC. In cases already referred
to the ICC, further support from the Council is of
paramount importance.

