Ms. Jial: It is a particular honour to be invited to
brief the Security Council on International Women's
Day. I want to dedicate my remarks today to the women
all around the world who continue to fight for the rights
of women and girls and who work daily to restore peace
in their communities.

I speak to the Council today as the founder and
Executive Director of Hope Restoration South Sudan,
an organization that works for the protection of people
with special needs and provides much-needed services
for women and girls who have suffered gender-based
Violence. I also represent a broader community of
humanitarians in South Sudan and am a member of
the South Sudan Women's Coalition, which was a
representative at the peace talks in 2015 and 2018.

I want to focus my remarks today on civil society
in South Sudan, particularly women-led organizations,
which I believe play a crucial role in building peace
and security in our country. The mass rape in Bentiu
last November was a symptom of a much deeper
problem affecting women and girls in South Sudan,
which suffers from some of the highest rates of gender-
based violence in the world. It is in that context that
civil society and women-led organizations across
South Sudan work tirelessly to deliver some of the most
critical life-saving services. They respond to gender-
based violence, protect people with special needs and
create women-friendly spaces that offer services like
psychosocial support and income-generating activities.
Because we employ local staff, we can operate in the
parts of the country that are hardest to reach. We work
throughout the rainy season. We stay and deliver to our
communities even when the fighting is going on around
us, and we will still be there when the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has left.

However, we struggle to operate when we lack
the necessary resources to carry out our work and
to continue to provide these life-saving services
to our communities, which have suffered from
decades of conflict. In South Sudan today, there
is intense competition between international and
national non-governmental organizations (NGOs) for
humanitarian resources. The bulk of the funding goes
to United Nations agencies and international NGOs,
and the smallest portion to national NGOs. Within
national civil society, by far the smallest portion of
funding goes to women-led organizations. We cannot
build a strong and vibrant civil society in South Sudan
with those constraints, and without us our community's
hopes for a lasting peace will fade.

In September 2018, my own organization, Hope
Restoration, received a grant from the South Sudan
Humanitarian Fund to open a woman- and girl-friendly
space in Leer, where we provided programmes for
survivors of gender-based violence. Within months
of opening, we were surprised by the number of
women who began visiting that space. As they started
building relationships of trust with our case workers
and counsellors, many of them began to open up
about their own stories. We were even more surprised
when we found that nearly half of these women were
survivors of gender-based violence; some had suffered
multiple rapes.

We started providing medical and psychosocial
support services, which most of those women had never
had access to. For me, that was our goal - helping
our community heal. But then, in early 2019 we lost
our funding. One can imagine what it was like for our
staff to have to tell those women in Leer that the space
would close on 1 March, just six months after opening.
How does one tell someone who has been subjected to
horrific acts of violence that one can no longer help
them? It is very disheartening, but we cannot afford to
give up hope. We cannot because we know those women
depend on us to keep fighting for them.

I take heart that this year's humanitarian
response plan has prioritized gender-based violence
programming. That should give local women-led
organizations, such as mine, more resources to provide
essential services. It is also encouraging that Mark
Lowcock, the Head of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, recently announced that he
will review the United Nations pooled funds to make
sure that more money is allocated to women-led local
organizations. That shows that more leaders across the
United Nations system value the work that we do - that
is, filling some of the biggest gaps in humanitarian
response and doing so with cost-effective programmes
that are making a real difference in our communities.
We are the best value operators in town.

So, what does that mean for the Security Council
as members consider next steps in South Sudan and the
renewal of the UNMlSS mandate?

First, it means including South Sudanese local
NGOs, especially women-led organizations, in the
UNMISS mandate. We are not there, and that needs to
change. There ought to be urgent recognition that we
cannot meet humanitarian needs, rebuild institutions
or craft a new Government without addressing the
deep-rooted gender inequality in South Sudanese
society. Women must be involved in discussions about
our country's future. We have talented, determined,
visionary women in South Sudan. We are ready to fill
the 35 per cent quota in the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, but in order to do so we need the backing of the
international community and the Council.

The women and peace and security agenda is much
more than just getting women to the table. It is about
women being central players in all aspects of peace
and security, including at the onset of an emergency,
throughout the crisis and when rebuilding their
communities after conflict has ended. To truly make
a difference and address the scale and severity of the
needs across South Sudan, local NGOs, particularly
those led by women, need greater financial support
to operate on a more sustainable basis and to scale up
their work.

There are no short-cut fixes if one is serious about
ending violence against women and girls. We need
long-term funding, and we must be able to provide
services where they are most needed. As Council
members know, most people are not in protection of
civilians sites. We know that one-stop centres work in
South Sudan. We need to be able to offer more of them
to our communities. By that, I mean a place where a
woman can come for medical and legal services and to
develop skills so she can earn an income. Being able to
do all that in one place works.

In the UNMISS mandate renewal next week, I
urge the Security Council to make a direct request to
international donors and humanitarian actors to work
with South Sudanese local NGOs. We need the Mission
and international NGOs to support us in taking on
a much greater share of the humanitarian work. It is
critical that we scale up the work local NGOs do to help
resolve disputes in and between our own communities
in ways that do not involve violence, raiding each other's
cattle or abducting women and girls. Those grassroots
efforts are critical if we are to build safer communities
and sustain peace across the country. To me, that kind
of partnership between local NGOs, donors, UNMISS
and the international humanitarian community has
been one of the critical missing pieces in South Sudan.
1 think that partnership will work better if we have a
clearer understanding of the challenges women and
girls face and what their needs are.

That brings me to my final recommendation and
another key element missing in South Sudan - effective
engagement with South Sudanese communities. We
need not just to be consulted, but to be heard. When we
raise concerns about tensions mounting or the need for
services, we speak from an informed position of local
knowledge. Those are our communities. We understand
the complexities of what troubles our communities,
whether they are historical tribal grievances or more
recent disputes over land or cattle, because we live there.

In conclusion, I want to leave one very clear message
with the Council. Within communities and local NGOs
in South Sudan, there is a wealth of untapped potential.
The key to unlocking that potential is finding better
ways to work together. As local NGOs, we stand ready
to work with the soon-to-be established transitional
Government of national unity, with UNMISS, with
the international humanitarian community and with
donors. I look forward to building those partnerships
and working with men and women across the country
to build a peaceful South Sudan.

