Mr. Trautwein (Germany): Let me first
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council in the first month of
the new year. We wish you all the best. We also
welcome the new members of the Council, and my
delegation promises to cooperate fully and a very
constructive way with all our new colleagues.

The United Nations sanctions regime targeting
members or associates of Al Qaeda and the Taliban
remains a major tool for combating terrorism on a
global scale.

My delegation thanks you, Sir, as Chairman of
the Committee, for your comprehensive and detailed
report, whose conclusions and recommendations we
fully support. We also commend you, Sir, for your
personal dedication and tireless efforts to improve the
system, in close cooperation with all partners.

In particular, we appreciate the recent visits made
to several Member States, including my country. The
substantive discussions held and the tangible results
achieved reassured the countries visited that the
Committee's work is based on an effective, even-
handed and transparent approach.

Dialogue was also intensified by inviting some
interested Member States to present their views
directly in a meeting of the Committee and also by
holding today this second public meeting of the
Council dealing with the Committee's work. We
welcome the announcement to hold periodic briefings
open to all States on the Committee's activities.

Thus, through several initiatives, you,
Ambassador Munoz, have succeeded in setting high
standards for strengthening the Committee's profile as
a trusted partner.

We would like also to thank the Monitoring
Group, led by Mr. Michael Chandler, for the
substantive findings and recommendations contained in
its latest report. They deserve thorough analysis and
should be duly reflected in the upcoming draft
resolution.

We join the Chairman in his appeal to those
Member States which, regrettably, have not fully and
proactively cooperated with the Committee to make
renewed efforts to do so, including by submitting long-
outstanding reports.

We also express our gratitude to Ambassador
Munoz and to the representatives of more than 30
Member States, as well as to the staff of the Secretariat,
for their active participation in the seminar on
"Terrorism and Targeted Sanctions - Shortcomings
and Possible Remedies for Individuals and Entities",
which was organized last November as a joint initiative
by the European Union, Sweden and Germany.

The seminar explored ways to introduce at least
some elements of due process into this sanctions
regime in order to avoid the targeting of innocent
individuals. These measures would, to our
understanding, increase the system's credibility and
effectiveness.

To conclude, I would like to underline the fact
that Germany fully subscribes to the forthcoming
statement by the representative of Ireland, speaking on
behalf of the presidency of the European Union.

