Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
submitting his report on small arms (S/2003/1217). We
have carefully studied that document and the
conclusions and recommendations contained in it. They
confirm that the United Nations is playing a leading
role in taking a comprehensive approach to the
resolution of problems related to small arms and light
weapons. The Russian Federation consistently
advocates enhancing the Organization's coordinating
role in that area, primarily in resolving problems
involving the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.

Over the past year, a number of very important
activities were held in this area, revealing substantial
potential in the international community to fight the
illicit trade in such weapons. The holding in July 2003
of the First Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects is a
clear example of how we can use the potential of the
United Nations and of regional and non-governmental
organizations in carrying out this most complex effort.

Pursuant to General Assembly resolution 58/241
of 23 December 2003, on the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons in all its aspects, work will begin
this year in the open-ended working group to prepare
an international document to enable States to identify
and trace, in a timely and reliable manner, illicit small
arms and light weapons. We trust that the establishment
of a comprehensive monitoring mechanism will erect a
serious obstacle to the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons throughout the world. We are convinced
that in future, the main work in this area should be
carried out within that framework.

The Security Council has repeatedly tackled
problems involving the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons as they relate to conflict situations on its
agenda. In that regard, the Council's comprehensive
consideration of this subject in March 2003 in the
context of resolving complex problems related to
maintaining and restoring international peace and
security on the African continent - particularly in
West Africa - was extremely useful and timely. Great
attention was devoted to that issue during the Security
Council mission to Central and West African countries.

The Russian Federation consistently advocates
imposing severe measures in cases where weapons are
supplied to illegal armed groups. Experience with the
imposition of arms embargoes against the Taliban
movement in conflict areas has confirmed the
effectiveness of such measures when undertaken by the
Security Council. Priority also continues to be placed
on monitoring compliance with Council-imposed arms
embargoes, enhancing the effectiveness of the
monitoring machinery for the tracking of violations of
such embargoes.

Recently, in the context of conducting
peacekeeping operations sponsored by the United
Nations, special attention - as reflected in the
Secretary-General's report - has been devoted to the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of former combatants and to the inclusion in the
mandate of such operations of the collection and
destruction of illicit small arms and light weapons, in
close cooperation with the parties to conflicts. Donor
support for DDR programmes is an important
prerequisite for their successful realization.

Particular cases and practical experience related
to the settlement of conflict situations convincingly
confirm the negative impact of and the direct link
among the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons,
the activities of illegal armed groups, the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, the involvement of
child soldiers in conflict, mass Violations of human
rights and of the norms of international humanitarian
law, and transborder crime.

The dangerous linkage between the illicit
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and
international terrorism is becoming increasingly
obvious. We believe it is important that we continue to
devote special attention to specific, practical and
achievable measures to fight the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons both at the preventive stage
and during the post-conflict settlement phase. In that
connection, the experience gained by regional
organizations is extremely timely and useful.

For its part, the Russian Federation will continue
to make a substantial contribution to solving the
problem of the illegal trafficking of small arms and
light weapons.

