Ms. Wensley (Australia): Today's debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is a welcome
opportunity to consider more fully, and to hear the
considered views of a substantial number of Member
States - including, importantly, non-Council members -
on the issues and recommendations raised in the
Secretary-Generals report of September 1999.

It was under Canadian leadership a little over a year
ago that Council attention was refocused on the issue of
protection of civilians. We want to commend Canada for
its initiative in holding this follow-up meeting and for its
firm commitment to pursuing this very specific aspect and
dimension of the more general and, I would say, still-
evolving concept of human security.

The Secretary-General's report and also the
statements we have heard from others today underline that
strengthening protection for civilians requires a multi-
dimensional approach, addressing legal and physical
assurances, conflict prevention and post-conflict peace-
building activities.

It is clear that Member States, the United Nations
and regional bodies must all focus more attention on ways
of improving implementation and enforcement of existing
humanitarian and human rights laws and norms, including
the Geneva Conventions - particularly the fourth - and
the 1977 Additional Protocols, and of promoting
observance of these instruments at all levels. This means
support for efforts to develop consistent national laws. It
also means support for efforts to develop national
institutions to disseminate laws of armed conflict through
education and training, both of armed forces and of
civilian administration, and for monitoring and
enforcement of laws.

Strengthening the legal protections for civilians also
involves ensuring adequate recourse to justice where
violations have taken place. We have heard many
speakers address this issue, but it is certainly vital that we
have effective institutions to bring to justice perpetrators
of crimes against humanity. It is for this reason that
Australia welcomed the establishment of the special
tribunals and views the International Criminal Court as a
particularly powerful instrument in this regard. It
reinforces the obligations of States to investigate and to
prosecute those responsible for major violations; and,

 

where no State is able or willing genuinely to do so, it
provides a mechanism for the investigation and prosecution
of crimes.

In our view, more emphasis needs to be placed on
developing and implementing concrete measures to improve
the physical security of civilians caught in conflict
situations, with particular attention to be given to the
vulnerable groups of women, children and displaced
persons. Those measures should include greater use of
preventive action, increased use of the specific mechanisms
for the protection of civilians provided for in international
humanitarian law instruments, increased use of United
Nations Charter provisions to investigate conflict situations
and, as a last resort, sanctions targeting delinquent parties,
but - as we discussed earlier this week in another equally
welcome open debate - such measures should be tailored
to minimize adverse impact on the civilian population.

Another important component is the sustained use of
political and diplomatic pressure to ensure that parties
guarantee access for civilians to humanitarian assistance
and necessary protection for United Nations and related
personnel, the International Committee of the Red Cross,
and humanitarian relief workers. Although humanitarian
relief workers are entitled to the same protection as
civilians, their operations - we have all acknowledged -
make them especially vulnerable to attack in conflict
situations. We look forward to the Secretary-General's
comprehensive report on the safety and security situation of
humanitarian personnel, when it is submitted during the
fifty-fifth session of the General Assembly, and beyond that
to further international cooperation in enhancing the
protection of those humanitarian workers who are not
specifically protected under current international
humanitarian law instruments or under the Convention on
the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.

There is also scope for the international community to
improve the physical security of civilians through its
peacekeeping activities. Australia supports the
Secretary-General's recommendations to include explicit
provisions for the protection of civilians within United
Nations peacekeeping mandates where warranted and where
the United Nations missions are provided with the resources
to fulfil those responsibilities. In this context, it is
especially important that United Nations peacekeeping
mandates be clearly and realistically defined, in terms of
both responsibilities and objectives. Where peace
enforcement powers are entrusted to United Nations
operations, they must be backed up with the necessary
resources.

The International Force in East Timor (INTERFET)
demonstrated that a well-equipped, mobile force can have
an immediate, positive impact on the physical security of
civilian populations, as well as perform a critical, longer-
term deterrence function. INTERFET benefitted from a
robust mandate that left no question as to its authority to
enforce peace if required, and from strong support from
the international community.

The capacity for rapid deployment and force
projection are essential to peacekeepers' ability to
stabilize conflict situations and to extend protection to
civilians. Australia considers that the recent report of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations contains
a number of useful ideas and suggestions on how the
United Nations capacities in these areas might be
improved, and we look forward to opportunities to
consider those ideas and suggestions further.

But effectively maintaining peace - and in so doing
guaranteeing the security of civilians - also requires
confidence-building measures at the grassroots level to
defuse tension and confrontation and to lay the
groundwork for political reconciliation. Here, we believe
Australia's experience in the Peace Monitoring Group in
Bougainville, in company with other South Pacific
countries, offers some lessons. The role of the Peace
Monitoring Group has largely been one of building
confidence between parties and ensuring continued
commitment to peaceful settlement of the dispute.

Australia supported the provisions of the draft
resolution before the Council today on the protection of
civilians. Its welcome adoption will represent another
important step in the Council's ongoing efforts to enhance
international security, not only in the broad geopolitical
sense but in a very practical way that can benefit people
right down to the village level. That is to say, to benefit
the ordinary citizens and civilians whose safety and well
being is the subject of today's open debate.

