Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I welcome the presence among us of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands. We also thank the Under Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for his valuable
briefing on the latest developments concerning the
humanitarian situation in Syria.

We fully associate ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of Sweden, which was
also made on our behalf, and I wish to make a few
additional remarks in our national capacity.

We reiterate our support for all humanitarian actors
and medical staff on the ground and commend their
efforts to reduce the humanitarian suffering in Syria.

The Council hasjust adopted resolution 2449 (2018),
which renews the mandate of the mechanism to deliver
cross-border humanitarian aid for an additional year.
The resolution is the result of weeks of discussions and
consultations, during which we listened to the opinions
of all members of the Council and relevant parties. We
thank all States that voted in favour of the resolution.

The adoption of this humanitarian resolution
represents an extremely important step in ensuring
the direct delivery of humanitarian aid to millions of
Syrians in need. The Council has therefore responded
to the international community's calls by renewing this
mechanism, which is a clear signal that the international
community attaches great importance to the swift and
unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid to those in
need.

Regrettably, this year has seen an increase in the
humanitarian suffering in Syria. The conflict continues,
threatening regional and international peace and
security, while the Council remains unable to resolve
the crisis. We are concerned by the recent escalation of
the situation in various parts of the country, including
Deir ez-Zor, Idlib and Aleppo. The current security
situation in Syria demonstrates that it is still fragile and
could lead to a military escalation, in particular in Idlib,
where some 3 million people live. In that regard, we
reaffirm the importance of maintaining the agreement
reached between Russia and Turkey on Idlib in order to
prevent a further humanitarian catastrophe there.

We also reaffirm that all parties must honour
their commitments under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We reiterate
the importance of holding accountable all those who
have committed violations of international law and
international humanitarian law. We must also ensure
the safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, according to international
criteria. The Council must therefore redouble its efforts
and work collectively in order to resolve the crisis.
The humanitarian situation will keep deteriorating if
a political solution of the Syrian crisis is not reached
pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex).

In conclusion, since this meeting is the last
scheduled on the humanitarian situation in Syria for
this year, I take this opportunity to thank the delegation
of Sweden, especially Ambassador Olof Skoog and his
team, for their cooperation on the humanitarian file
of a dear Arab State that should enjoy security and
stability. We commend the marvellous performance
of the delegation of Sweden, which was admired by
everyone in the Council. After we closely worked
with it on this and other dossiers, I can honestly say
that the delegation of Sweden has enjoyed the great
confidence of all members of the Council because of its
demonstrated professionalism, credibility and integrity
in upholding and staunchly defending the Charter of
the United Nations and international law. We therefore
again congratulate the Ambassador and the delegation
of Sweden on their efforts and achievements, and look
forward to working with the delegations of Germany
and Belgium on the Syrian humanitarian dossier
starting in January 2019.

