Mr. Seruhere (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation joins those who have spoken before me in
congratulating you, Madam, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July. We are very pleased to see Nigeria presiding over
the debate on this very special and important subject
for the United Nations and the African continent. We
are confident that you will steer this meeting to a
fruitful conclusion, given your vast political experience

and diplomatic skills, coupled with Nigeria's
commitment to peace for Africa and the world. This
commitment has been well illustrated by, among other
things, your country's effective participation in many
United Nations and African peacekeeping missions,
your various endeavours in the settlement of disputes,
and deliberations on international peace and security
here at the United Nations.

We welcome the statement of the Deputy
Secretary-General, Asha-Rose Migiro, and the briefing
by the Special Representative and Director for the
World Development Report on Conflict, Security and
Development of the World Bank, Ms. Sarah Cliffe.
Nigeria has also done a commendable job in
coordinating disarmament issues for the African Group
under each of the agenda items of the First Committee.
We also commend the Bureau that you lead in carrying
out the work of the Security Council.

The United Republic of Tanzania is committed
not only to the keeping of peace in Africa and the
world but also to making it happen. In that regard, we
belong to the clan of peacemakers. In recent times,
Tanzania has, for example, successfully mediated
various conflicts and disputes in Africa, in particular in
countries of the Great Lakes region, including Burundi,
Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and,
most recently, neighbouring Kenya, to mention but a
few.

Preventive diplomacy works well but, despite the
significant and commendable efforts African countries
have made in that regard, some of the factors that cause
or perpetuate conflicts, especially poverty and
unemployment, persist in our societies. The World
Bank representative, Ms. Sarah Cliffe, elucidated this
issue in very clear terms.

Armed conflicts not only cause instability and
insecurity, but also retard human development for very
many years. As I have just mentioned, poverty and
unemployment are persistent phenomena in conflict
and post-conflict societies. The people affected,
especially unemployed youth, become very easy targets
for recruitment into terrorism, with all its tragic
consequences, as well as other vices including
transborder crimes such as arms and drug trafficking.
Many of the representatives who spoke before me,
including members of the Security Council, did not
miss the opportunity to stress this reality. No civilized
society or people should claim honour or take pride in
wealth or power acquired by orchestrating conflict
entrepreneurship, nor should we allow that to happen.

The way forward for the United Nations, the
international community as a whole and, of course,
Africa is to join hands and address in a holistic but
efficient and effective way the circumstances that serve
to perpetuate conflicts, instability and terrorism. It is
cheaper to invest in development, employment and the
elimination of poverty than to wage war or pay for
peacekeeping activities. The United Nations must show
leadership in these processes, much as African Member
States have been asked or instructed to own them. We
must all give the United Nations adequate support, as
speakers have demonstrated here, in exercising its
multilateral authority and we must demand that it does
so with impartiality and effectively. Donor nations and
the entire donor community stand to benefit in the long
run as lives and resources will eventually be saved
when peace reigns and more nations become better
partners in global markets and trade instead of
preoccupying themselves with conflict issues.

