The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity as
representative of Argentina.

First, along with all previous speakers, I wish to
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Kalomoh, for his comprehensive briefing.

Secondly, I wish to underscore that in recent days
a number of significant events have taken place in the
Middle East, including, in particular, the Israeli
elections, the formation of a new Palestinian
Government, the beginning of the Lebanese national
dialogue and the holding of the Arab League summit in
Khartoum.

We believe therefore that this is a transcendent
moment for the region, in particular as regards the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It is now for the parties to
take decisions that may to a large extent determine
their future. The international community, which also
has an important role to play, should help the parties to
take decisions that facilitate the path towards a
peaceful solution based on the coexistence of two
sovereign States living side by side in peace and
security.

As regards the first of the events that I have
noted - the Israeli elections - we wish to welcome
the statements made by the leaders of some of the
political parties that gained significant representation
in the Knesset, reaffirming their commitment to the
search for a negotiated settlement to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. We are convinced that the solution
to the conflict can be achieved only through good-faith
negotiations, not through unilateral measures or
military operations.

The President of the Palestinian Authority has
also affirmed that he is committed to achieving a
negotiated solution. We reaffirm the message that this
Council sent on 3 February 2006 to the effect that all
the members of the new Palestinian Government must
unequivocally commit themselves to combat violence,
to recognize the right of Israel to exist and to accept
the agreements previously concluded between the two
parties. We hope that the leaders of Hamas will
respond to this appeal.

In this time of political readjustments and new
alignments, we should not lose sight of the fact that
both parties continue to have clear-cut obligations
under the road map. In accordance with provisions of
that document, Israel must cease any settlement-
expansion activity and proceed to dismantle the
outposts. Similarly, it must put an end to the building
of the separation wall inside the Green Line. As far as
these issues are concerned, we reaffirm that under
international law, both the settlements and long
sections of the wall are illegal.

We would also ask the Government of Israel to
end extrajudicial executions, which, as we know, are in
breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention. Also, it
should refrain from military operations such as that
carried out in Jericho on 14 March, concerning which
we feel bound to express our concern.

For its part, the Palestinian Authority should take
all possible steps to restore order in the Palestinian
territories and prevent attacks from those territories on
Israeli territory. In keeping with the road map, all
terrorist infrastructures must be dismantled and
decisive measures must be taken against persons or
groups that carry out or plan violent attacks on Israelis.

The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip is a
matter of particular concern to my country. The near-
permanent closure of the Karni crossing point in recent
months has caused considerable economic harm, and
we all know that it has had a negative effect on the
humanitarian situation in the territory. We therefore
believe that urgent measures need to be taken to deal
with the shortage of foodstuffs and basic goods in
Gaza. We believe that the best solution would be the
full implementation of the Agreement on Movement
and Access, signed in November. We therefore call on
the Israeli Government, the Quartet and the Palestinian
Authority to accord priority to that issue with a view to
reopening the crossing point and lifting the many
obstacles in the way of the circulation of goods and
persons in Gaza and the West Bank.

The recent World Bank report on the prospects
for the Palestinian economy points unambiguously to
the grave consequences of certain measures that have
already been taken or that are being contemplated as a
reaction to the outcome of the Palestinian legislative
elections. We believe that the utmost caution must be
exercised before such measures are taken, as a massive
reduction of funds transfers and donations to the
Palestine Authority would have a significant impact on
Palestinian gross domestic product, raising the rate of
unemployment and poverty to alarming levels. We
reiterate that we cannot and should not punish the
Palestinian people for the way in which they voted in
the elections of 25 January.

At the same, the budgetary situation of the
Palestinian Authority is a cause for concern,
particularly in view of the Israeli decision not to
transfer tax and customs duty revenues belonging to
the Palestinians themselves. We should not forget that
the Palestinian Authority plays an important role in
providing basic social and economic services and that
it pays the wages of a significant proportion of the
economically active population in the occupied
territories.

With regard to the recent developments in
Lebanon, we welcome the beginning of a national
dialogue. For the first time, all Lebanese factions are
seated around the negotiating table with a view to
arriving at an agreement on issues of great complexity
and sensitivity. We fully support that process and call
on the parties to do their utmost to reach agreement on
outstanding issues, including on those provisions of
resolution 1559 (2004) that have not yet been
implemented, especially those relating to the
disarmament of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the United
Arab Emirates.

