Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): I should like to
begin, Madame, by congratulating you, on behalf of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, on the outstanding
manner in which the Bosnian presidency has led the
Council's work this month. I also wish to commend
Ambassador Susan Rice, Permanent Representative of
the United States of America to the United Nations,
who presided so effectively over the Council's work in
December 2010.

I also thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his exhaustive
briefing, in which he urged the parties and the
international community to pursue their efforts aimed
at the resumption of negotiations on all final status
issues concerning the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

In a statement issued earlier this week, the
Bureau of my Committee reaffirmed that the
continuation of Israeli settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, is the main obstacle to a resumption of
negotiations between the parties to the conflict. It again
urges the Government of Israel to heed the repeated
calls of the international community for a complete
cessation of settlement activities, which are illegal
under international law and run counter to the efforts to
launch successful final status negotiations.

Since the expiration of the partial moratorium in
September, Israel has built over 1,600 housing units in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
10

Jerusalem. The recent decision of the Government of
Israel to devote over $500 million in the form of
subsidies to expanding settlements through 2012 also
demonstrates Israel's intention to pursue its illegal
settlement policies in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

It would be useful if the Security Council were to
reaffirm today its firm position on settlements and to
demand that an end be put to their expansion so that
the parties might understand that the United Nations
and the Security Council intend to ensure respect for
international legitimacy and to achieve a just, lasting
and comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian
question. The Council must urgently intervene to
prevent the situation from deteriorating. It is also
obligated to maintain regional peace and security.

In that respect, the Committee fervently hopes
that the draft resolution on Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories will be adopted by the
Council. Furthermore, the Committee asks the
Government of Israel to extend the moratorium
indefinitely and to apply it to East Jerusalem, pursuant
to its obligations under Road Map. The Committee
believes that the implementation of a new moratorium
on settlements, including in East Jerusalem, would
enable the parties to relaunch serious and direct
negotiations. These important negotiations can succeed
only in an atmosphere of mutual trust and good faith.

While commending the efforts undertaken by the
Quartet and each of its members in recent years to
promote a freeze of settlement activities and a
resumption of negotiations, the Committee, through
me, urges the Council, the Quartet and the high
contracting parties to the Geneva Conventions to
clearly reaffirm their principled position on the issue of
settlements in order to compel Israel to meet its
obligations. The very future of the peace process is at
stake. The international community should send a clear
message that settlement activities are illegal and
incompatible with peace. They must therefore stop.

