Mr. Sial (Pakistan): We would like to thank the
Mexican presidency for holding this thematic debate.
We listened with interest to the presentations made by
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
on Children and Armed Conflict; Mr. Atul Khare,
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Ms. Hilde Frafjord Johnson, Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF.

Children are our future. A child, whether in the
developing or developed world, can be privileged or
underprivileged. No matter where they are, children
require our equal attention, focus and care. While
trying to tackle the present challenges, we all
consciously work towards ensuring a better and safer
future. That future lies in our children.

The central purpose of the United Nations
Charter, that is "to save succeeding generations", is
linked to our children as we strive to save them from
the scourge of war. We face common cross-cutting
issues of health, education and protection, et cetera,
when addressing issues related to children in all
situations. However, the vulnerability of children in
situations of armed conflict requires more attention
than any other such issue.

We have carefully reviewed the latest
(S/2010/181) and past reports of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict. We would like to take
this opportunity to point out that the recent reports
have tried to overstretch the definition of armed
conflict. No one can deny the importance of caring for
our children, and any violation of their rights must be
reported and acted upon swiftly. However, we also
have to be careful when we overload a reporting
mechanism by stretching it beyond its mandate. That
results in weakening the message that should be
conveyed by a mandate and a report from the
Secretary-General on the subject of children and armed
conflict.

In the context of Pakistan, the latest report has
referred to our law enforcement action against
terrorists and extremists as an armed conflict; this
action cannot be defined as such under international
law. Pakistan has been obliged to undertake certain law
enforcement and anti-terror actions with the full
support of the nation, in particular that of the people of
the affected areas. This was necessary to promote and
protect the human rights of the people, especially those
of women and children.

We are deeply concerned at the few instances of
the abhorrent use of children by extremists in Pakistan
and have strongly condemned it. We, however, regret
that the situation is mentioned out of context in the
report. Let me reiterate that the Government of
Pakistan condemns in the strongest terms any use of
children by extremists or any other group to promote
their egregious agenda and is taking appropriate action
in that regard.

UNICEF is Pakistan's key technical partner in the
area of children and is providing valuable assistance
for children in Pakistan. We have a robust UNICEF
country programme. In this debate, we would like to
acknowledge the role of UNICEF as the key lead
agency on issues of children. We also recognize that
the non-governmental organization community has
made invaluable contributions in this sphere. For a
sustained and meaningful engagement, it is important
that civil society should be sensitive in differentiating
among situations by maintaining objectivity.

We hope that the future reports of the Secretary-
General will be objective, so as not to lose sight of the
noble objective of saving our children from the scourge
of war.

