Ms. Arbour: The urgent need to stop the
violence in Darfur is widely acknowledged. One way
to reduce the carnage - not the only way, but a
credible and legitimate way - is to remove from their
positions those who orchestrate and execute it. The
Security Council has taken the lead in this regard,
through its call for the establishment of a Commission
of Inquiry in resolution 1564 (2004).

The findings of that Commission, which the
Council has before it and which I shall highlight today,
provide a blueprint for action. The Commission's
recommendations are not merely of retrospective
importance; their implementation will not only do
justice for the victims of the massive crimes committed
in Darfur, but may actually contribute to reducing the
exposure of thousands of prospective victims. That is
the context in which today's call for action needs to be
understood.

Following the adoption of resolution 1564
(2004), the Secretary-General appointed five
outstanding international legal and human rights
experts as commissioners. They brought with them a
wealth of knowledge from different legal systems and
expertise in international human rights, humanitarian
and criminal law.

The Council will recall that the Commission's
mandate was, first, to investigate reports of violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights law
in Darfur by all parties; secondly, to determine whether
or not acts of genocide had occurred; and thirdly, to
identify the perpetrators of such violations with a view
to ensuring that those responsible were held
accountable.

The Secretary-General requested my Office to
assist the Commission in its work. My Office created a
secretariat composed, in all, of more than 30 persons,
including legal and human rights officers supporting
the day-to-day work of the commissioners, and field-
based teams composed of criminal investigators -
including some with backgrounds in the area of sexual
violence - military analysts and forensic experts.

The commissioners undertook two missions to
the Sudan, including Darfur, as well as visiting
relevant parties in Chad, Eritrea and Ethiopia. When
the commissioners returned to Geneva following their
first mission to the Sudan in November 2004, their
investigative teams stayed in the country and remained
on the ground - primarily in Darfur - for a total of
eight weeks, until 19 January 2005. In addition to the
material collected by the Commission itself, the
Commission received information and evidence from a
very broad range of sources, including Governments,
non-governmental organizations and various
international organizations. The Commission reported
to the Secretary-General within three months, on
25 January 2005. Its findings are clear and thoroughly
documented.

First, the Commission found that large-scale war
crimes and crimes against humanity had been
committed by Sudanese Government officials and by
the Janjaweed militia. In particular, the Commission
found that Government forces and militias had,
throughout Darfur, engaged in indiscriminate attacks
against civilians, murder, torture, enforced
disappearances, the destruction of villages, rape,
pillage and forced displacement. Those acts took place
on a very large scale and in a systematic manner, and
may therefore amount to crimes against humanity.

Consider the events in Kailek, a village in south
Darfur populated mainly by people of the Fur tribe.
Kailek and surrounding villages were attacked twice by
Government forces and Janjaweed. Following the
second attack, in March 2004, the villagers fled to the
mountains, where they were hunted down by mounted
Janjaweed. The military shelled the area and machine-
gunned those in flight; some were captured and shot
and killed.

For a period of approximately 50 days, up to
30,000 people were confined in a small open area in
Kailek. They were subject to the most abhorrent
treatment. Some men were singled out and summarily
shot. There were reports of people being thrown onto
fires and burned alive. Women and children were
separated out, confined in a walled area and
periodically taken away by their captors to be raped;
some of them were subjected to gang rapes.

As evidenced in the Commission's report, the
case of Kailek is not unique in today's Darfur.

With regard to the rebels, the Commission found
credible evidence that members of the Sudanese
Liberation Army and of the Justice and Equality
Movement were also responsible for serious violations
that may amount to war crimes. In particular, those
violations include cases of murder of civilians and
pillaging. However, the Commission did not find a
systematic or a widespread pattern to those violations.

Secondly, the Commission concluded that the
Government of the Sudan had not pursued a policy of
genocide; in other words, it did not find a
demonstrated, specific intention, expressed as
Government policy, to exterminate, in whole or in part,
a national, ethnic, racial or religious group protected
under the definition of genocide. However, the
Commission recognized that only a competent court
could determine, on a case-by-case basis, whether
individuals, including Government officials, ordered or
participated in atrocities motivated by the genocidal
intent to exterminate a protected group, in which case
they could be found guilty of the crime of genocide.

It is, in my view, important to stress that nothing
in the Commission's report precludes the possibility of
individuals being convicted of acts of genocide in
relation to the events in Darfur. Personal criminal
responsibility is not determined by Government policy.
Furthermore, the Commission stressed that its
conclusion that no genocidal policy had been pursued
should not be taken as in any way detracting from or
belittling the gravity of the crimes perpetrated.

Thirdly, the Commission identified 51 individuals
suspected of having committed international crimes in
Darfur. It decided to withhold their names from the
public domain so as to respect the suspects' right to
due process and to ensure the protection of witnesses
from possible harassment or intimidation. The names
of those suspects are contained in a sealed file that has
been placed in the custody of the Secretary-General to
be handed over to a competent prosecutor. In addition,
the Commission handed to me a sealed file containing
the evidentiary material it had collected, also to be
delivered to a competent prosecutor.

The Commission reviewed steps taken by the
Sudanese Government and by judicial authorities to
address those crimes, and it concluded that they were
both unwilling and unable to act. It noted that the
justice system had been significantly weakened during
the past decade and that restrictive laws granting broad
powers to the executive particularly undermined the
effectiveness of the judiciary.

Many of the laws in force in the Sudan today
contravene basic human rights standards, and the
Criminal Procedure Code contains provisions that
prevent the effective prosecution of these crimes. In
addition, many victims informed the Commission that
they had little confidence in the impartiality of the
Sudanese justice system and its ability to bring to
justice the perpetrators of the serious crimes committed
in Darfur, and many feared reprisals if they resorted to
it.

Despite the magnitude of the crisis, the
Government informed the Commission of very few
cases of individuals who had been prosecuted or even
disciplined in the context of the situation in Darfur,
which led the Commission to observe that the measures
taken so far had been grossly inadequate and
ineffective.

In my view, any new initiative proposed by the
Government of the Sudan today to address these crimes
could not be supported in the light of the Commission's
conclusions. In particular, the extent of involvement of

Government officials - as documented by the
Commission - would appear to foreclose such
options.

The Commission carefully considered a broad
range of other accountability measures. For reasons I
have outlined, the Commission also excluded the
possibility of establishing mixed courts. Moreover, the
Commission discounted the possibility of either
establishing an ad hoc international tribunal or
expanding the mandate of an existing tribunal. The
Commission concluded that ad hoc measures would
likely prove to be unduly time-consuming and
expensive.

The Commission strongly recommended that the
Security Council refer the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court (ICC). The Commission
held the View that referral to the ICC was the only
credible way in which to bring alleged perpetrators to
justice, and it advised against other measures.
Activated by Security Council referral, the ICC would
be empowered to prosecute any persons for acts
committed in Darfur that amount to any of the crimes
listed under the Rome Statute.

Designed in part for the purpose of addressing
crimes that threaten international peace and security,
the International Criminal Court could be activated
immediately. With an already existing set of well-
defined rules of procedure and evidence, the Court is
the institution best suited for ensuring speedy
investigations leading to arrests and demonstrably fair
trials.

In addition, the Commission urged that the
Council act not only against the perpetrators, but also
on behalf of the victims. It therefore proposed the
establishment of an international compensation
commission.

Murder, torture, enforced disappearances, the
destruction of villages, rape and forced displacement
continue to be committed against the people of Darfur.
Those crimes have been - and, it appears, continue to
be - perpetrated on a widespread and systematic basis
by Government officials and Janjaweed leaders or
those under their command. Members of rebel groups
are also responsible for war crimes.

What is most urgently needed now are concrete
measures to bring the current violence to an end and to
restore security and dignity to the people of Darfur.
The Commission, in my View, eloquently and
powerfully argues that referral to the ICC is the best
means by which to halt ongoing violations and to
prevent future ones.

As stressed by the Commission, there are other
immediate actions to be taken that the Council may
wish to note, including granting full and unimpeded
access by the International Committee of the Red Cross
and by United Nations human rights monitors to all
those detained by the Sudanese authorities in relation
to the situation in Darfur.

The protection of witnesses and victims of human
rights violations is urgently needed. I have written to
the Government of Sudan with regard to these issues,
and I have already appointed a Witness Protection
Officer to follow up on any reports of threats or
harassment of victims and witnesses perceived to have
cooperated with the Commission.

Last September, the Council took an important
step towards bringing justice to the people of Darfur by
requesting the establishment of an international
commission of inquiry. The Commission has
discharged its task with professionalism and integrity,
and has placed before you a proposed course of action
aimed at ending the brutality in Darfur, ensuring that
perpetrators of atrocities are punished and recognizing
the dignity of the victims.

The pursuit of justice is often said to clash with
the pursuit of peace. Whatever the theoretical merit of
that proposition, the findings of this Commission of
Inquiry irrefutably demonstrate that there is no hope
for sustainable peace in Darfur without immediate
access to justice.

