Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
for her introduction of the seventh report of her Office
to the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011). My comments will address the four main issues
in the report.

On matters pertaining to cooperation, we note
that the Office of the Prosecutor continues to receive
cooperation on the Libyan situation from State parties
as well as non-State parties with a view to strengthening
the rule of law in Libya. We welcome the engagement of
the Libyan Prosecutor General with the ICC Prosecutor
and Deputy Prosecutor to discuss the implementation
of the memorandum of understanding of 2013 aimed
at fostering cooperation in the investigation of grave
crimes allegedly committed in Libya. We believe
that the support of the Libyan authorities is crucial in
facilitating the work of the Prosecutor.

Concerning the case against Saif Al-Islam
Al- Qadhafi, while we understand the wish of the Libyan
authorities to prosecute him within the national justice
system, we see the need for Libya's actions in that
matter to be consistent with the decisions of the ICC.

With regard to ongoing investigations, we urge
the Government of Libya to expedite action on
its negotiations with the ICC Registry on matters
pertaining to the recognition of the privileges and
immunities of ICC staff in order to facilitate the work
of the ICC inside Libya.

On the crimes allegedly committed by the different
parties in Libya since 15 February 2011, we note with
concern that thousands of conflict-related detainees
have not yet been transferred to State authority and are
being held in violation of their basic human rights. We
also note that the Government of Libya missed its own
deadline of 2 March 2014 for charging or releasing all
detainees. We stress that respecting the human rights
of detainees is in itself an important aspect of the
dispensation of justice. We therefore endorse the call
by the Office of the Prosecutor for the Government of
Libya and concerned local authorities, especially in
Misrata, to process all detainees as expeditiously as
possible.

