First, I thank Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. Allow me to voice France's growing concerns regarding the threat of annexation. Like the overwhelming majority of the Council, we expressed our worries last month regarding the prospect of annexation of parts of the West Bank after the signing of the Israeli coalition agreement (see S/2020/341). However, the inauguration of the new Israeli Government brings us closer to that prospect. We look forward to continuing to work with the Israeli authorities in a constructive and comprehensive way, in the spirit of the long-standing friendship that binds us to Israel and of our unshakable commitment to Israel's security. Nevertheless, I want to echo Minister Le Drian's statement and reiterate that any annexation of any part of the West Bank, including only settlements, would represent a violation of international law, which strictly prohibits the acquisition of territory by force. It would jeopardize the two-State solution envisaged in previous negotiations and agreements. It would also undermine the prospect of peace talks, for which the Council unanimously calls. Annexation is not in the interest of the Palestinians, the Israelis, the Europeans or the international community. The implementation of such a unilateral step would further threaten regional stability. It would also be detrimental to Israel's role in the world, its integration in the regional context and its relationship with its partners. France therefore again warns the Israeli Government against such a move, which would not be without consequences for its relations with the European Union. We will not recognize any changes to the June 1967 lines unless agreed to by both parties. In that regard, let me recall that resolution 2334 (2016) creates obligations for third parties by calling on Member States to distinguish between the State of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967. We recall the importance for all parties to respect existing agreements. In that context, it is more urgent than ever to restart peace negotiations. France firmly believes that only negotiations aimed at establishing two States living in peace and security along secure, recognized borders on the basis of the 1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States, are likely to lead to a just and lasting peace in the region. That is also the position of the European Union, based on the Council's resolutions. Together with the European Union, we stand ready to support any effort made on that basis, in line with international law and by means of negotiations between the parties. We are working closely with our European, as well as our Arab, partners on that issue. We therefore stand ready to support any initiative aimed at relaunching credible negotiations. As we have already said, we are ready to consider President Abbas's proposals to the Council in February (see S/PV.8717). We also believe that Palestinian unity is of paramount importance in the current situation. That can be achieved only through credible reconciliation talks. The Palestinian Authority should set a time frame for the holding of general elections in Gaza, the West Bank and East Jerusalem once the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is under control. Those elections could foster Palestinian reconciliation, which is also essential for peace. That responsibility lies in the hands of the Palestinian Authority. Finally, I am glad to hear that the spread of the pandemic is, for now, more or less under control, but efforts should not be stopped as long as the risk remains. Let me once again commend the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), as well as the other United Nations agencies, for their exemplary role in response to the pandemic. I also welcome the new agreement reached between Israel and the Palestinian Authority on the issue of clearance revenue and call for it to pave the way for a comprehensive agreement. Nevertheless, more needs to be done in order to promote cooperation and dialogue between the parties apart from combating the pandemic. As the already dire economic situation in Palestine is likely to worsen, France has advanced its annual budgetary contribution to the Palestinian Authority. Furthermore, the French Development Agency has provided financial support to the Ministries of Health and National Economy. France also continues to support the UNRWA response to COVID-19. The meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International Assistance to Palestinians on 2 June will give us the opportunity to once again renew our commitment to supporting a viable two-State solution. France, along with its European partners, will continue to promote multilateralism and support for the international rules-based order. The Charter of the United Nations prohibits the acquisition of territory by force. The Council has established the internationally agreed parameters on which the two-State solution is based, in particular the distinction between Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories in resolutions 242 (1967) to 2334 (2016). The Security Council should not remain silent about any violation of international law. Today we are at a crossroads for the Middle East peace process. As Council members, it is our responsibility to unite to promote peace, not chaos.
