Mr. de La Sabliere (spoke in French): This was
the seventh visit of the Security Council to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It took place just a
few weeks prior to a historic event, namely, the
presidential and legislative elections of 30 July, which
will mark the end of the transition.

The support demonstrated by the Security
Council by its presence there this year was justified by
the importance of what is at stake and by our resolve to
give the Congolese people our fullest support so that
the elections can be truly successful - that is, well-
organized, free, transparent and credible. Above and
beyond the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
success of this important phase of Congolese recovery
should affect the stability of the whole region, and
possibly even the continent, for this country at the
heart of Africa is significant because of its size, its
population and its natural resources.

It was therefore natural that by our presence we
signalled support for the considerable work being done
by Bill Swing and the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), which is involved in support operations for
the most important elections ever carried out by the
United Nations.
Our visit, I believe, was useful and busy. The
latter is clear from the programme - meetings with
the President, the four Vice-Presidents, the Independent
Electoral Commission, the High Media Authority, the
political parties and the churches; contacts with
Congolese officials in the security area and their
international support, in particular the European Union
security sector reform mission (EUSEC), EU Police
Mission (EUPOL) and EU military operation in the
Democratic Republic in the Congo (EUFOR); the
Bretton Woods institutions, the business world, the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and,
of course, the International Committee in Support of
the Transition (CIAT) and various representatives of
MONUC.

This choice for a very busy visit was made so that
we could engage in a fruitful dialogue with all the
officials concerned, send a clear message about our
expectations and gain greater knowledge about this
country so important for Africa, where the presence of
the United Nations should be maintained for some time
after the elections, in partnership with the Congolese
people and authorities.

Our first concern, then, was the success of free
elections, the first in 45 years. I do not underestimate
the technical problems that may arise here and there, in
view of the sophisticated nature of the electoral system
chosen by the Assembly and the size of the country and
its communications problems. It seems to us - I
believe that I reflect the views of the mission - that
the engagement is such, the measures put in place are
so significant and organized, and the work already
accomplished by the Independent Electoral
Commission and MONUC is so professional that we
have every assurance that the Congolese people will be
able to vote under good conditions on 30 July. Council
members stated time and again that that date must be
maintained.

Free and successful elections also presuppose
sufficient security. It is true that violent incidents
continue in the east, in Ituri - for example, the
hostage-taking of Nepalese soldiers, which we brought
up at the appropriate time. I would add that the armed
groups - including the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda - have not been fully controlled
in Kivu, but these groups and the violent incidents that
I mentioned are not likely to significantly disrupt the
elections. Everyone agreed on that. In addition, the
police training programmes have been well run; 50,000
06-39099
police officers will take part in the security for the
elections. The use of the army will thus be reduced to a
minimum and limited to some unstable areas.

Finally, the establishment of a European standby
reserve force, authorized by the Security Council and
prepared to intervene in support of MONUC, is an
additional serious guarantee. That initiative, taken by
the Secretary-General, is an excellent one. I believe
that we should welcome the broad and diversified
support provided to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for this electoral period by the European Union
and other countries. To summarize briefly, I would say
that in terms of security, I believe we can also be
reassured.

Throughout our visit, we emphasized that the
elections must be free, transparent and fair. To all our
interlocutors, beginning with the President and the
Vice-President, we said that the blunders in the pre-
election campaign - particularly in the media, which
conveyed messages of exclusion and division on the
subject of "Congoleseness" - and the personal attacks
must be redressed. We stressed the tragic consequences
that such messages had recently elsewhere on the
continent. The President shared our concern, and more
generally, all our interlocutors told us - some more
forcefully than others - that they recognized the need
to calm people down and to conduct a campaign that
was more worthy of a democratic debate.

Likewise, we stressed the need to provide the less
important candidates and parties with the necessary
access to the media, particularly radio. This problem,
which was raised by the High Media Authority and
does not require a significant amount of resources to
resolve, must be addressed. Here also, we received
responses that seemed to justify our concerns.
However, we will have to continue to monitor the
situation, in particular through what the CIAT will tell
us. A number of serious acts of intimidation do not
spare journalists or even some candidates. Such acts
must stop. Even if they perhaps are of minor
significance, it is important to be firm with the
interlocutors.

Lastly, it is essential that there be an awareness
that the country must continue to be governed and
administered during the period between the first round
of elections and the establishment of the institutions.
We made our interlocutors aware of that problem. I
would add that it would be desirable to make that
06-39099

period as short as possible, while respecting texts and
technical restraints. On the whole, it seems to us that
even if we accurately assess the task and the risks of
blunders, we can be reasonably confident. To use an
image, I would say that the train is on the tracks; now
it has to arrive at the station.

The Congolese people, who have registered in a
great national movement to vote and who endorsed the
constitution in massive numbers by referendum,
deserve these elections. The pressure applied to make
sure that they take place under good circumstances is
also a fundamental factor that must be taken into
account. It is a major responsibility for the Congolese
political class, but it is also a very important
responsibility for the international community, which is
helping the Congolese people.

But, as the Security Council often emphasizes in
its statements, elections are not an end in themselves;
they are a phase. The people have considerable
expectations, and it is important that they perceive a
change, which must also be long-term. That is why we
greatly stressed the need not only to preserve what has
been achieved, but to ensure that it can be fully
consolidated and enhanced by the legitimacy provided
by the elections and by a uniting of energies after the
elections. That is to say, the winners must be generous,
and the losers must accept the choice of the voters -
the verdict of the elections.

Above all, we must not enter into the political
debate, which is not the responsibility of the Security
Council and the international community. But we can
remind people that inclusiveness will be extremely
desirable after the elections so that the Congolese can
deal with the many priorities ahead of them. Among
those priorities, there are three that we constantly
mentioned.

First is the swift completion of the effort to form
an integrated and professional national army, which
should be of a reasonable size to carry out its missions
and should be properly equipped and paid. The elected
President and the Government must give priority to
that objective, and the international community, in
partnership with them, must be better organized than it
is today to provide its vital support. I must say that
everyone agreed on that objective.

The second priority is resolving the vexing and
persistent problem of armed groups in the east. That
task must be accomplished. First, it is essential for the
3
people; it is also important for good relations between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
neighbours, who must also cooperate. In that regard,
we welcome the fact that the relationship with Rwanda
has very much improved.

Finally, the Congolese must improve the
administration of the State. The country's resources are
such that they should produce the income necessary to
bring the people the prosperity that they are entitled to
expect.

The international community, including the
Security Council, is now strongly mobilized to help the
Congolese people. After the elections, we should
remain at their side. We assured them, on behalf of the
Council, that that was also part of our message.
In conclusion, I should like to say that I think this
Security Council mission - which was very united,
and I thank all our colleagues who participated in it -
was well received. I believe that that also attests to the
kind of excellent work carried out by MONUC in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

