Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe for his briefing on the work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
covering the months that have passed since the Council
adopted resolution 1770 (2007), which reviewed and
considerably broadened United Nations authority in
Iraq.

We listened attentively to the briefing given by
the Permanent Representative of the United States,
Mr. Khalilzad, on the work of the multinational force.

Russia shares many of the assessments and
concerns on the situation in Iraq set out in the
Secretary-General's report. Indeed, the situation there
continues to remain extremely tense. In spite of some
signs of improvement in the situation in Baghdad and a
number of provinces, violence and terrorist activity
remain integral realities in Iraq.

In our View, the greatest threat today is the
sectarian divisions in Iraqi society referred to at length
in the report. That phenomenon proves the need for
focused resolve in attempts to find a solution; it also
continues to sink new roots into Iraqi soil. We have
also heard alarming predictions about an inevitable
hardening of the civil conflict and even the collapse of
the Iraqi State.

The complex situation is eloquently illustrated in
the problems of the future of Kirkuk and the tense
situation on the Iraq-Turkey border. In that regard, we
call once again for a peaceful settlement in the
northern Iraqi regions and reiterate that we fully
support the principle of the territorial integrity of Iraq
and Turkey alike.

The escalation of the Iraqi crisis might not only
dangerously destabilize the entire Middle East, but also
spill over far beyond its boundaries. It is obvious that
Iraq's neighbours would not be well served by such
developments. We do not believe that the point of no
return has been reached. The possibility of achieving
stability remains. We are convinced that it is
impossible to normalize the situation in Iraq
exclusively by force. We therefore feel that a realistic
and lasting settlement can be achieved only through
political means, by developing broad-based inter-Iraqi
dialogue and achieving national reconciliation and
harmony. The United Nations can and must help the
Iraqis to do so.

Judging from the report, the United Nations side
is in agreement. Moreover, we fully support the
Secretary-General's assertion that the United Nations,
participating in the Iraqi process, must enjoy the right
to interact with all parties and that this right must be
defended.

We recognize that, bearing in mind the current
acute security problems, it will not be easy for UNAMI
to assume new tasks, but we need to do everything we
can to that end, first and foremost by restoring Iraqi
confidence in the United Nations representatives. It is
therefore important to develop a mechanism for
cooperation with Iraq's authorities that would allow the
Mission to play a credible in political and socio-
economic processes initiated by the leadership of that
country. In that regard, Baghdad must ratify the status-
of-mission agreement as soon as possible so as to settle
once and for all the legal formalities for the duration of
its stay in the country. Finally, we believe that a firm
schedule for the multinational force's stay might also
help to ease tension in Iraq.

We understand that a hasty withdrawal of
coalition forces would have deleterious consequences,
but that is not the true issue.

We are convinced that a timeline for reduction of
the foreign military presence in Iraq, with the prospect
of full withdrawal, would substantially defuse the
situation. We would like to draw the attention of
Council members to an incident to which the report
refers: the killing of Iraqi civilians by personnel of the
private security firm Blackwater. We share the
concerns stated in the report of the Secretary-General,
and we support the approach of the Iraqi authorities to
put an end to activities by the many mercenary groups
operating on Iraqi soil that violate Iraqi law. I should
mention that the exploits of those so-called
sub-contractors are hurting not only Iraqis, but also
Baghdad-based foreign diplomatic representatives,
including Russian representatives.

We believe that, without effective international
assistance to the political settlement process, the
leaders of Iraqi communities and parties will have
difficulty in overcoming their mutual distrust. As early
as 2003 we proposed the convening of a representative
international conference on Iraq, with the participation
of all major political forces in the country, including its
patriotic opposition, leading world Powers and
influential regional States. Although our initiative was
not acted upon at that time, it remains in force. We
have supported and will continue to support all
proposals that are in keeping with that approach.

