Mr. Bamba (Cote D'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to take the floor on behalf of the 15

States members of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS).

We would like to extend our congratuations to you,
Mr. President, on the Republic of Korea's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.

ECOWAS welcomes the excellent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/26) on the situation in
Guinea-Bissau.

There have been numerous developments in the
situation in Guinea-Bissau since the adoption of
resolution 2048 (2012). On 21 October 2012 there
was a major incident at the Bissalanca air force base
in Bissau, which appeared to be a forcible coup. The
Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS firmly
condemned that attempt to destabilize the Transitional
Government.

On 7 November 2012, we attended the signing of a
memorandum of understanding between Guinea-Bissau
and ECOWAS with a view to implementing the reform
of the defence and security sectors. Furthermore, we
would note that on 29 November 2012, the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau reached its full strength of
677 personnel, comprising troops, police and civilians.

At the economic level, in 2012 the falling price
of cashew nuts, Guinea-Bissau's main export, caused
a drop in the economic growth rate to less than 1 per
cent, contrary to the initial forecast of 4.5 per cent.
Given the resulting budget deficit, the Transitional
Government therefore received various budget
assistance, in particular $5.5 million from the West
African Economic and Monetary Union, $10.6 million
from the Federal Republic of Nigeria and $2 million
from the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire.

I would now like to recall the historic meeting
between the President of the Transitional Government,
Serifo Nhamadjo, and the former President of Guinea-
Bissau, Mr. Raimundo Pereira, both representing
Guinea-Bissau parties at the highest level, which took
place here in New York and inspired great hope. That
meeting, it should be recalled, was convened at the
initiative of the African Union, in close cooperation with
ECOWAS and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), on Saturday, 29 September 2012 at
the headquarters of the African Union Mission in New
York.

At the end of that critical meeting the two parties
approved an initiative to send a joint mission to
Guinea-Bissau, comprising officials of the African
Union, ECOWAS, the CPLP, the United Nations and
the European Union. The Peace and Security Council
of the African Union supported that initiative at its
meeting of 2 November 2012, as did ECOWAS at its
extraordinary session in Abuja on 11 November 2012.
In that context, the joint mission visited Guinea-Bissau
from 16 to 21 November 2012.

Specifically, the mission had the following
objectives: first, to assess the political and security
situation on the ground; secondly, to examine the
underlying causes of the recurring crises in Guinea-
Bissau; thirdly, to study the possibilities for a consensus
among the partner organizations on Guinea-Bissau on
the way forward; fourthly, to facilitate the establishment
of a series of recommendations on the best ways and
means for the organizations concerned to work together
in order to assist Guinea-Bissau in overcoming the
challenges facing it in the short, medium and long
term; and fifthly, to make recommendations on the
establishment of an appropriate follow-up mechanism.
As the Assistant Secretary-General said, in
Guinea-Bissau, the mission met the authorities, in
particular the interim President, the Prime Minister and
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, Defence, the Interior
and Justice, as well as other officials of the Transitional
Government. The mission also met the Bureau of the
People's National Assembly and the Parliamentary
Commission, tasked with amending the transitional
pact and the political agreement recently concluded by
ECOWAS.

The joint mission then met with the Office of the
National Electoral Commission. It met with the various
political parties, both those supporting the current
transition and those not participating in it, members
of civil society, including women's groups, traditional
and religious leaders, socio-professional bodies,
businessmen, lawyers and journalists. Finally, the joint
mission met members of the Guinea-Bissau diplomatic
community.

As the Assistant Secretary-General said, the
report of the joint mission has not yet been endorsed
by the appropriate bodies. However, now we have some
information that I would like to share with the Council.
First, a direct dialogue among the parties, including
the African Party for the Independence of Guinea
and Cape Verde (PAIGC), has been established with a
view to concluding a transitional pact. That means that
the political process is acceptable to all parties and is
therefore irreversible. The Parliamentary Commission,
under the chairmanship of the PAIGC, has been
established to review the transitional road map and, in
particular, to propose new realistic dates for the holding
of general elections.

ECOWAS welcomes the appointment of Mr. Jose
Ramos-Hortas, former Head of State of Timor-Leste
and Nobel Peace Prize laureate. That appointment is
very timely given the important coordinating role
that the United Nations must play in the concerted
pursuit of solutions to the crisis. I would like to take
this opportunity to pay the greatest tribute to him
and his predecessor, Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, whom we
commend.

ECOWAS looks forward to the new Special
Representative, who is due to assume his duties in
February, coordinating and invigorating the new
momentum of the international community's concerted
action, established by the joint mission. We therefore
welcome the recommendation of the Secretary-General
in paragraph 53 ofhis report (S/2013/26), which provides
for the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) to
be extended for three months, until 31 May. ECOWAS
hopes that the new Special Representative will be able
to visit West Africa and Guinea-Bissau in order to make
all necessary contacts in the subregion and to collect
the views of the main stakeholders.

On the basis of the conclusions of that trip to the
subregion, of course, the Special Representative may
propose an adjustment of the United Nations mandate
in Guinea-Bissau to the Secretary-General. That new
mandate, we believe, should encourage the option of
establishing a common strategy of the United Nations,
the African Union, the European Union, ECOWAS and
the CPLP in order to resolve the crisis in Guinea-Bissau.
In that regard, I would like to underscore that the new
Special Representative has already begun to make
contact with people at all levels so as to successfully
discharge his duties. Such steps are of course supported
and agreed to by ECOWAS.

ECOWAS maintains that it is high time to
work together to strengthen coordination among all
stakeholders and to climb down from extreme positions,
which to date have not allowed the international
community to speak with one voice on the situation
in Guinea-Bissau. In that regard, ECOWAS is of the
View that it would be in the interests of peace for the
Transitional Government in Guinea-Bissau to be
recognized and for development partners to be able to
resume their cooperation with that country.

I would like to conclude by affirming loud and
clear that West Africa greatly needs peace and stability
in order to develop the subregion's economic potential.
That can happen only if the situation in Guinea-Bissau
is resolved once and for all in a sustainable way, all the
more since the subregion is suffering from the situation
in Mali, which threatens not only West Africa but also
international peace and security.

