Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): The beginning of the year
seemed to offer fresh and renewed hope for the people of
Syria. A breakthrough was made in securing access for
humanitarian assistance for more than 500,000 people
in besieged and hard-to-reach areas. The violence was
significantly reduced, thanks to the agreement on a
cessation of hostilities. Most importantly, peace talks
aimed at solving the political deadlock had finally
gained some traction. However, in recent weeks the
fighting in Aleppo has intensified. It appears that the
fragile cessation of hostilities is no longer holding and
has collapsed there. We cannot allow the progress so
painstakingly made thus far to unravel.

I would like to thank Mr. Feltman and Mr. O'Brien
for their comprehensive briefings on the latest
developments in Aleppo. We also thank the United
Kingdom for requesting today's urgent Council meeting
in the light of the deteriorating situation in Aleppo.

It was only yesterday that the Council adopted the
landmark resolution 2286 (2016), which seeks to protect
the wounded and sick and medical and humanitarian
personnel and their supplies and facilities. Yet on the
very same day, the Al-Dabit maternity hospital in
Aleppo was struck, with at least three medical staff
members and patients killed. It seems that scant, if any,
respect is accorded for the neutrality and impartiality
of medical facilities. It is all the more telling when
six medical centres have been attacked in less than a
week. We wish to reaffirm that such attacks, whether
premeditated or otherwise, are simply unacceptable.
Reports of the Government's aim to encircle eastern
Aleppo, placing its residents under one of the largest
sieges of the conflict, are alarming. Besieging that
territory would inevitably lead to another catastrophic
humanitarian situation. The Security Council is duty-
bound to ensure that the calamity in the four towns of
Madaya, Fo'ah, Kafraya and Zabadani is not repeated
in Aleppo.

We welcome and support the talks between Special
Envoy De Mistura and the Foreign Ministers of Jordan,
Russia, Saudi Arabia, the United States, Germany and
France, as well as the head of the opposition, Mr. Riyad
Hijab. In addition to the truce brokered by the Russian
Federation and the United States in Latakia and near
Damascus last week, we welcome the news of the
days of silence beginning last night in Aleppo. A full
and immediate restoration of the truce in Aleppo and
elsewhere in Syria is key ifwe are to rebuild confidence,
which was shattered by the sharp escalation of violence
and hostilities in recent weeks.

With the start of the days of silence in Aleppo and
other areas, we call on the parties to the conflict to
commit to the following provisions. First, they should
immediately cease hostilities and attacks against
civilians and civilian objects. Secondly, they should
allow safe, unimpeded and unhindered humanitarian
access to the population in Aleppo. We stress that the
delivery of humanitarian assistance must be allowed
to reach all civilians regardless of their political
affiliations. Thirdly, they should build on the consensus
among the Government and opposition groups during
the most recent round of peace talks on the necessity
for a political transition in Syria. Fourthly, they should
urgently engage with the United Nations, in particular
Special Envoy De Mistura, with a view to resuming
the peace talks in Geneva and recommencing their
deliberations, based on the Geneva communique'
(S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015),
including on the political transition.

