Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening today's debate, and
the Secretary-General for his statement, which pointed
the way to making the radical changes in peacekeeping
missions that can make them more fit for our times.

Italy is a global security provider. We are the top
contributor of Blue Helmets among Western countries.
In addition, we participate in a range of non-United
Nations missions, such as those in Afghanistan, Iraq
and Somalia, as well as that fighting human trafficking
and terrorism in the Mediterranean.

In a world that has seen a dramatic increase in
security challenges, peacekeeping continues to be a
crucial tool for maintaining peace and security. We
should not forget United Nations peacekeeping's many
success stories, which we should be building on. The
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, for example,
plays a fundamental role in its interposition between
the parties and as a mediator, through its tripartite
mechanism. It is a concrete example of conflict
prevention through patience, dedication and continued
efforts by the parties and of a mission that makes a huge
contribution to regional stability. In West Africa - in
Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire - peace missions achieved
their goals thanks also to the political dimension of the
United Nations presence, to a coordinated action at the
regional level and to the critical role of the Economic
Community of West African States and the United
Nations Office for West Africa.

As Secretary-General underlined, we need a more
holistic approach to peace. Peace operations should be
seen in the broader context of prevention, peacebuilding,
sustaining peace and post-conflict stabilization, in a
sort of peace continuum where the quest for political
solutions must be a primary goal. Yet, of course,
resources are limited and should be utilized in a cost-
effective way, including by progressively closing the
gap between the resources the Organization spends on
peacekeeping - almost $8 billion - and the budget for
mediation and special political missions, which is about
$600 million.

We agree that peacekeeping missions should
be regularly reviewed to assess their effectiveness,
adherence to their mandates and the need for
adjustments to address evolving situations. However,
when examining or phasing out peacekeeping missions,
we should avoid decisions driven only by the need to
reduce costs, and avoid early disengagement that may
lead to a redeployment of new missions in a deteriorating
environment, as was the case in the past. Strategic
patience should be at the core of our evaluations.

Peace operations should be shaped by four main
principles. The first is the primacy of politics and
the centrality of the people. A peacekeeping mission
should have as a core objective the support for inclusive
political processes aimed at national dialogue and
reconciliation. Protecting civilians in conformity with
the Kigali Principles, to which Italy subscribed, must
also be one of its main functions.

The second principle is mandates. We should
define an entry strategy, attainable objectives and
measurable benchmarks for all the parties involved.
Clear benchmarks for launching a responsible exit
strategy should be provided at the outset. Sequenced
benchmarks linked to political progress in the country
should be established, as well as local ownership of
stabilization to prevent dependency of the country on
a mission. Mandates of course should also be flexible
to evolve as the situation evolves. We should not refrain
when possible from phasing out a military mission
with a more agile and light-footprint mission based on
specialized police units and civilian units focused on
stabilization, the rule of law, justice and the protection
of civilians.

Thirdly, the involvement of regional actors and
the role of regional and subregional organizations are
key to establishing an effective and successful political
process. In that regard, I wish to mention the report (see S/2008/813) prepared in December 2008 by the group
of experts chaired by Romano Prodi, which called
for predictable financial support for United Nations-
approved African Union peacekeeping missions. In
that context, the European Union can also have a major
role to play in complementing United Nations efforts
on the ground, improving cooperation on mandates and
mission planning and concluding agreements to operate
jointly with the United Nations, as is already the case in
Mali, in the Sahel, and in the Central African Republic.

Fourthly, if we talk about efficiency, intelligence,
equipment and training are essential. Technological
innovation in particular is crucial to improving the
performance of peace missions and increasing the
security of peacekeepers, as highlighted by the use
of unmanned aerial vehicles in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which Italy first provided to the
mission several years ago.
Finally, training, in particular predeployment and
mandate-oriented training, is key. There must be a
strong commitment to achieving the highest standards
of conduct of United Nations peacekeepers, promoting
initiatives between countries, providing training to
troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs and PCCs) and donors, including efforts to prevent sexual
abuse and exploitation. The long-term challenge
consists of promoting the self-sufficiency of TCCs and
PCCs. In that regard, allow me to recall Italy's role as
a training and logistical hub, thanks to its facilities in
Vicenza, in joint venture with the United States, in
Brindisi, the Global Service Centre, and in Turin, the
United Nations Staff College.

In conclusion, I wish like others to pay tribute
to the women and men serving in United Nations
peacekeeping missions, and in particular to those who
have lost their lives over the years.

