Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): My
delegation joins colleagues in expressing our deepest
condolences to the people and Government of Morocco on
the sad occasion of the death of His Majesty King Hassan
II. His many bold and creative contributions to Middle East
peace are well known and highly appreciated.

I would like once again to welcome Mrs. Ogata to the
Security Council Chamber and to thank you, Sir, for
organizing this meeting. It is an unfortunate and tragic fact
that refugee issues often figure prominently in the
complex matters of international stability which daily face
this Council. We are therefore always grateful to
Mrs. Ogata for her briefings on refugee situations.

First, I would like to applaud Mrs. Ogata's
commitment to refugees around the world, as well as her
dedicated efforts to acquire first-hand information about
the plight of refugees and international efforts to assist
them. Similar appreciation should go to the staff of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) around the world; they are on the
front lines of many crises and I hope that Mrs. Ogata can
convey our sincere appreciation to them.

Last week, Mrs. Ogata was in Washington for
consultations on current refugee emergencies, notably
those across the African continent. Prior to that, as she
just informed us, Mrs. Ogata was in Algiers for the
summit of the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
seeking the cooperation of heads of State on such critical
issues as humanitarian access, and she has recently
completed another fact-finding Visit to the Great Lakes
region of Africa.

Every one of us in this Chamber recognizes that
humanitarian needs in Africa are quite substantial and that
there are many obstacles to meeting them, from
programming levels to logistical access. We agree with
Mrs. Ogata that it is not by criticizing aid to victims in
Kosovo that those obstacles in Africa will be overcome.
We must instead look at the international community's
response to the Kosovo crisis, take inspiration from what
has proved possible and then work together to ensure that
the same positive results are achieved in Africa.

Mrs. Ogata has spoken of the opportunity that
springs from the peace processes in Sierra Leone and in
Congo. My Government has been actively involved in
facilitating the peace processes in these and other
conflicts in Africa. In May, a united effort involving
Presidential Envoy Jesse Jackson; the Chairman of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), President Eyadema of Togo; and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Francis Okelo,
resulted in a ceasefire agreement for Sierra Leone. High-
level United States representatives have been involved in
promoting the peace process for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and our Special Envoy Howard Wolpe has
been working actively with others to help resolve the
situation in Burundi. In addition, former National Security
Advisor Anthony Lake was in the Horn of Africa just last

 

week to help support the OAU effort to encourage the
Ethiopians and Eritreans to negotiate a settlement to their
conflict. These are just some of the examples of the extent
to which my Government shares Mrs. Ogata's conviction
that the path to resolving refugee crises lies in finding
solutions to the underlying political problems.

For nearly a decade, Sierra Leoneans have endured the
horrors of a war characterized by unspeakable atrocities.
With the 7 July peace agreement, we have an opportunity
to support the Sierra Leoneans on their path to national
recovery. Indeed, in two days, the International Contact
Group on Sierra Leone will meet in London to demonstrate
support for the implementation of the Lome agreement. The
Group will also consider priorities for international
assistance in all of the key areas, including humanitarian
aid to innocent civilian victims of atrocities; demobilization
and reintegration of former soldiers; and reconstruction of
the social and economic infrastructure of the country.

We expect that most, but not all, of the 450,000 Sierra
Leonean refugees residing in Guinea, Liberia and Cote
d'Ivoire will want to return as soon as they believe that
Sierra Leone is secure. The United States strongly supports
the voluntary repatriation and reintegration of those
refugees who want to return home as soon as possible.

We applaud the efforts of all those who realize that
assistance for the humanitarian effort in Sierra Leone and
throughout Africa must come from many sources. The
Brookings group of major donors, including non-
governmental organizations, United Nations agencies and
the World Bank, has selected Sierra Leone as a target
country for proposed partnership initiatives. These
initiatives will improve both relief and development
planning and programme implementation. The United
Nations has also decided to make Sierra Leone a pilot case
in the strategic framework process. We are confident that
these efforts can be fully coordinated to help give Sierra
Leoneans the peace and recovery that they deserve.

Meanwhile, significant conflicts in the Great Lakes
region have affected some 4.1 million people - among
them 950,000 refugees, an estimated 2.2 million internally
displaced persons, more than 12,000 unaccompanied minors
and 800,000 other conflict victims. In recent days, as Mrs.
Ogata has detailed, the refugee numbers have increased
dramatically as Congolese from Congo (Brazzaville) have
fled to Gabon and many from Congo (Kinshasa) have fled
to the Central African Republic.

As I mentioned earlier, the United States has been
closely involved in efforts to conclude a ceasefire
agreement in the Congo war. Only an end to that war and
a cessation of hostilities will provide an opening for
recovery and development for the people of that
devastated country. Congolese refugees continue to flow
to Tanzania and Zambia. Long-term insecurity in eastern
Congo prevents the sustained delivery of relief assistance,
raising fears that the coping mechanisms are being
exhausted and that an extensive humanitarian disaster is
imminent. We welcome Mrs. Ogata's report on the efforts
of leaders in the region to provide humanitarian access to
UNHCR and other relief entities.

The United States Government has also been
intimately involved, in cooperation with the special
envoys of several other nations, in seeking to bring peace
to Burundi, where internal and external peace processes
are ongoing. It is difficult to predict when a peace
agreement will be concluded. Meanwhile, the unfortunate
number of Burundian refugees in Tanzania continues to
grow.
The ongoing tragic wars in Angola, in Somalia, in
Sudan and between Ethiopia and Eritrea are also of great
concern to the United States, as well as to this body. I
wish to express my country's grave concern that the lethal
nexus of drought and conflict in the Horn, which has
produced so many humanitarian crises in the past, could
well reappear later this year if a lack of access to food
puts desperate people on the move.

It is painfully clear that the challenges we face in the
refugee area are immense and that both political
instability and unforgiving environmental factors only
raise the hurdles we must overcome. Yet we must not
lose heart nor allow ourselves to be overwhelmed with
pessimism. Our experience in Kosovo has shown that the
international community, working together with a clear
vision and common goal, can indeed make significant
strides on the path towards repatriation and humanitarian
assistance for refugees.

I am happy to inform the Council that, during
Mrs. Ogata's visit to Washington last week, the State
Department announced an additional mid-year
contribution of $11.7 million for UNHCR's General
Programmes. Of that amount, over half - $6.6 million
- is for Africa. My Government looks forward with
optimism to joining the rest of our colleagues in applying
the positive lessons learned in Kosovo to those areas in

 

Africa and around the world that still cry out for assistance.

In closing, let me reiterate our appreciation to
Mrs. Ogata for all she and her UNHCR colleagues have
done to alleviate the plight of refugees throughout the
world, and reassure her of my Government's continuing
support for her efforts.

