Mr. Roux: On behalf of INTERPOL, I would
like to commend Malaysia for convening this timely
high-level debate on the challenges in addressing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. I would
also like to thank the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), with Spain as its Chair, and
its Group of Experts for their continued efforts to tackle
this important issue and for cooperating so closely
with INTERPOL.

The possible use of chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear (CBRN) materials by terrorist
groups, criminals and other non-State actors has become
one of the most significant challenges for national
Governments in ensuring the safety of their citizens,
as well as their national security. Organizations such as
Al-Qaida, Aum Shinrikyo and other extremist groups
have in the past expressly announced their intention,
backed by real attempts, to develop, acquire and
deploy weapons of mass destruction against civilian
populations. Several emerging dynamics have made the
threat more imminent than ever. I shall cite three.

First, the complex architecture of today's terrorist
organizations and their methods of operation in a
globalized world have a direct impact on the CBRN
threat. The increasing cross-border movement of foreign
terrorist fighters is allowing terrorist organizations
to reach out to a wider range of recruits in a targeted
fashion, giving them access to advanced CBRN
expertise. We received a concrete indicator of this when
a Da'esh laptop, owned by a Tunisian chemistry and
physics student, was seized in Syria in August 2014.
It contained a l9-page document on how to develop
biological weapons, including bubonic plague, and
also included instructions on how to test the weapons
on mice.

More recently, the Brussels attacks of March 2016
raised concerns when Belgian officials discovered that
Da'esh operatives had been secretly videotaping one of
the country's senior nuclear scientists. The incident led
to the evacuation of two nuclear power stations and the
reinforcement of security at all others. Officials feared
that Da'esh was working to breach Belgium's nuclear
security and would launch a dirty bomb to follow the
Brussels airport bombing.
Secondly, the accessibility of CBRN materials
and technology is increasing as actors develop new
combinations of materials and constantly discover
new technological and scientific advances. Technology
that was once perceived as sensitive military-grade
expertise is now becoming available to a broader
audience. It is a matter of fact that, in the past few years,
researchers have recreated a number of viruses in the
laboratory, including SARS-like viruses, prompting
fears that terrorist organizations might exploit the same
technique to synthesize more deadly Viral agents as
biological weapons.

Also to blame in making CBRN materials more
accessible is the complexity of controlling the transfer
and use of dual-use CBRN materials. For example,
chlorine, a basic chemical freely available in legitimate
markets and most commonly used in water treatment
facilities, is currently a common additive that terrorist
actors mix with classic explosives in the Middle East
and South-East Asia. A recent home search of the
suicide attacker who detonated a bomb outside a bar in
Ansbach, Germany, on 24 July revealed sophisticated
bomb-making materials and chemicals, possibly meant
for another deadly attack.

Thirdly, CBRN attacks have cross-border impacts
with global implications. These broad impacts make the
prevention and containment of CBRN attacks almost
impossible for one agency, one ministry or one country
to manage alone. The lack of coordination among
relevant stakeholders creates loopholes that could be
exploited by terrorists to carry out successful attacks
and maximize the number of casualties.

In 2010, in response to the growing concern over
the illicit trafficking of CBRN materials, INTERPOL
launched a comprehensive CBRN terrorism prevention
and response effort to support its 190 member countries.
This decision was unanimously endorsed by the
INTERPOL General Assembly in Hanoi, leading to the
establishment of a specialized unit on CBRN threats
within INTERPOL's Counter-Terrorism Directorate.

In accordance with INTERPOL's mandate and
Constitution, we focus exclusively on threats from
non-State actors. This encompasses not only terrorist
groups, lone wolves and other criminals, but also
includes those individuals that traffic in CBRN
materials across borders. Suppliers, middlemen,
buyers and smuggling networks all fall within this
spectrum. Our CBRN activities are fully integrated
within INTERPOL's newly released counter-terrorism
strategy covering the years 2016 to 2020.

INTERPOL's activities range from data analysis,
multi-agency capacity-building and training workshops
to regional cross-border field operations. One specific
example of these analysis activities is Project Geiger.
Project Geiger collects information on cases of the
illicit use of radiological and nuclear materials and
analyses trends and risks of such attacks. As part of
this effort, INTERPOL maintains a database of over
3,500 incidents collected through its secured channels.
Since 2010, details on 44 suspects involved in nuclear
trafficking have been shared through INTERPOL,
including those convicted of trafficking in highly
enriched uranium.

Another example of our CBRN data analysis-
related activities is Project Watchmaker, which focuses
on chemical threats and targets individuals involved
in their manufacture. It coordinates the exchange of
technical data and the forensic signatures of bomb-
makers. This information is then included in a specific
database that currently contains over 1,000 bomb-
maker profiles. Project Watchmaker has resulted in 749
INTERPOL Notices being issued, including 176 Red
Notices, which are international arrest warrants, and 67
INTERPOL-United Nations Security Council Special
Notices, issued for individuals targeted by Security
Council sanction committees.

However, just sharing this information makes no
difference if it is not accessible to authorities on the
ground. Providing access to information to front-line
law enforcement officers is the one of the key added
values of INTERPOL. INTERPOL assists international
law enforcement in tracking cross-border movements
of individuals involved in the illicit trafficking of
CBRN materials. It does so by giving national police
agencies, including those at border points, direct access
to INTERPOL's databases and notices and designing
and coordinating multi-agency cross-border operations.
Let me offer only two brief examples of projects
that encompass our multi-agency capacity-building,
training and cross-border field operations.

The first, INTERPOL's Chemical Anti-Smuggling
Enforcement (CHASE) Operation, is a model of global
efforts to counter international smuggling of chemicals
used to manufacture chemical and explosive devices.
It increases the capacity of police, customs, border,
immigration and security agencies to work together. In a
practical application of the skills developed through the
CHASE training initiatives, INTERPOL coordinates
cross-border multi-agency operations in the field.

The second is Project Stop Trafficking of Nuclear
Elements. It provides operational and technical
resources to Member Countries in two ways: a capacity-
building phase, to train law enforcement officers in
the necessary skills, including evidence collection,
investigation, and prevention; and an operational
phase to help put those skills into practice in the field.
This includes an international operation conducted
at border points in which officers run checks against
INTERPOL's criminal databases.

In the past few years, INTERPOL has become a
key international partner in the implementation of
the global strategy to counter the illicit trafficking of
CBRN materials. INTERPOL has established close ties
with its relevant international stakeholders - such as
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
EUROPOL and the European Union CBRN Risk
Mitigation Centres of Excellence Initiative, which
includes the United Nations Interregional Crime and
Justice Research Institute - as part of an inter-agency
approach. We believe that consolidating partnerships
through the establishment of legal frameworks and
the implementation mechanisms is crucial to the
sustainability of these integrated efforts.

That is why resolution 1540 (2004) should continue
to provide the umbrella under which initiatives are
launched harmoniously and through which countries'
needs can be met by matching them to assistance
providers. Given the global impacts of CBRN attacks,
it is especially important that we ensure the proper
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) on both the
national and regional levels.

The global, multi-agency architecture to combat
the threat of CBRN terrorism requires stronger
shared political will. That is why I would like to
especially thank Malaysia for convening this important
meeting, which provides an excellent opportunity to
foster political goodwill. This global response also
requires intensified coordination among the relevant
international stakeholders and increased financial
support to initiate and implement projects with tangible
and sustainable results.

INTERPOL's policing capabilities have proved to
greatly benefit member countries, especially on the
ground. Frameworks such as resolution 1540 (2004) play
a crucial role in promoting better sharing of information
regarding CBRN incidents through INTERPOL's
secure communications. Systematic and effective use
of INTERPOL's analytical and operational capabilities
will certainly help intercept trafficked CBRN materials
and prevent their use by criminals, terrorists and other
non-State actors.

