Mrs. Kawar (Jordan): I have the honour to brief
the members of the Council in my capacity as the Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In my statement, I intend to provide an
overview of my visit to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda from 24 to 29 May. I
will also briefly highlight the work of the Committee
since 22 January, the most recent occasion on which
I delivered a statement to the Council concerning
the Democratic Republic of the Congo sanctions (see S/PV.7367).

In my briefing on 22 January, I noted that the
date of 12 March would mark 11 years since the
Council established the sanctions Committee to
monitor the implementation of the arms embargo. I
had expressed the hope that, during the course of 2015,
we would collectively acquire a better appreciation
of the commitment to the implementation of the
sanctions regime and what actions could be taken to
address any gaps or deficiencies. I noted that I was
aware of the challenges before us, particularly the
differences of views in the region as to who bears
the most responsibility for violating the sanctions. I
also underlined the importance of the Committee's
engaging with interlocutors by hearing their views and
providing assistance, as necessary, so as to strengthen
the implementation of the sanctions regime.

Several months later, I spent a week in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda, which was the first occasion on which a
Chair of the sanctions Committee had travelled to the
Great Lakes region to assess the implementation of the
arms embargo, assets freeze and travel ban. On behalf
of the Committee, I would like to extend my utmost
appreciation to the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda for having
facilitated the visit. I would also like to take this
opportunity to convey my personal thanks to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kobler and his
team in the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), which provided invaluable support,
particularly logistical support, during my stay in all
three countries.

During the course of my visit, I explained to
interlocutors that, in accordance with the terms
of reference agreed upon by the Committee, the
purpose of my visit was to learn how to improve the
effectiveness of sanctions provisions under the relevant
Council resolutions; to collect first-hand information
about the situation in Democratic Republic of the
Congo and neighbouring States, including names for
listing; to strengthen the dialogue between relevant
stakeholders and the Committee; and to receive any
concrete proposals that States might have with a view
to strengthening the implementation of the sanctions
regime, including requests for capacity-building. The
terms ofreference also noted that the visit was expected
to feed into the Council's future review of the sanctions
measures.

During my meetings in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, several themes resonated, namely, the
upcoming elections; the recent interruption of joint
operations between the Forces armees de la Republique
Democratique du Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO;
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities'
call for a reduction of 7,000 MONUSCO troops by the
end ofthis year. In meetings with Government officials,
civil society representatives and United Nations
representatives, I touched upon the paradox between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo's extensive
natural resources and its difficult path towards
governance, leaving the State unable to capitalize
on its resources to generate wealth and further the
development of the country and opportunities for its
population. On a number of occasions, I was reminded
of the Government's assertions that neighbouring
States were complicit in smuggling networks linked to
destabilizing activities in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo through the illicit trade in natural resources,
and of allegations that members of the Government and
FARDC elements were themselves complicit in such
networks.

In a climate where serious efforts are needed to
investigate and prosecute smuggling networks, and in
the knowledge that no individuals have been sanctioned
by the Committee since December 2012, I informed
interlocutors that as the Chair of the Committee, I
was interested in determining whether several well-
placed sanction designations, substantiated of course
by sufficient evidence, could target malefactors as a
deterrent and strengthen the authority of the State. I
encouraged interlocutors to put forward names of key
spoilers in order to set an example for those operating at
the mid-level and lower levels. The Minister of Interior
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo voiced the
readiness of his Government to work with the Group of
Experts to provide suggested names for designations.
However, when the Group of Experts held a up meeting
in the Ministry on 12 June with a view to following up
on my request, no such names were provided. We are
still hoping to make progress on that point.

I wish to confirm that since the adoption of
resolution 1807 (2008) in March of that year, the
embargo no longer applies to the Government, and
that the procedure of notifications to the Committee
regarding the transfer of military equipment from
supplier States to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has been simply for informational purposes. The
Committee is willing to further engage on this matter
with the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo if they so desire, with a view of providing any
further clarifications.

On weapons stockpile management, I reiterated
the Council's call on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to enhance stockpile security and implement a
national weapons-marking programme, and I echoed
the findings of the Group of Experts from a previous
report that the FARDC remained the main source of
weapons and ammunition for non-governmental armed
groups. Stockpile security and weapons-marking need
to be prioritized, as repeatedly called for by the Group
of Experts and the Council itself, but there does not
seem to be any movement on that issue.

In that connection, I wish to note that the United
Nations Mine Action Service briefed the Committee
on 6 March, and noted that financial constraints have
limited the weapons and ammunition management
assistance to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In my written report of the
visit to the region, which was discussed on Friday in
the Committee, I called upon Committee members to
earmark funds to the United Nations Voluntary Trust
Fund for Assistance in Mine Action, with particular
emphasis on the construction of new weapons depots
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. That is
a tangible way that Council members can help move
forward an issue that has seen little if any progress, and
build the Democratic Republic of the Congo's capacity
in weapons management and storage.

Another outcome of the visit was to pave the way
for improved communication and collaboration between
the Group of Experts and Governments, the United
Nations and civil society members. As a Committee, we
must follow up with the Group to ensure that the access
promised to the members during my visit is granted.

In Rwanda, the general tenor of the meetings
was positive, although the Rwandan side echoed the
counter-argument to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's complaints that it was responsible for the
problems in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
was made clear that the authorities felt the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was using Rwanda unfairly as
a scapegoat for problems that arose from governance
issues. Rwandan officials felt that the responsibility
rested with the authorities of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo for achieving progress in areas such as
the governance of the natural resource trade and the
neutralization of the Forces de'mocratiques de liberation
du Rwanda.

In Uganda, allegations emerged during meetings
with the Minister of Defence and the Acting Director of
Multilateral Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
that the armed group the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF), sanctioned by the Committee in June 2014, has
links with terrorist groups, such as Al-Shabaab. To
date, the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has not found any such links. In that
context, I wish to express gratitude to the Government
of the United Republic of Tanzania for having arrested
the sanctioned ADF leader Jamil Mukulu and agreed
to Kampala's request to extradite him to Uganda. I
also wish to thank the Ugandan authorities for having
conveyed to me their intention to allow the Group of
Experts to interview Mukulu and any of his associates
arrested with him.

In Kampala, my delegation also held a breakfast
meeting with representatives of the five permanent
members of the Security Council, and spoke via video-
teleconference with representatives of the Office of the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region, Mr. Said Djinnit, in Nairobi. We also met with
two representatives of a Kampala-based business that
was sanctioned by the Committee in March 2007 for
having purchased gold through a regular commercial
deal with traders in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo who are tightly linked to militias. The business
is under investigation by the Ugandan authorities.

Since my briefing to the Council on 22 January,
the Committee convened a formal meeting on 6 March
with the States of the region and held three sessions
of informal consultations on 31 March, 28 April and
10 July. At the 6 March meeting, the Committee
invited the representatives of Burundi, the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the United
Republic of Tanzania to share their views on the 2014
final report of the Group of Experts (see S/2015/l9),
together with our fellow Committee members Angola,
on behalf of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region (ICGLR), and South Africa, on behalf of
the Southern African Development Community.

Following the 6 March meeting, the Committee
took the unprecedented step of sending letters in
May encouraging a number of the invited States to
undertake investigations pursuant to recommendations
of the Group of Experts. I handed copies of the letters
addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda to interlocutors during the visit. The Committee
intends to follow up these letters, as well as those that
were sent to Burundi, South Africa and Tanzania. At
the consultations on 31 March, the Committee heard
a briefing by Mr. Alphonse Ntumba Luaba, Executive
Secretary of the ICGLR, concerning its activities.
During the consultations on 28 April, the Group of
Experts provided an overview of its workplan on its
current mandate.

Finally, during the Committee's consultations on
Friday 10 July, the Coordinator of the Group of Experts
provided an overview of the Group's progress update
to the Committee, which was circulated on 2 July. I
also conveyed a number of personal reflections on my
visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda
and Uganda, some of which I intend to echo during the
Council's consultations following this meeting.

