Mr. von der Schulenburg: I thank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to introduce the fourth report
(S/2010/ 135) of the Secretary-General on the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). As members of the
Council have the full report before them, let me here
only highlight recent developments in relation to the
three critical issues for Sierra Leone's peace and
stability that are regularly reviewed by this Council:
youth unemployment, illicit drug trafficking and
corruption. Let me also introduce, for the first time, a
fourth issue for future reference and review: the 2012
elections. At the end, I would like to make three brief
additional points.

With respect to fighting youth unemployment,
despite the magnitude and political significance of this
social problem, relatively little progress has been
made. Over the past two years, there have been many
plans and assessments, but they have resulted in
relatively few tangible programmes that would
significantly impact the lives of a sizable number of
young people. I believe that the responsibility for this
must be equally shared by the Government and its
international development partners.

Largely as a result of the recent visit of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to Sierra Leone, the
relevant Government ministries and all relevant
development partners have come together over the past
few days and agreed to develop one integrated national
programme in support of creating employment
opportunities for young people in various economic
sectors. On the Government side, this integrated
national employment programme will be led by Sierra
10-28245
Leone's Youth Commissioner and include a number of
line ministries and national authorities; on the
international side, the programme will include
technical and financial support from the World Bank,
the Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Technische
Zusammenarbeit, the United Nations Development
Programme, the International Labour Organization, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
and the European Community. The joint outline for this
integrated programme will be presented to the
Peacebuilding Commission on Friday this week.

This will be only the second time that
development partners have agreed with the
Government on one joint programme in a crucial area
for peacebuilding, and I would like to stress here the
important role that the PBC can play, and indeed has
played, in rallying international support behind a
critical development issue.

With regard to fighting illicit drug trafficking,
over the past six months tangible progress has been
made in the fight illicit drug trafficking. The
Government has established the Joint Drug Interdiction
Task Force, which has now begun its work. With the
help of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), and in accordance with the West Africa
Coast Initiative, the Task Force will now be upgraded
to a transnational crime unit. UNODC and UNIPSIL's
Police Unit coordinate international assistance coming
from the United Kingdom, the United States, Germany
and Italy, making this an example of international
cooperation for other countries in the subregion. Sierra
Leone's model character in building strong institutions
to fight illicit drug trafficking and other international
crime was underlined during a recent conference that
brought together ministers from Guinea-Bissau, Cote
d'Ivoire and Liberia in Freetown under the leadership
of Antonio Costa, Director General of UNODC.

Closely linked to fighting international crime is
the urgent need to beef up coastal security to combat
illicit maritime drug trafficking, illegal fishing and the
beginnings of human trafficking and piracy. In October
of last year, the PBC launched an appeal for two
decommissioned 30-metre patrol vessels, one for Sierra
Leone and one for Liberia. We still hope that we will
be successful with this appeal, as that would allow
these two countries to work together in fighting a
common threat to their peace and development. Such
bilateral cooperation could form the nucleus for wider
regional cooperation that would not only benefit the
10-28245
security of West Africa, but would also help improve
the security in Europe and other countries bordering
the Atlantic.

With regard to fighting corruption, over the past
few months Sierra Leone has taken some
unprecedented bold steps in fighting corruption. A
string of arrests and convictions on corruption charges
have taken place that not only concentrated on lower-
ranking officials, but that also targeted senior
Government officials and cabinet ministers, including
close political associates of the President. In January,
the Director of the National Revenue Authority was
suspended following an investigation by the
Anti-corruption Commission; on ll March, the former
Minister of Health was sentenced to five years in
prison on corruption charges; and, on 15 March, the
Permanent Secretary and the Minister of Fisheries were
indicted on corruption charges and relieved of their
duties. The last case, in particular, is of great political
significance, as the indicted Minister of Fisheries has a
strong following within the governing party, the All
People's Congress, and played a crucial role in
securing the President's party nomination for the 2007
elections.

Closely connected to the issue of corruption is the
need for the proper management of the country's rich
mineral and natural resources. A recently concluded
contract on mining iron ore has raised considerable
criticism and concerns among knowledgeable experts.
Sierra Leone's newly enacted mining law should apply
to all mining contracts, and I urge the Government to
fully comply with the requirements of the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative. The United Nations
stands ready to provide all necessary legal advice and
technical support to help protect Sierra Leone from
being unfairly taken advantage of while seeking
foreign investments for its development.

With regard to preparing for the elections, in
2012 Sierra Leone will hold three important elections:
presidential, parliamentary and local. All internal and
international observers agree that these elections will
pose some very difficult and complex challenges for
the country and that special efforts will be required by
all stakeholders to ensure that these elections are fair,
transparent and free from violence. Unfortunately,
politics in Sierra Leone have become increasingly
ethnic-based and the country is today largely divided
North-South along tribal and political loyalties. Recent
3
by-elections would indicate that this trend is further
deepening.

For these reasons, we have agreed with the
Government to start the process of preparing for the
2012 elections early. An election needs assessment
team has recently visited Sierra Leone and will be
followed by an election programming mission to
develop the required technical and financial assistance
package. In parallel, we are engaging in a series of
multi-party talks with the aim of identifying and
mitigating major political, economic and social
problem areas that could negatively impact the conduct
of the 2012 elections. The joint communique that was
signed by political parties a year ago forms the basis of
this dialogue. In the dialogue, we have also taken up
more sensitive issues such as ethnic loyalties in party
politics, the winner-takes-all syndrome and political
party financing.

Allow me to make here three additional points.
First, today we are less worried that the situation in
neighbouring Guinea will spill over into Sierra Leone.
However, with the situation in Guinea improving, we
now have to think more about taking a regional
approach to peacebuilding and peace consolidation. In
this context, the Mano River Union is of great interest
to us, as it brings together four West African countries
that have either come out of civil wars or that are in the
process of ending internal conflicts.

Secondly, so far we have not been successful in
raising the necessary financial resources to implement
our peacebuilding strategy, the Joint United Nations
Vision. This poses fundamental credibility issues for
us; ultimately, the lack of funding could even
jeopardize our new approach to peacebuilding. The
additional funding that we are seeking to mobilize
through our multi-donor trust fund is only $200
million. In other words, the additional funding required
for four years of peacebuilding would be equivalent to
the costs of only four months of the previous
peacekeeping operation back in 2004. In this context, I
would like to thank the French Ambassador for having
taken up this key issue in the Security Council debate
last month. I hope that the Council will continue to
debate this important issue and consider not only the
institutional aspects of such a transition from
peacekeeping, but also its financial implications.

Thirdly, I feel that Sierra Leone is a good
example of why the Peacebuilding Commission, the

Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office are so important to what we as an integrated
peacebuilding mission want to achieve on the ground. I
would like to thank in particular the chair of the PBC's
Sierra Leone configuration, Ambassador John McNee,
and his colleagues from the Canadian mission, for their
unwavering support. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Liberia, Poland, Peru
and the Republic of Korea - and, of course,
Ambassador Mayr-Harting of Austria, who is present
for having taken the trouble of travelling all the way to
Sierra Leone despite their busy schedules. Let me also
recognize the excellent work that is being done by Judy
Cheng-Hopkins and her team of the Peacebuilding
Support Office. We now feel truly supported.

 

Finally, but most importantly, I would like to
thank the President of Sierra Leone, Ernest Bai
Koroma, and his colleagues in the Government,
members of the opposition and indeed all Sierra
Leoneans for their support of the work of UNIPSIL and
the United Nations country team. Any success that we
have is ultimately only their success.

