Mr. Wittig (Germany): Mr. President, I, too,
should like to thank you for having initiated today's
open debate. It provides a good opportunity to reflect
on what has been achieved so far and where
improvements could be made.

Much has been achieved. Discussions at this
year's retreat for the incoming newly elected members
were also dedicated to ideas and suggestions on how to
improve the work of the Council and make it more
transparent and efficient.
The regular briefings by the Department of
Political Affairs are an important improvement,
particularly in the context of the Arab Spring. These
briefings have allowed for discussions on matters of
international peace and security that have not yet
become formal agenda items. They also allow the
Council to be more flexible and responsive to evolving
situations on the ground, contributing also to a stronger
preventive role of the Council.

Among the Council's subsidiary bodies, the
sanctions committees have become a major field of
activity for the Council and its members. Here, too, the
working methods have become more efficient and
transparent over the past years. The establishment of a
focal point for delisting, and, in the case of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, of an
Ombudsperson in particular are important innovations
with direct benefit for the wider United Nations
membership.

There is also some discussion on the selection
procedure and the accountability of the expert panels
established to support the sanctions committees in their
work. While a discussion on this issue may be
warranted, it is our view that this should neither result
in excessively delaying the beginning of the work of
new experts, nor lead to any infringement on the
independence of such experts in the implementation of
their mandate. It is precisely their independence,
combined with their expert knowledge, that provides
the added benefit not only to the Security Council but
also to the wider United Nations membership. We thus
are strongly in favour of their reports, as a general rule,
being made public.

An open and transparent relationship between the
Security Council and the wider United Nations
membership remains crucial for the political
acceptance and relevance of the Council, as well as for
the implementation of its resolutions. As President of
the Security Council for the month of July 2011,
Germany drafted the introduction of the annual report
of the Security Council to the General Assembly
(A/66/2). In preparing for the compilation of the report,
we built on the good practice of holding, together with
Nigeria and Portugal, an informal meeting with the
wider United Nations membership. We also asked the
presidency to separate the debates on the annual report
and on the issue of Security Council reform in order to
allow for a more focused debate on both issues. These
are but two examples of how the Council can better
satisfy the legitimate interests of the broader

membership in enhanced transparency and accessibility
of the Council in its work.

We fully agree with the goal expressed in your
concept paper, Mr. President, preparing for today's
debate, of improving involvement by all stakeholders
such as concerned non-members of the Council and
relevant regional organizations. Concrete steps could
include more frequent use of the Arria-formula
meetings or giving troop contributors and other
stakeholders the opportunity for joint input in Council
consultations. We also share the goal of enhancing the
role of the Military Staff Committee. We appreciate the
current practice of regular informal meetings of the
Committee open to all 15 members of the Council, and
encourage its continuation.

The relationship between the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has become
more interactive and dynamic. The chairpersons of the
PBC country-specific configurations now regularly
brief the Council when a particular country's situation
is under consideration. They bring to the table a
different perspective that can complement the
Council's assessment of a given situation. In this
context, their participation in Council consultations
should also be envisaged. There is also still potential
for improvement in ensuring that the Council can and
will draw on the PBC's advice on broader
peacebuilding perspectives.

Important progress has been made in enhancing
the relationship between the Security Council and
thematic Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General, such as those for children and armed conflict
and sexual violence in conflict. Similarly, the briefings
provided by the Executive Director of UN-Women and
representatives of the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights have been important to the Council's
work. In our view, the Council has greatly benefited
from their analyses and reports. The same holds true
for the briefings provided by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court. Germany supports
regular participation by these Offices in briefings and
at consultations of the Security Council.

We also believe that the Council should be more
open to an enhanced relationship with the Human
Rights Council, not least because of the role that the
independent commissions of inquiry established by the
Human Rights Council play in several situations on the
Security Council's agenda.

Lastly, we welcome the initiative of Member
States in presenting concrete proposals for reform of
the working methods of the Security Council. As I
mentioned before, we support many of the ideas
contained in the initiative proposed by the so-called
group of five small nations. However, Germany
strongly supports improvement of the Council's
working methods as part of a comprehensive reform of
the Council. Focusing only on its working methods
resembles a band-aid approach to a more structural
issue that, in our View, can be addressed only by
making the membership of the Council more
representative of the world we live in today.

