Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I should like to join preceding speakers in
thanking Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his presentation on the
situation in the Middle East. I am particularly grateful
for the important information with which he provided
us.

As the Security Council meets once again to
consider the situation in the Middle East, the
Palestinian people - especially those in Gaza -
continue to dress the wounds of the December war,
which claimed numerous victims, particularly civilians,
and destroyed major socio-economic infrastructure.

In the context of the intensified humanitarian
crisis that resulted, particularly in Gaza, we welcome
the mobilization of the international community,
which, from the outbreak of the confrontation, spared
no effort not only to achieve the cessation of
hostilities, but also to come to the aid of the civilian
population.

In that context, we welcome the holding of the
donors conference on 2 March 2009 in Sharm
el-Sheikh, in Egypt, which came at the right time to
respond to the humanitarian crisis and assist in the
rebuilding of devastated Gaza. We must now hope that
the commitments undertaken on that occasion will be
fulfilled as swiftly as possible. That is all the more
important because, unfortunately, the challenges to be
met remain numerous and the humanitarian needs very
great.

Moreover, the conference was another
opportunity for the international community to show
the degree to which it can display its concern by being
in solidarity with a population in distress. My
delegation calls on Israel to join in this overall spirit of
solidarity and compassion, in particular by lifting the
embargo on Gaza and all restrictions on the movement
of goods and persons, which are prerequisites for the
resumption of socio-economic activity and the success
of reconstruction efforts.

The recent events in Gaza have revealed once
again the difficult conditions in which the United
Nations and humanitarian organizations intervene in
times of conflict. Their work - particularly that of
United Nations agencies, including the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East - is all the more remarkable and
praiseworthy for that reason. Therefore, it is important
to continue to support them and to ensure the
protection and integrity of their staff and infrastructure.
In that regard, we hope that the investigations of the
Board of Inquiry established by the Secretary-General
will help to shed light on the attacks carried out against
United Nations facilities.

We remain greatly concerned by the many
escalations that are further exacerbating tension
between Israel and Palestine. We invite the parties to
refrain from engaging in extremist rhetoric, which calls
into question a number of the significant achievements
that have been accomplished, including within the
framework of the Road Map and the Arab Peace
Initiative. Also contributing to those escalations is the
continued policy of establishing Israeli settlements.

My delegation urges the next Israeli Government
to put an end to that policy and to resolutely commit
itself to the spirit of the peace process, which, despite
difficulties, today still provides us with the best
possible prospects for a settlement of the conflict. We
should also like to reiterate our appeal to the
Palestinian parties to achieve reconciliation and unity.
That is why we hope that the inter-Palestinian
negotiations currently under way under Egyptian
auspices will lead to a Government that unites all
Palestinian political sensibilities.

Beyond Gaza and the West Bank, antagonisms
are increasingly worsening in the region. We invite all
actors to display the utmost restraint in order to create
the best possible prospects for the success of the
ongoing diplomatic efforts.

In this troubled region, we must welcome the
relative calm and stability prevailing in Lebanon. We
call on the entire Lebanese political class to continue to
abide by the important May 2008 Doha Agreement,
and we hope that the June parliamentary elections will
be held in optimal conditions of security, transparency
and fairness. In order to avoid unnecessary tensions in
that country, we wish to stress once again the
importance of abiding by resolution 1701 (2006).

The gradual improvement in Syrian-Lebanese
relations is another reason for satisfaction. We hope
that it will make it possible to resolve outstanding
bilateral issues in a consensual and decisive manner.
Finally, returning to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, we express the hope that the conference at
Moscow will be held as soon as possible and that it
will help renew the momentum of the Annapolis
negotiations. That in turn should, inter alia, lead to the
creation of an independent Palestinian State coexisting

with Israel in peace and security. However, that will be
possible only if the minimal conditions for mutual trust
between the parties are created, including an end to the
settlement policy, exchanges of prisoners, a lifting of
the Gaza blockade, the opening of crossing points, a
halt to rocket firings, and inter-Palestinian
reconciliation.

For its part, the international community,
including the Security Council, must resolutely assist
the parties. In other words, if there is to be a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, the contributions of all parties are essential. That
is why we invite the United Nations and all States and
organizations committed to the process to continue
their efforts.

