Mr. Ghafoorzai (Afghanistan): At the outset, I wish
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of April. We are
sure that your broad knowledge of international issues and
your diplomatic skill will contribute to the successful
conduct of the Security Council's work during the month
of April. I would also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to the outgoing President.

I sincerely thank the Council for convening this
special meeting on the current situation in Afghanistan.

The last two decades have seen Afghanistan become
an issue of concern for the world. Each year, it seems
that new dimensions are added to the protracted,
annihilating conflict in our country, the land of perilous
events and critical circumstances. The desire of the
Afghan nation for a durable peace is fading away, with
military interventions and corporate interests acting as
obstacles to peace rather than catalysts for peace. We
believe that if the Afghan problem is not addressed with
sincerity and caution, Afghanistan will present the world
with serious dangers that will have subsequent
ramifications. It is therefore incumbent upon the members
of the Council to note that the disastrous destabilizing
effects of turmoil in Afghanistan can potentially spill
over. With all the good for which the United Nations
strives, I am quite confident that a political solution can
be found for Afghanistan. Let us all contribute to that
solution.

 

Respect for the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of countries is a recognized principle of
the United Nations Charter and other international
instruments. This requires all countries, in their
international relations, to refrain from any kind of
interference or intervention in the internal affairs of other
States and to base their relations with others on the
renowned guidelines of equality of States and mutual
respect.

Likewise, recruiting, arming, training and dispatching
an armed mercenary group assigned to destabilize another
country's Government or jeopardize a political process are
in violation of recognized principles of international law.
Such moves deserve the condemnation of the entire
international community, and any effort aimed at
legitimizing such a mercenary group and the consequent
effects of foreign-sponsored intervention sets dangerous
precedents for international relations.

The Taliban qualify as the embodiment of such a
mercenary group. In October 1996, I gave an adequate
introduction of the Taliban mercenaries to this Council.
They support international terrorism and shelter those who
finance them. They commit gross and massive violations of
human rights, particularly chain-lashing and beating women.
As the members of the Council well know, the Taliban
cultivate, process and export narcotics. Sadly, one of the
new breaches of international humanitarian law committed
by the Taliban is a Serbian-style "ethnic cleansing"
involving 140,000 non-Pashtun Afghans, as widely reported
by The New York Times, as well as by both Mr. Norbert
Holl, Head of the United Nations Special Mission and Mr.
Paik, Special Rapporteur on Human Rights for Afghanistan.
We believe that the latest series of heinous acts constitute
crimes of genocide punishable in accordance with relevant
conventions.

On 8 April 1997, Mr. Choong Hyun Paik presented a
report to the Commission on Human Rights in Geneva. In
his report he informed the Commission of the displacement
of 250,000 Afghans from their villages since October 1996.
The report also briefed the Commission on mass violations
of women's rights committed by the Taliban, including the
beating of 225 women because they had not met the
Taliban dress code. The women of Afghanistan, who
compose more than half the Afghan population, would like
their grievances to be heard by the Security Council.

The first sign of ethnic cleansing occurred in Sar-
Cheshma, a small village north-west of Kabul, at a time
when the Taliban had suffered major setbacks, on 23
October 1996. John Burns of The New York Times
reminded readers that the razing of villages had already
taken place during the 18 years of war in Afghanistan,
but that

"the twist this time was that the men who destroyed
Sar-Cheshma were the turbaned warriors of the
Taliban, the ultra-conservative Muslims who have
imposed a medieval social order across much of
Afghanistan The villagers of Sar-Cheshma say 30
Taliban fighters swept in at dawn on 23 October,
then spent several hours pouring canisters of
gasoline into the 120 courtyards, one after another,
where hundreds of people live. Little remains but
buckled bed frames and melted kitchen utensils".

Regarding the forced exodus of the non-Pashtun
civilian population in January, we provided early
information to the Security Council in document
S/1997/54 of 21 January 1997. Since then the Taliban
have forcibly evicted many other villagers from their
homes and farms. The total estimate of victims facing
forced eviction has since surpassed 150,000. It is the
earnest expectation of the Islamic State of Afghanistan
that the United Nations will appropriately address these
grave violations of international humanitarian law
committed by the Taliban. We hope that the United
Nations will not spare Taliban advisers, supporters and
financiers.

In identical letters dated 13 April 1997 - as
recently as yesterday - addressed to the Secretary-
General and to you, Sir, I drew the attention of the
Security Council to an alarming situation. According to
reliable accounts, the Taliban mercenaries - heavily
reinforced from outside very recently - have been
preparing a massive attack against northern Afghanistan
to take place in the next few days. The mobilization of
forces reaching Kabul is still continuing. Thousands of
militia members from outside, whose identity and
nationality have been well explained in previous
communications addressed to the President of the Security
Council and to the Secretary-General, are part of the
mobilization. The Council may recall the involvement of
"foreign military personnel" in the Afghan conflict, which
was identified as inadmissible in resolution 1076 (1996)
of 22 October 1996, as well as in General Assembly
resolution 51/195 B of 17 December 1996.

The Islamic State of Afghanistan wishes to request
the Security Council to take appropriate preventive
measures to halt the onslaught which otherwise, apart

 

from causing a social catastrophe, will negatively affect the
peace process.

We have always emphasized the need for the existence
of a positive regional atmosphere as an important factor for
the cessation of the current crisis in Afghanistan. This
desire of ours has been well received by all our
neighbouring States except one. We are still waiting to see
a change in the stance and attitude of this neighbour
towards cooperation, understanding and participation in all
common efforts, including peace initiatives.

We are certain that the nation of Pakistan supports
non-interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan and
favours friendship and brotherhood with the Afghan nation.
When Prime Minister Mian Nawaz Sharif gained the
majority vote in the Pakistani elections, our hopes were
further strengthened that he would abandon the stance of
the former Pakistani Administration and shift the Pakistani
position onto the path of fraternity, good-neighbourliness
and mutual respect. His promise on a reconsideration of the
Pakistani policy towards Afghanistan is in essence
indicative of his approval of the Pakistani constituency's
preference for friendship, mutual respect and brotherhood.
We hope that fulfilment of that promise will assist us in the
peace process and curtail the flow of arms and assistance
to a group in Afghanistan that wants to impose draconian
military rule.

A cessation of cross-border assistance to the Taliban
would be a first step towards the realization of
reconciliation, peace and stability in our country. If there is
any country that fancies that it will be spared the
ramifications of the flames of war and violence fuelled by
the Taliban, let us remind it that it needs to do some deep
thinking.

Permit me to refer to another factor which has bearing
on the current Afghan situation: the gas and oil pipeline
project referred to by the Far Eastern Economic Review of
10 April 1997 as a new Central Asian version of the
nineteenth-century Great Game.

The Islamic State of Afghanistan is well aware of the
outstanding economic significance of the projected gas and
oil pipeline from Turkmenistan to Pakistan, and probably
India, through the territory of Afghanistan. The significance
attached to this project by some industrialized countries and
the interest taken by major corporations in the construction
of the pipeline have come to represent a classic political
game and a struggle for the control of the ancient Silk
Road, thus signifying a race for securing energy pipelines.
This competition is undoubtedly about to create major
political ramifications, jeopardizing regional peace and
stability.

We appreciate this historic opportunity. We are
ready to reap the benefits of the project, but only if it
serves the supreme interests of Afghanistan. But we
cannot afford to be part of a political game, because we
have suffered enough. What we need is peace. Our
salvation depends on our national unity. To achieve that,
we need national reconciliation. Construction of the
pipeline project should complement peace and
reconciliation in Afghanistan and aim at extinguishing the
flames of war rather than at fuelling them. Continued war
and violence in Afghanistan would only delay not only
the construction of the pipeline project but also the
reconstruction and rehabilitation of our war-shattered
homeland.

As stated during the gatherings of the Economic
Cooperation Organization, and also as communicated to
the Unocal-Delta Consortium and Bridas - the two
leading competing corporations for the project - and in
compliance with the memorandum of understanding
signed by Afghanistan, Pakistan, Turkmenistan and
Uzbekistan at the fourth summit of the Economic
Cooperation Organization held in Ashgabat in May 1996,
Afghanistan believes that the construction of this project
may best be done through a consortium representing all
interested multinational corporations. Otherwise, we
would be ready to negotiate with a company that will not
tie the project to any political conditions and would be
ready to take preliminary practical steps for the project's
implementation.

We believe that with a view to the achievement of
a durable political settlement in Afghanistan and to the
alleviation of regional and international concern at the
prolonged conflict in Afghanistan, the Security Council
will appreciate all of the harsh and complex realities in
our country. The Islamic State of Afghanistan actively
cooperates with the Head of the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan and will positively consider any
peace plan that is in conformity with Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions.

A military solution in Afghanistan would be a
serious threat to the peace and security of the region. As
clearly indicated in paragraph 7 of the report of the
Secretary-General dated 16 March 1997,

 

"The Taliban, judging both from their words and
from their activities on the ground, appear determined
to gain military and political control of the whole of
Afghanistan and to establish their" - and I emphasize
"their" - "vision of an Islamic State. They view the
other side as opposed to this goal." (S/1997/240, para. 7)

We earnestly believe that the Security Council should
take appropriate measures, including sanctions against the
Taliban and their supporters, who are supplying arms and
logistical support and are preaching an appeasement policy
towards the Taliban.

Armed popular opposition, including mass civil unrest
against the Taliban, is continuing to increase. Many districts
in the eastern provinces of Kunar and Laghman and the
north-western province of Badghis have very recently been
liberated with the assistance of the Supreme Council for the
Defence of Afghanistan.

All that I have stated is not to justify the Islamic State
of Afghanistan as the only Power capable of bringing peace
to the entire country, although the foundations of the
Government have broadened considerably, to include the
Eastern Council of Nangarhar. Rather it is to emphasize the
serious ramifications of the continuation of assistance being
channeled to the Taliban, which poses a threat to
democracy, human rights and peace and stability - not
only in Afghanistan but in the entire region.

Having fervently stood by the ideals of the United
Nations, the Islamic State of Afghanistan, despite
incalculable odds, has struggled for the preservation of the
national independence, unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Afghanistan, and continues to do so. While we
believe there is no military solution to our country's
multifaceted problems, the Islamic State of Afghanistan has
no viable option other than to resist the Taliban's agenda.
Just a few years ago, we halted a Soviet thrust southward,
so that part of the world would be safer. Today we are
striving to contain the Taliban within Afghanistan, because
we are committed to regional and global peace and
stability. Yet we still hold the conviction that the return of
peace and stability to Afghanistan requires a national accord
reached between all sides. This can only be achieved
through serious negotiations, for which the Islamic State of
Afghanistan has always expressed its readiness. Today, we
are still ready.

