Mr. Tenya (Peru) (Spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We also
thank Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, and Ambassador Mauro
Vieira, Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, for their
important briefings.

Peru notes with concern the recent events in
Guinea-Bissau, where, despite the political progress
that had been made, the legislative elections that were
supposed to be held on 19 November have once again
been postponed. We hope that the elections can indeed
take place on 10 March of next year, in accordance
with the presidential announcement that was issued
yesterday. We are also concerned about the impact that
those repeated postponements will have on the holding
of the presidential elections in 2019. We stress that the
mass participation of citizens in free, fair and inclusive
elections is essential to the consolidation of democracy
and, in turn, the legitimacy and effectiveness of the
institutions needed to build sustainable peace. In that
vein and in accordance with the Conakry Agreement
and the six-point road map, we believe it is urgent for
the Guinea-Bissau authorities to convene legislative
elections that include the participation of all political
actors and are supported by regional and international
players and organizations.

We reiterate the importance of promoting the
greater participation of women and young people in the
country's political and institutional spheres. It is also
important to bear in mind that elections represent one
step in a process that requires broad national consensus
to be reached so that the root causes of conflicts can be
addressed by building a safer, more stable and more just
country. To that end, it is essential to respond to threats
such as drug trafficking, transnational organized
crime and growing violent extremism, which would
undermine the institutional framework and the social
fabric in any country. It is also necessary to strengthen
the institutions required to promote economic growth,
fight poverty and achieve sustainable development for
the benefit of all sectors of the population.

In that regard, we highlight the work carried out
by the United Nations country team to support the
implementation of the national development plan, which
prioritizes growth, human development, the sustainable
management of resources and the strengthening of the
rule of law and governance.

I conclude by underlining how important it is that
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau continue to support the country in
all those efforts, in accordance with the provisions
of Council resolution 2404 (2018) and in close
coordination with the Peacebuilding Commission, the
aforementioned country team and other relevant actors.
In that vein, we also highlight the important roles
played by the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the Community of Portuguese
Language Countries and the European Union.

