At the outset, I would like to extend my congratulations to His Excellency Dian Triansyah Djani, Permanent Representative of the Republic of Indonesia, on his presidency of the Security Council for this month. I also extend my sincere thanks to His Excellency Christoph Heusgen, Permanent Representative of the Federal Republic of Germany, for his distinguished management of the Council's meetings in the previous month. I also extend my gratitude to Her Excellency Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAM]), for her briefing. Iraq faces great challenges in various fields - economic, security, health and social. However, our willingness to deal with them is greater. The Government is expeditiously working at the maximum level, as promised, to meet the people's expectations and demands by preserving peace and security, providing services, countering the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), fighting terrorism and achieving political and economic reforms. The situation relating to the COVID-19 pandemic is critical and could lead to the collapse of the health system. The competent authorities have adopted preventive measures to centralize the decision-making process concerning the pandemic and sought to restore stability and ensure the gradual return of public life to normal. Meanwhile, it has taken measures to stimulate the economy and support low- income people. In that regard, Iraq expresses sincere gratitude to the World Health Organization and friendly States for their generous health aid in supporting Iraq to counter the pandemic. One important commitment that the Government has made is to meet demonstrators' demands. Measures have been taken to fill in the trust gap with the people, especially the youth, by making their voices heard and honouring the people's constitutional rights to peaceful protests and freedom of expression. Despite the financial hardship facing the country, the Government did not hesitate to respond to the aspirations expressed by demonstrators and involved a number of them in the State's public jobs. The Government has promised to protect the demonstrators from any violations of human rights. In that regard, the competent authorities made major efforts to prevent violent groups from targeting the demonstrators and to reduce the number of incidents to the lowest level possible. Furthermore, the Government placed the families of the victims on a list to receive the benefits stipulated by the martyr's law, which provides financial compensation and all necessary medical treatments to wounded demonstrators. Countering corruption is at the heart of the reform process. In that regard, the Government has shown great keenness to restore full control of border checkpoints so as to prevent and deter any illegal practices. The Prime Minister of Iraq, Mr. Mustafa Al-Kadhimi, declared 6 June 2021 as the date for the holding of early elections. That declaration was the result of efficient consultations between the Government and the legislative authority. The Government believes that without an inclusive initiative, it will be very difficult to devise sustainable solutions to the crisis in Iraq. It is unquestionable that the Government gave a response to the political crisis; indeed, it aspires to be a Government that accommodates solutions to urgent problems. In that regard, certain steps should be taken in advance: first and foremost, the sovereignty of the State must be preserved and honoured; secondly, it is vital to strengthen the rule of law and reclaim the State's control over all armed forces; and, thirdly, foreign Powers must be prevented from turning our country into a base for its political and strategic agendas. Iraq's sovereignty and independence are crucial to the stability and security of the region. Iraq strives to maintain strong relations with countries in accordance with the principles of common interest and non-interference in internal affairs. The Government pledges to enforce the State's authority by controlling the possession of arms, restricting them to Government and military institutions and enforcing the rule of law. To this end, the Government is engaged in a process of achieving security reform that promotes performance in the field, respects human rights and ensures professionalism, and is countering the militarization of society by preventing any form of non-State intervention. In response to the Government's serious and effective measures, the outlaw groups assassinated a well-known Iraqi expert on violent extremism, Hisham Al-Hashimi. As these groups seek to undermine the authority of the State, the Iraqi Government is determined to pursue the perpetrators and will not allow assassinations to resume in our country and disrupt its security and stability. Furthermore, the Government believes that its security accomplishments are related to the same factors, most important of which are the success of the counter- corruption campaign and achieving economic reforms, a frank and responsible national dialogue with all components of society, the promotion of patriotism and the respect of diversity in Iraq, and preserving Iraq's sovereignty. Fighting and countering terrorism is at the core of my country's security strategy. My Government believes that terrorism still poses an imminent threat and represents an obstacle to the reconstruction of liberated cities, the return of displaced citizens and access to humanitarian assistance. To this end, we will work with the international community to facilitate the access of humanitarian assistance and lead negotiations with the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS concerning the presence of international troops in Iraq, on the basis of a shared and inclusive national vision. Iraq also welcomes all efforts undertaken to date to repatriate the family members of foreign terrorist fighters and urges other countries to receive their non-convicted citizens. There remains an urgent need for concerted efforts to rehabilitate and reintegrate victims of terrorism, especially in the liberated areas. Iraq confirms its strong commitment to establishing friendly relations and cooperation with its neighbours and the international community. At the same time, my country expects the same spirit of cooperation and mutual respect from others. Turkey launched the joint Claw-Eagle and Claw-Tiger military operations in the north of Iraq without any prior consultations with the Iraqi Government. The operations have led to casualties among civilians and military personnel, most recently on 11 August. We understand Turkey's security concerns but what happened is a clear violation of international law. The Turkish violations threaten not only Iraq's sovereignty, but also its security and stability. The Iraqi Government considers the Turkish violations of its territory to be irresponsible measures that do not take into account the promotion and development of a peaceful situation in international relations. The latest incident was a blatant attack that targeted Iraqi border guards, killing two officers and one soldier from the Iraqi army, in violation of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and flouting good-neighbourly relations. At this point, the Iraqi Government affirms its right to confront any attack that threatens the security of Iraq. In this perilous security situation, my country has filed complaints with the Security Council, documenting and requesting urgent steps to prevent future violations. I confirm before the Council that, in order to avoid any escalation and aggravated consequences, my country adheres to peaceful and friendly means rather than resorting to military measures. This matter is consistently emphasized during the Prime Minister's important visits to our neighbours in the region, allies and friends in the international community. Concerning relations with Kuwait in the context of cooperation and finding the missing Kuwaitis, this matter is the major focus of our efforts to finalize and fulfil our obligations towards their bereaved families. The Iraqi Ministry of Defence is pursuing its efforts to excavate the sites of Samawah, Khamisiyah, Radwaniyah, Karbala, Salman Pak and Al-Burjusiya for remains. Meanwhile Iraq calls on the Tripartite Commission and the State of Kuwait to accelerate the process of announcing the results of DNA tests of the remains. Our ongoing and painstaking search efforts continue to unearth a new set of Kuwaiti archives that were supposed to be delivered by the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs in April, but due to the conditions of the COVID-19 pandemic, the delivery has been postponed Concerning compensation, a payment of $210 million was made on 28 July, leaving an outstanding balance of $2.6 billion. The current situation has put Iraq in an extremely difficult position that no Government can survive without international cooperation and solidarity. Accordingly, we aspire to secure the Security Council's support in helping the new Government to achieve its priorities by condemning violations of Iraqi sovereignty by any Member State and preventing such acts in the future; helping the Government to address the main challenges, especially with regard to COVID-19 and the economic and financial crises; actively cooperating with Iraq in the war against terrorism, in which Iraq remains on the front line; and assisting the Independent High Electoral Commission to address the requirements of organizing integrated and free election. Iraq commends the support of the international community and reiterates that its assistance to Iraq in preserving its national sovereignty will be a cornerstone of the success of the Government. The Iraqi Government has taken pains to enhance its relationships with its neighbours in the region by building bridges of cooperation with them. A first official visit to Saudi Arabia was scheduled for the Prime Minister, but it was postponed due to a health condition of His Majesty King Salman. At the same time, the Prime Minister undertook an official visit to Tehran, where he discussed with President Rouhani bilateral relations between the two countries and ways to enhance them. Furthermore, the Iraqi Government engaged in a strategic dialogue in June with the United States of America and discussed the prospects of bilateral relations, and most importantly the future presence of United States troops in Iraq. The dialogue also included discussions of future cooperation in various fields, such as the economy, security, culture and health. Iraq welcomes the positive and friendly results of the dialogue that surrounded the official visit of the Prime Minister to Washington, D.C. Iraq's policy of regional engagement also included the participation of the Prime Minister in the Iraq-Jordan-Egypt tripartite summit, hosted in Amman on 25 August, for the inspiration of a better and prosperous future of the region. I extend my appreciation to the Secretary-General for his supportive stances towards Iraq, and we hope that the international community will continue to help its people to achieve a stable and prosperous Iraq. I especially thank the Head of UNAMI and her team in Baghdad and New York for their tireless efforts.
