Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): I am honoured
to have been invited to participate, as Chair of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP),
in this meeting devoted to the situation in Guinea-Bissau.
I would also like to thank Mr. Joseph Mutaboba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Guinea-Bissau; Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil and Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission; and Ambassador Youssoufou Bamba,
Permanent Representative of Cote d'Ivoire and Chair
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), for their briefings today.

The Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
has been following with deep concern the internal
situation in Guinea-Bissau since the coup d'etat on
12 April that interrupted the country's progress towards
consolidating democracy and political and institutional
normalization. The internal political atmosphere is
still very fragile, with serious implications for peace,
stability, economic development and the humanitarian
situation. In order to reverse this scenario, the CPLP
advocates the full implementation of resolution 2048
(2012), adopted on 18 May, aimed at achieving a
restoration of constitutional order and the resumption
of the democratic process interrupted by the coup.

I would like to draw the attention of the members
of the Security Council to the fact that the prevailing
situation in Guinea-Bissau was thoroughly discussed
at the CPLP's ninth summit of heads of State and
Government, held in Maputo, Mozambique, on 20 July.
The summit culminated in the adoption of a declaration
on Guinea-Bissau by which the heads of State and
Government of the CPLP reiterate their call for the full
re-establishment of the constitutional order, restoring
the functioning and authority of the legitimate bodies
of governance, including the Interim President of the
Republic and the Prime Minister.

As the declaration highlights, the CPLP considers
it essential to promote, under the aegis of the United
Nations, close coordination with other regional and
international partners, notably the African Union,
ECOWAS and the European Union, with a View to
establishing a partnership that can contribute effectively
to stabilizing Guinea-Bissau.

In that process, the CPLP encourages the pursuit
of reform of the defence and security sectors and the
strengthening of the fight against drug trafficking as
fundamental elements of an effective and sustainable
stabilization strategy for Guinea-Bissau. In line with
those efforts, we appeal to the international community
to convene a high-level meeting under United Nations
sponsorship, with a View to developing a comprehensive
and integrated strategy aimed at restoring constitutional
order in Guinea-Bissau.

Let me conclude my remarks by stressing our
solidarity with the people of Guinea-Bissau and
reaffirming the full commitment and openness of the
Mozambican chairmanship of the CPLP to working
closely with all relevant partners to find a lasting
solution to the crisis in Guinea-Bissau.

