Mrs. Fritsche (Liechtenstein): There have been
few occasions on which an open debate of the Security
Council has been more necessary. What is under
discussion is not merely the future of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) - a landmark achievement in
the history of international law - but also, and what is
more, the role and the credibility of the Security
Council.

The mandate of the Council under the United
Nations Charter does not lack clarity. A transgression
of this mandate as a result of the ongoing debate would
have not only disastrous consequences for the ICC, but
maybe even more devastating ones for the Council
itself. We do not want to see the Council put itself in a
position in which the United Nations membership at
large is forced to question the legality of one of its
decisions. Such a situation would have a devastating
impact on the credibility of the Council and thus of the
Organization as a whole. I would like to comment in
this regard on the following two approaches
contemplated within the Council to resolve the current
impasse.

The one under discussion last week invokes
article 16 of the Rome Statute, while effectively
amending it. As has been said by many over the past
few days, and most prominently by Secretary-General
Kofi Annan, this would constitute an action outside the
mandate of the Security Council and fundamentally
affect the process of treaty-making as practiced in the
United Nations.

The other approach which has been explored is a
"generic resolution" which would address the role of
the ICC with regard to peacekeeping in general, rather
than in conjunction with a specific peacekeeping
operation. This could be based only on the untenable
notion that the International Criminal Court constitutes
a threat to international peace and security.

The conclusion must by necessity be that neither
of the two approaches is viable, both politically and
legally speaking.

The concerns expressed with regard to the
International Criminal Court are well known. Indeed,
they were discussed at length at the Diplomatic
Conference in Rome. While not everybody deemed it
necessary during the course of those negotiations, the
view prevailed in the end that it was advisable to make
a massive effort to address these concerns. As a result,
the Rome Statute provides for a number of
painstakingly drafted safeguards to prevent frivolous
and politically motivated investigations and
prosecutions, the principle of complementarity being
the most crucial one. This effort was carried out in
good faith and with creative thinking flowing from
some of the best available expertise in the area of
international law. We are disappointed that this genuine
effort has not met with the appreciation we believe it
deserves, and we have serious difficulties in
understanding the substantive reasons for that.

Peacekeeping and international justice are, to our
minds, complementary concepts. We find it therefore
disturbing that some of the discussions under way treat
them, in effect, as mutually exclusive. There can be no
choice between one or the other, when the international
community so obviously needs both. The progressive
development of international law and respect for the
rule of law, as well as the maintenance of international
peace and security, are core activities of the United
Nations, and they both must be treated as such. No
choice can be made here, and the Council must
therefore not impose such a choice on itself.

We are aware that many avenues have been
explored to find a viable solution to the prevailing
deadlock. A magic formula seems not to have been
found yet, and I would like to refer to the remarks
made by Canada and France as positive contributions
in this respect. Whatever options are considered, in the
end the question always comes down to whether or not
to respect a treaty adopted by a Diplomatic Conference
and ratified by 76 States. We believe, both as a State
party to the Statute and as a Member of the United
Nations, that the answer is obvious and that the
preservation of the integrity of the Statute is the only
way for the Council to preserve its credibility and
effectiveness.

