Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I thank you, Madam
President, for your able leadership of the Council
this month. My thanks also go to our friend Special
Representative Jan Kubis for his briefing and for his
skilful leadership of the UnitedNations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We convey our gratitude to
Australia and Ambassador Quinlan for his country's
committed work as the penholder in the Council on
Afghanistan and for the spirit of cooperation shown
during the course of negotiations on the UNAMA
draft resolution (S/2014/184). I would also like to take
this opportunity to welcome the recent Secretary-
General's report on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security
(S/2014/163).

On 28 March 2002, in the wake of the Bonn
Conference, the Council voted on resolution 1401
(2002), on the establishment of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan- apolitical mission
to lead international civilian coordination efforts and to
support Afghanistan in building a democratic, stable and
peaceful country. Since then, its comprehensive focus
on security, the economy, governance and development
challenges has been essential to my Government's work
to lay the foundations for sustainable development and
peace in the country, and the UNAMA mandate has
been renewed regularly with the full support of the
Government of Afghanistan.

Throughout the past decade, UNAMA has
remained at the centre of international engagement in
support of Afghanistan, an engagement characterized
by the involvement of more than 70 countries and
dozens of international organizations, known as the
donor community. The international community's
collective efforts have spanned all dimensions, and our
achievements attained through shared efforts have been
exceptional. The country is more unified, millions of
boys and girls are in school, more Afghans have access
to health care than ever before and all Afghans enjoy
their fundamental human rights as guaranteed by our
Constitution.

We reached the final stage of transition this year,
as the country began to stand on its own feet and take
charge of its own destiny. Afghan National Security
Forces assumed full security responsibility nationwide,
showing even more capability and professionalism
as international forces draw down. The Government
began to renew its international partnerships while
asserting greater Afghan ownership and leadership
over the country's future. And now, after 12 years
of unprecedented international cooperation and
engagement, the Afghan people are less than a few
weeks away from the pinnacle of transition, that is,
presidential and provincial elections.

On 5 April, Afghans will cast their votes to choose
the future leader of the country and their provincial
representatives. Thatwillbe ahistoric event, marking the
first peaceful transition of power through a democratic
process. Moreover, a legitimate political transition is
essential to our efforts to secure a brighter and more
peaceful future. After decades of war, Afghans have
worked intently to build a new foundation for progress
in Afghanistan. Elections represent the hope that the
work will continue and provide an opportunity for its
advancement throughout the transformation decade.

Election preparations have been long under way,
with the help of the international community and
the United Nations. It is crucial that the elections be
legitimate, credible and transparent, as expected by all.
To that end, the Independent Election Commission is in
the lead in administering, adjudicating and managing
the polls and in overseeing logistical and technical
preparations, with the support of our international
partners. The Independent Electoral Complaints
Commission is well positioned to prevent fraud and
misconduct. Furthermore, the Ministry of the Interior
has intensified efforts to ensure security on election
day, preparing 400,000 Afghan security forces to
protect the 7,168 polling stations on 5 April, with plans
to deploy 13,000 female polling station searchers and
provide security to the 308 female provincial council
candidates. The number of international and national
observers will be in the thousands.
The participation of Afghans in the lead-up to the
elections has been monumental. All segments of society
are deeply involved in the elections, many of them for
the first time, keenly participating to ensure they have
a say over the country's future. Importantly, women are
involved in the elections as candidates, campaigners,
electoral workers and voters. Today, of the 3.4 million
new voters registered for the April election, 35 per cent
are women. Additionally, presidential candidates have
had historical media exposure, particularly through
a number of televised debates, allowing candidates
the opportunity to present their programmes to the
electorate and enhancing countrywide involvement in
the political process. That sets a new precedent for our
young democracy.

With all Afghans focused keenly on the elections,
we have not lost sight of the challenges facing us this
year. That is crucial to the preservation of the gains of
the past decade and to a successful departure towards
the transformation decade. To address those challenges,
a serious focus is needed on the following three main
areas.

The first area is Afghanistan's continuing
cooperation with the international community. That
is essential to a successful transition this year, to
the transformation decade ahead and to long-term
peace, security and development in the country. As
demonstratedbytheconsultativeLoyaJirgaofNovember
2013, the Afghan people believe in the importance of
continuing strategic relations with the United States,
NATO and the wider international community. To that
end, we are certain that the bilateral security agreement
with the United States will be signed soon.

The second aspect is fiscal stability and the
sustainable economic growth and development of
Afghanistan. We welcome the progress made towards
fulfilling the commitments set out in the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, which is essential to the
country's long-term stability and sustainability. In
addition to that Framework, the Government continues
to further the agreements reached at the London,
Kabul, Bonn and Tokyo Conferences and the Lisbon
and Chicago Summits, which aim to enhance national
leadership and ownership and Afghanistan's economic
self-sufficiency strategy.

The third element is regional cooperation. As
we move towards the end of the transition this year,
it is fundamental to Afghanistan's stability that its
neighbours and countries in the region play their role
in contributing to peace and security in the country. It
is clear that the prosperity and security of all countries
in the region are deeply interlinked. My Government
therefore continues to strengthen regional cooperation
networks through multilateral processes, such as the
Istanbul Process, as well as bilateral efforts. Regional
cooperation is also essential to peace and reconciliation,
as well as related outreach to the Taliban and other
groups that continue to fight against the Government.

Throughout all the that, protecting the rights of
all Afghans remains a fundamental priority. That
includes ensuring the right of all Afghan people to good
governance, justice, health care and education and to
live free from violence. In that regard, Afghanistan
is committed to preventing and mitigating the toll of
violence on civilians, particularly women and children.
We condemn in the strongest terms the continuing
violence against the Afghan people, including women
and children, by extremists. With elections presenting
an opportunity for all Afghans to come together in
unity, the impetus for the armed opposition to reject its
brutal tactics, contribute meaningfully to the country
and heed the call for peace have never been stronger
than today.

As we renew the mandate of UNAMA for another
year, we are well aware of the continuing importance of
the role of the United Nations as a whole at this crucial
time for the country. We expect the international
community to stand firmly for peace and security in
Afghanistan and to further our work to ensure that the
hard-won achievements of the past decade are protected.
After decades of war and instability and 12 years of
tremendous progress, it is crucial that the momentum
continue towards our goal of achieving a long-lasting,
stable, peaceful and democratic Afghanistan.

