Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to you, Mr. President,
for convening today's meeting. We thank Special
Representative Yamamoto for his briefing and
his analysis of the processes currently unfolding
in Afghanistan. We also listened carefully to the
statements by Mrs. Raz, the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan, and Ms. Samar. We share the
Ambassador's assessments and listened attentively to
Ms. Samar. We agree with many of the opinions in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2019/493), and would
like to make the following points.

We support the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
believe it has an important role to play in coordinating the
international humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan.
We greatly appreciate the work and selfless efforts of
United Nations personnel in the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan. We hope that in the future the United
Nations evaluations of the situation in the country will
continue to be based on the principle of impartiality
and an accurate identification of the country's current
challenges, first among them being terrorism. It is
unacceptable to pass over that in silence or to try to
embellish the reality.

We are concerned about the ongoing increase in
terrorist activity, the continued presence of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Afghanistan and
its ability to survive even after various defeats in the
north, indeed on the contrary to strengthen its ranks by
recruiting foreign terrorist fighters fleeing Afghanistan,
Syria and Iraq, as well as members of other terrorist
groups, of which there are more than 20 in Afghanistan.
We can see that the Islamic State has not only refused to
abandon its expansionist ambitions but is consistently
working to realize them, including by establishing
branches and sleeper cells, and including in northern
Afghanistan. That poses a real threat to the security
of our friends in Central Asia and the southern regions
of Russia. Against that background, the consensus
decision of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities, chaired by Indonesia, to
list ISIL-Khorasan Province was timely. Although an
important step, it is not sufficient on its own and should
be followed by practical measures within the United
Nations to eradicate that terrorist threat. And we are
naturally very concerned about the major terrorist acts
that regularly occur in various cities in Afghanistan,
including the capital. Besides civilians, including
women and children, Afghan soldiers and police
officers are dying every day at the hands of terrorists.
We pay tribute to their heroism and courage.

We are especially focused on the fight against drug
trafficking in Afghanistan. The drug threat continues
to be a serious problem for the region, for peace and for
Afghanistan itself. The revenue it generates provides
terrorism with significant financial support. We believe
it is extremely important to continue to strengthen
international efforts to combat this scourge. As with
any global threat, overcoming the challenges presented
by narcotics requires broad collective cooperation,
including through specialized entities. We remain
committed to helping to comprehensively combat this
threat,withtheparticipation oftheUnitedNations Office
on Drugs and Crime, among others. Our practical steps
are also in line with that approach, including through
regional authorities such as the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO). We will continue to contribute
to training narcotics police from Afghanistan, Pakistan
and the countries of Central Asia in cooperation with
many States around the world, including Japan.

Russia has consistently supported the desire of the
Afghan people to entrench lasting peace in their country.
This year Russia and Afghanistan are celebrating
the centenary of their establishment of diplomatic
relations. Our countries are indeed linked by a rich
history of mutual respect, good-neighbourliness and
cooperation whose foundation was laid back in 1919.
As was the case 100 years ago, today we are driven
by the desire to help Afghanistan become a peaceful,
independent State, free from terrorism and drugs. We
intend to continue to work with our Afghan friends on
eliminating security threats, particularly from ISIL
and Al-Qaida, and strengthening the capacity of civil,
security and anti-drug structures.

We are sincerely interested in seeing a national
reconciliation process, and the country's subsequent
stabilization, take place as soon as possible, led by
the Afghans themselves. We believe firmly that
everyone 4 Afghanistan, its neighbours in the region
and the world at large - wins when there is peace,
stability and national reconciliation. We are ready to
continue our full cooperation in furthering the process
of national reconciliation, and that purpose is what
guides us in implementing our own efforts in that area.
With that in mind, we held a second meeting of the
Moscow consultations format, with major participation
by interested parties.

We support a policy of making the upcoming peace
process in Afghanistan as inclusive as possible, involving
all the country's social and political forces, including
the opposition. We believe that a broad dialogue is key
to achieving peace in Afghanistan. In that regard, we
support the continuation of the inter-Afghan dialogue
launched in Moscow in February, especially since
the meeting displayed all Afghans' genuine interest
and desire to achieve peace and reconciliation. We
assume that the various international actors who have
decided to showcase their efforts in the area of national
reconciliation in Afghanistan will play by the same
rules and take into account of the gains already made in
the Moscow format and the trilateral dialogue between
Russia, the United States and China. What is needed is
cooperation, not artificial competition, and that is what
Afghanistan wants, too.
We want to point to the world's growing
understanding of the importance that the regional
context also has for an Afghan settlement, and the need
in that regard to harness the potential of proven bodies,
particularly the CSTO and the SCO. We want to highlight
the revived mechanism ofthe SCO-Afghanistan Contact
Group. We were pleased that Afghanistan participated
as Chair in the Contact Group's meeting in Bishkek
this spring. We see good potential for strengthening
the cooperation between Afghanistan and the CSTO.
After years of conflict, the efforts to reach a settlement
in Afghanistan require engagement and constructive
dialogue among all its neighbours, and there should
be no exceptions. We believe there is no alternative to
that, for only good-neighbourliness, collaboration and
cooperation will make it possible to resolve the acute
problems of Afghanistan today. It will be vital to ensure
that the international and regional efforts are aligned.

The quest for peace in Afghanistan requires
strategic patience in order to ensure that the formula for
a final settlement, designed to result in a comprehensive
agreement, not only promotes national reconciliation
among all patriotic political forces, but also unites them
on a platform of reconstruction for Afghanistan and
collective opposition to terrorist entities, of which the
country has more than 20, including the Islamic State
and Al-Qaida. We are confident that once Afghans
are united they will be able to end that threat and put
the country on a path to sustainable development,
which has to be the basis for the prosperity of all its
citizens, including women, as well for strengthening
the democratic foundations of Afghan society.

We firmly believe that the defining criterion
for all peace initiatives and for the elections planned
for September must be the goal of uniting the entire
country and all Afghans, without exception. Without it,
the conflict will only worsen. The task is to maintain
a united and indivisible Afghanistan where tolerance
prevails and its many ethnic groups coexist in peace
and harmony. Based on those principles, and those
principles alone, we are open to cooperate with regional
and international partners.

