Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We wish at the outset
to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.

My delegation is encouraged by the formation of
a Government of national unity in Palestine, the
resumption of direct talks between the Israeli Prime
Minister and the President of Palestine, and the
progress made towards reviving the Middle East peace
process.

We welcome the reaffirmation of the Arab Peace
Initiative and the subsequent formation of the Arab
Ministerial Committee for that initiative, which was
formed to resuscitate and promote the peace process.
We look forward to direct interactions between that
important Committee and the Security Council.

We urge all parties to maintain and accelerate the
momentum and to ensure that the initiatives undertaken
thus far translate into tangible progress leading to the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

It is now incumbent upon the international
community to support the fully inclusive and
democratic Palestinian Government, and for Israel and
other countries to lift the economic and political siege
on the Palestinians. Funds owing to the Palestinian
National Authority and withheld by Israel, as well as
other funding from the international community, are
urgently required to alleviate the socio-economic
hardships facing the Palestinian people and to support
the deteriorating Palestinian institutions.

The international community should pause to
reflect on a situation in which a crippling sanctions
regime freezing Palestinian funding that was not
authorized by the Security Council or the General
Assembly has been imposed on only one party to a
dispute. It is a matter of grave concern that those
sanctions are undermining the foundations of
governance in a non-independent entity that, after 40
years, is still subject to military occupation, and that
they are thereby eroding prospects for a two-State
solution.

My delegation notes that the World Food
Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization
have recently prepared a Comprehensive Food Security
and Vulnerability Assessment in the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip. The report presents a bleak account of the
humanitarian situation in the occupied territories. The
report notes that:

"Without a political resolution - and particularly
removal of restrictions on movement -
improvement in the humanitarian situation is
unlikely and millions will remain dependent on
assistance."

Findings such as these illustrate the point that the
United Nations has to deal with the situation in a more
comprehensive manner and not merely address the
humanitarian consequences of the occupation. The
latest report by Professor John Dugard, Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
Palestinian territories occupied since 1967, details the
systematic human rights abuses and discriminatory
practices committed against the Palestinian people.
Professor Dugard points out that the 1973 International
Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the
Crime of Apartheid appears to have been violated by
many practices, particularly those denying freedom of
movement to Palestinians.

We also note with deep concern the report
submitted by the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict following her recent visit to the
region. The Special Representative reports on Israel's
continued detention of Palestinian children and their
denial of proper trials. Approximately 400 children are
in detention, half of them for minor security or
criminal offences.

In addition, we would like to express our grave
concern at the apparent lack of progress in bringing
about an exchange of prisoners between Israel and

Palestine. Thousands of Palestinian political prisoners
remain in Israeli jails, and an Israeli soldier is still
being held hostage by a Palestinian faction. We believe
that the resolution of the issue of prisoners will
contribute to the resumption of serious negotiations
aimed at establishing a viable Palestinian State,
existing side by side in peace with Israel, within secure
and internationally recognized borders.

We are also concerned about the continued Israeli
incursions in Nablus and Jenin. We urge the
Palestinians to uphold the ceasefire and believe that
Israel should immediately and unconditionally end all
military incursions, acts of collective punishment and
the expansion of settlements, and that it should halt and
reverse the construction of the separation wall, as
required by the international community.

Regarding the situation in Lebanon, we reiterate
that all the parties must abide by their commitments
under resolution 1701 (2006), in all its aspects and
without selectivity. We remain concerned at the fact
that Israel continues to violate Lebanese airspace with
impunity, and we stress the need for progress with
regard to the release of prisoners by both sides.

The key to resolving many of Lebanon's
problems lies with the achievement of national
reconciliation and the fair representation of all
Lebanese confessional and ethnic groups in the
Lebanese Government.

We stress once again that the United Nations
Charter has entrusted the Security Council with the
mandate to maintain international peace and security.
South Africa, for its part, will be hosting the United
Nations African Meeting on the Question of Palestine
from 9 to 10 May 2007, and the Public Forum in
Support of Israeli-Palestinian Peace on 11 May 2007,
where, it is hoped, the high-level participants will
generate ideas to help advance the peace process.
South Africa is also willing to assist the Palestinians in
their national reconciliation efforts.

