Mrs. Gallardo Hernandez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to sincerely congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and on having convened this open
Council debate to consider the issue of children and
armed conflict. It is undoubtedly a highly sensitive and
very interesting topic for the international community,
in particular for a country such as El Salvador, which
has experienced conflict. Indeed, it is so because of its
cross-cutting implications and because of the moral
and political challenges that it entails in the area of
peace and security. It is also important in terms of
respecting and promoting the human rights of children
and adolescents, relevant international law and post-
conflict peacebuilding processes.

We fully agree with the Secretary-General
regarding the approach and the recommendations set
out in his eighth report on children and armed conflict
(S/2009/158).

El Salvador attaches great importance to the issue
of children and armed conflict as a matter of principle
firmly established in international law related to the
rights and the protection of children in armed conflicts,
including, among other instruments to which my
country is a State party, the Optional Protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Likewise, as a
post-conflict country, El Salvador recognizes the great
value of the international community's efforts to put an
end to the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflicts and other grave violations committed against
children affected by armed conflict.

In that context, our country considers it essential
to continue to make progress in implementing the
monitoring and reporting mechanism, in submitting
action plans to stop the recruitment and use of children,
and in mainstreaming issues related to children and
armed conflict in United Nations political and
peacekeeping missions.

Moreover, as amply documented by relevant
bodies of the United Nations system, rape and other
grave acts of sexual violence committed against
children in conflict and post-conflict situations are a
vital concern of the international community. Such
aberrant acts are clearly used as a weapon of war,
sometimes wielded to humiliate victims and subject
them to the military tactics of parties to conflict,
thereby forcibly displacing specific populations
targeted by such acts and causing serious humanitarian
crises. El Salvador recognizes the importance of
eliminating such practices, which undermine the rights
and the protection of children in both conflict and post-
conflict situations.

In that regard, we should consider incorporating
into the Organization's new international peacebuilding
architecture the systematic analysis and formulation of
specific recommendations for the Security Council on
this issue to supplement the efforts currently being
made by the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict.

As a result of its experience in the area of
peacebuilding, El Salvador believes that the protection
of children's rights and the full reintegration of
children into post-conflict societies are fundamental
elements that must be considered and incorporated into
the language of peace agreements, peacebuilding
strategies and national reconciliation processes.

El Salvador welcomes the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his report on children
and armed conflict. In particular, we wish to highlight
the importance of considering the feasibility of
including in country teams, which are established
pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005), officials
responsible for monitoring gender-based violence.
Likewise, officials concerned with the area of gender
violence and the protection of children, in particular
disabled children, should jointly establish modalities to
share information and coordinate their activities,
including in the area of access to justice and legal
recourse. In addition, we should fully consider possible
links between that suggestion and the Security
Council's follow-up on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

Furthermore, special mention should be made of
the situation, caused by armed conflict, in which
children are involuntarily separated from their families.
El Salvador, as a post-conflict country, has addressed
that situation by establishing an inter-institutional
commission to search for children who have
disappeared as a result of armed conflict. The
commission seeks to cooperate with public institutions
involved in or responsible for child protection in
finding children involuntarily separated from their
families, thus promoting family reunification based on
the best interests of the child. Here, we express to
Council members my country's willingness to share the
experience gained by the inter-institutional commission
if this is considered appropriate.

Finally, we should like to commend the excellent
work done by Special Representative Coomaraswamy,
to whom I pay tribute this afternoon. I also wish to
reaffirm the political will of the Government of
El Salvador to continue to promote measures aimed at
strengthening the rule of law and democratic
governance as basic tools for ensuring the effective
protection of the human rights of all Salvadorans and,
in particular, children in post-conflict situations.

