Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to begin by thanking the briefers and welcoming the ministers who are here today. I also thank the Kingdom of Belgium for organizing this meeting, which we hope will lead to a productive exchange of experiences and opinions on transitional justice in order to benefit from best practices and lessons learned and provide a comprehensive picture of what the Council can achieve in moving forward in the service of international peace and security. Many countries around the world have had diverse experiences with transitional justice, including in post-armed conflict and post-dictatorship situations. Although those experiences are many and diverse, the reasons for moving forward in transitional justice processes are tied to profound political changes ushered in after civil wars or during periods of transition following revolutions against dictatorships. Such periods are usually characterized by large-scale violations of people's freedoms and harm to their physical and emotional health. We believe that theobjectives of transitional justice in all cases are based on common elements, namely, promoting peace as well as political, social and economic harmony while preventing the renewal of conflicts and serious human rights violations. It is indeed difficult for any phase of political transition and peacebuilding to succeed without transitional justice where past violations are investigated in order to shed light on the truth, provide restitution to the victims and their families, ensure accountability and, thereby, make progress towards national reconciliation, with the aim of turning the page and building reconciled societies living in peace and harmony. Without such transitional justice, violations will sow the seeds of hatred and discord that could undermine peacebuilding any time. In the aftermath of the revolution against the dictatorship and at the beginning of the democratic transition, Tunisia had an important experience in the field of transitional justice. Civil society played an early leading role in moving the process forward even before the adoption of the Constitution of the Second Republic. Indeed, Organic Act No. 53, on the establishment and organization of transitional justice, was adopted on 24 December 2013 with a view to dealing with human rights violations and corruption during the First Republic. Transitional justice in Tunisia drew inspiration from comparative experiences and international references in the field of human rights. It also focused on women and young people. As a result, national law defines transitional justice as "an integrated process of mechanisms and means put in place to identify and remedy past human rights violations by revealing the truth, holding those responsible for such violations accountable, compensating the victims and restoring their dignity in order to achieve national reconciliation, preserve and archive the collective memory, establish guarantees of non-recurrence and enable the transition from dictatorship to a democratic regime that contributes to the consecration of human rights". In addition, we have established the Truth and Dignity Commission, chaired by a woman, and entrusted it with a series of missions in the field of transitional justice, namely, to bring the truth to light until reconciliation is achieved. That independent body completed its work at the end of its four-year mandate. The implementation of transitional justice mechanisms poses certain problems in some cases. However, such crises can be contained by relying on the political maturity of State institutions and the contribution of civil society to correct mistakes and achieve comprehensive reconciliation among the population, on the one hand, and between the population and the State apparatus and institutions, on the other. Practice has shown that there are no pre-established models for transitional justice. There can be no imposed prescriptions or wholly legal approaches. We must not lose sight of the local dynamics of political, economic and social transition that enable us to address violations and achieve just social changes over the long-term. In that regard, the Security Council can encourage innovative processes of transitional justice through reconstruction contexts that are derived from the specificities and concepts of local justice, while benefiting from the experience and capability of international criminal justice. Tunisia supports strengthening international cooperation to reform legislation and legal sovereign institutions in post-conflict or post-repressive periods in affected countries so that such legislation is in line with international law, the criteria of international criminal justice and international human rights law. That would lead to providing the requirements of effective national ownership over transitional justice. Tunisia also supports benefitting from the opportunities provided by international criminal justice in order to realize reconciliation through the Rome Statute and the Trust Fund for Victims of the International Criminal Court. That would allow the victims of gross violations to be offered reparations and reintegration, which contribute to promoting peace, stability and peacebuilding.
