The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of July, I should like to take
this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
His Excellency Mr. Baboucarr-Blaise Ismaila Jagne,
Permanent Representative of the Gambia to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security Council
for the month of June 1999. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador J agne for the great diplomatic
skill with which he conducted the Council's business last
month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Maintenance of peace and security and post-conflict
peace-building

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants in a peacekeeping environment

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Australia, Bangladesh, Croatia, El Salvador, Finland,
Guatemala, Indonesia, Japan, Mozambique, New Zealand,
the Republic of Korea and South Africa, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Smith
(Australia), Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh), Mr.
Simonovic' (Croatia), Mr. Mele'ndez-Barahona (El Salvador), Ms. Korpi (Finland), Mr. Rosenthal
(Guatemala), Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia), Mr. Yamazaki
(Japan), Mr. Santos (Mozambique), Mr. Hughes (New Zealand), Mr. Lee (Republic of Korea) and Mr.
Vermeulen (South Africa) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
is meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Today, the Security Council will hold an open
debate on the question pertaining to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants in a
peacekeeping environment, in the context of the
maintenance of peace and security and post-conflict
peace-building.

I give the floor to the Deputy Secretary-General.


