Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.

We are concerned about the continuing clashes and

confrontations in Gaza and at the Al-Aqsa Mosque and
the steadily escalating situation. We took note of the
fact that the basic principles for settling the Palestinian
question were reaffirmed at the emergency summit
of the League of Arab States and the summit of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, recently held
in Saudi Arabia. Safeguarding the legitimate rights
and interests of the Palestinian people is the shared
responsibility of the international community. I would
like to stress the following points.
First, to effectively implement resolution 2334
(2016), the parties concerned must immediately stop
all settlement activities in the occupied territory, cease
and desist the demolition of Palestinian homes and the
destruction of Palestinian property and take measures
to prevent violence against civilians. All legislative acts
and unilateral moves aimed at legitimizing settlement
activities must be stopped immediately and practical
measures must be taken to eliminate their effects.

Secondly, the parties must seek a proper settlement
to the issue ofthe final status ofJerusalem - a complex
and sensitive matter that is fundamental to settling the
Palestinian question and crucial to regional peace and
tranquillity. Recent clashes at the Al-Aqsa Mosque are
worrisome. All parties must act with caution, based
on the principles of respect for the plurality of history,
thereby upholding fairness and justice, implementing
the international consensus and achieving peaceful
coexistence, in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions and international law. They must
also hold talks to reach a solution that can balance
everyone's interests.

Thirdly, the parties must remain seized of the
economic and humanitarian situation in Palestine and
take measures to improve it. The prolonged blockade of
the Gaza Strip has led to severe humanitarian situations
in the region and is not conducive to regional stability.
Immediate measures must be taken to lift the blockade
in Gaza in full so as to prevent any potential escalation.
China is concerned about the actions of certain parties
to withhold some of the tax receipts collected on behalf
of Palestine. We call on the parties concerned to fulfil
the obligations under relevant international treaties,
such as the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations,
and fully implement United Nations resolutions on the
issue. The international community should provide
more support for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. We look
forward to the successful conclusion of its upcoming
pledging conference.

The Middle East needs peace and stability. There
is no alternative to the two-State solution - the only
correct answer to the Palestinian-Israeli question. In
line with the Arab Peace Initiative, the principle of
land for peace and the relevant Council resolutions, the
intentional community must adhere to a negotiations-
based approach for advancing a comprehensive, just
and lasting solution to the Palestinian question so as
to achieve the ultimate goal of establishing a fully
sovereign State of Palestine, based on the 1967 borders
and with East Jerusalem as its capital. Any new
initiative should meet those international guidelines.

