Mr. Salam (Lebanon): At the outset, I would like
to join the Secretary-General and my colleagues in
condemning today's terrorist attacks in Abuja in the
strongest terms and to express our deep sympathy and
heartfelt condolences to its victims, their families, the
people and Government of Nigeria, and the United
Nations and all its members.

I wish to express our appreciation to you, Sir, for
having organized this important debate and to extend
our thanks to the Secretary-General for his important
introductory remarks.

Lebanon aligns itself with the statement to be
made by Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The success of United Nations peacekeeping
requires partnership and regular consultation among
the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries (PCCs). These notions are at the heart of the
draft presidential statement to be adopted today, which
Lebanon fully supports. We advocate the further
involvement of TCCs and PCCs in all the planning and
deployment stages of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

Peacekeeping should be not an end in itself, but
rather part of a solution. The comprehensive resolution
of conflicts by dealing with their root causes, whether
political, social or economic, remains the objective. In
our region, an end to the Israeli occupation in
Palestine, Syria and Lebanon - the root cause of the
conflict - is a prerequisite to any comprehensive
resolution and successful transition of United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the Middle East.

Peacekeeping is not an alternative to an inclusive
political process. It rather provides space for such
processes that can guarantee the protection of civilians
and the achievement of sustainable peace. Respect for
the safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers
and positions is not only critical to the implementation
of their mandate, but is also a measure of the primacy
of international law and respect for Security Council
resolutions.

Lebanon considers that the main underpinning of
the success of a peacekeeping operation rests on the
following elements: first, developing clear and
achievable mandates matched with the required
resources and timely logistical support; secondly,
adherence to the general principles of peacekeeping;
thirdly, a strong link between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding - the interactions between security and
development are clearer than ever; and fourthly,
strengthening the role of regional and subregional
organizations, specifically the African Union, in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter.

Peacekeeping remains the most cost-effective
method to avoid conflict. The goal is the realization of
more efficient peacekeeping adapted to the new
complex realities of military, police, civilian and
humanitarian components all together, in some
missions and mandates that have less to do with
conflict between States and more with intra-State
conflict.

To achieve that goal, and to ensure the creation of
a more predictable, professional and accountable
peacekeeping system, we should emphasize the key
role of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations in policy formulation and development. We
should also enhance regular coordination on
peacebuilding tasks with the Peacebuilding
Commission in a manner that stresses national
ownership and the prioritization of peacebuilding
needs. To also ensure that peacekeeping remains an
expression of our collective security actions, we should
enlarge the base of troop-contributing countries in a
manner that responds to the scope and scale of
peacekeeping needs.

As peacekeeping now appears to be entering a
period of consolidation after a substantial period of

growth, it is high time to draw on lessons learned in
order to improve the critical early peacebuilding tasks
undertaken by peacekeepers. We should focus not only
on areas such as police, corrections, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and security sector
reform, among others, but also on economic revival
and sustainable development. It is clear today that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are not sequential. It
is also clear that transition should be based on
benchmarking against indicators in all fields.

On capability development, we all know where
the critical gaps are. We thus need a comprehensive,
capability-driven approach that addresses uniform
capability requirements, including force enablers such
as air assets, as well as civilian ones.

On global field support, we are glad that the
Secretariat has moved from a mission-centred to a
more global management approach.

Turning now to Lebanon, we reiterate the full
support of the Lebanese people and their Government
to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) and the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization (UNTSO). We would also like to reiterate
our condemnation in the strongest terms of all attacks
that have targeted UNIFIL and UNTSO. The Lebanese
people highly appreciate the important role that
UNIFIL plays in South Lebanon and fully recognizes
the grave sacrifices it has made. UNIFIL has been
steadfast in its support for the Lebanese people in their
efforts to end the Israeli occupation of their land.
UNIFIL is also our partner in mine clearance and in
development efforts in South Lebanon. The Lebanese
people and their Government express their sincere
thanks and appreciation to the peoples and
Governments of each and every troop-contributing
country.

