Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Ambassador Nishida for his briefing on
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) over the past 90 days. This will
be his last briefing to the Security Council in his
capacity as Chair of the Committee. Over the past two
years, under the leadership of Ambassador Nishida and
his predecessors, the Committee has done much
pragmatic and effective work. China wishes to express
its appreciation for the work of the Committee and its
chairs.

The Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 1929 (2010) is currently carrying out its
work. We wish to thank the Chair of the Committee,
the members of the Committee and the Secretariat for
all their efforts. We hope that the Panel of Experts, in
accordance with the mandate given by the resolution
and under the leadership of the Committee, will carry
out its work in a pragmatic and efficient manner and
play an important role in assisting the Member States
to comprehensively and earnestly carry out the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. During this process,
China wishes to provide all necessary support and
assistance to the Panel of Experts and will contribute
as always to the work of the Committee.

China always supports maintaining the
international non-proliferation regime and attaches
great importance to and strictly abides by the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. All Member States
are required to implement the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council comprehensively and earnestly.
However, in this process there should be no wilful
interpretation or expansion of the scope the sanctions.

China always believes that sanctions are not ends
in themselves and cannot fundamentally resolve any
issue. The best choice with respect to Iran is to seek
peaceful diplomatic negotiations and a peaceful
settlement of the nuclear issue. We now have a new
opportunity to restart the dialogue on the Iranian
nuclear issue and negotiations on the matter. The
European Union and six countries have just carried out
a positive and useful dialogue in Geneva that enhanced
mutual understanding. We hope that the concerned
parties can maintain their efforts to seek a solution
through diplomatic negotiation and in a cooperative,
flexible and pragmatic spirit try to gradually establish
mutual confidence, seek common ground and promote
progress in the negotiations. China continues to hope
that the International Atomic Energy Agency can play a
10-68565

 

constructive role in helping to find an appropriate
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue.

China will continue to work with all parties to
seize and make good use of the current opportunity to
step up diplomatic efforts and to continue to build
momentum for a solution of the Iranian nuclear issue
through dialogue and negotiation. We will continue to
do our part to find a comprehensive, lasting and
appropriate solution of the Iranian nuclear issue.

