Mr. Sargsyan (Armenia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for the choice of the theme of the present
debate. Throughout 2015 we were equipped with a
considerable number of important analyses on the
state of play within the United Nations, including the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/453) and those
of the Advisory Group of Experts (A/69/968) and the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446).

We share the concern of the Secretary-General
about the disturbing challenges in the area of the
protection of civilians in conflict-affected areas, which
remain as persistent as ever. While the humanitarian
aspects of the populations affected are of deep concern,
the basic physical security of civilians continues to
be compromised by, as the Secretary-General stated
in paragraph 4 of his report, "shocking levels of
brutality and casual disregard for human life". The
fact that considerable progress has been achieved
in strengthening the normative framework for the
protection of civilians, is, of course, commendable.
However, the persistently rising number of civilian
casualties calls for resolute action.

The analyses available are good enough only when
they are acted upon. They are sufficiently comprehensive
in defining ways of strengthening the capacities of
all major actors in the function of prevention. We are
willing to share some of our thinking on certain aspects
of these analyses.

First, the question of accountability requires greater
consolidation of the Council in demonstrating its
resolve against the parties responsible for denying basic
security or humanitarian relief to affected populations.

Secondly, the idea of giving United Nations peace
operations a mandate for a preventive, protective and
tactical use of force to protect civilians under threat
of physical violence needs to be given thorough
consideration. The reputation of the Organization
is judged not by its words of condemnation but by
deliverable protection.

Thirdly, United Nations field missions remain
an important source of information in detecting
deteriorating situations and alerting the Organization
to take early action. Prevention, as has often been
recognized in all of the available analyses, is the best
means of protection. Strengthening the capacities of
field missions, including those of the relevant regional
organizations, to this end remains an ongoing priority.

Last but not least, the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is closely tied to the prevention of mass
atrocities, including the crime of genocide. Once again,
we stress the importance of the Office of the Special
Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on the
Responsibility to Protect in detecting emerging risks.
A culture of assessing every crisis situation affecting
the civilian population through the prism of atrocity
crimes, including the crime of genocide, should be
further cultivated within the Organization.

Most recently, Armenia and Nagorno Karabakh
have been experiencing significant challenges to the
security of the civilian population as a result of the
ongoing disregard by Azerbaijan for respecting and
upholding the 1994 ceasefire agreement. Increasingly,
Azerbaijan continues to target civilians across the line
of contact with Nagorno Karabakh and the border with
Armenia. As a result ofintensified ceasefire violations
and the massive shelling of populated areas with the
unprecedented use of heavy artillery, considerable
damage has been inflicted on the livelihoods of the
bordering villages. In September 2015, three women
were killed by Azerbaijani fire. Armenia strongly
deplores Azerbaijan's intentional acts aimed at violating
the ceasefire regime and damaging the ongoing peace
process within the framework of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Minsk
Group co-chairmanship.

Once again, Armenia urges Azerbaijan to heed
the calls of the international community and to agree
without delay, as a first step, to establish a mechanism
for investigating the ceasefire violations and to
withdraw its snipers. By rejecting such a mechanism,
Azerbaijan bears full responsibility for the violations
and the escalation of tensions.

To conclude, the ongoing negotiations for the
peaceful settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict
within the framework of the OSCE Minsk Group
co-chairmanship is a positive example of the effective
utilization of the capacity of regional organizations
in conflict resolution. It is an example of what the
Secretary-General describes as a pragmatic approach
to a global-regional partnership.

Armenia highly commends the support of the
international community, the United Nations and
the Secretary-General for the OSCE Minsk Group
co-chairmanship in the peaceful resolution of the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict. Azerbaijan should be
denied the possibility of attempting to undermine the
efforts of the co-Chairs or to engage in forum and
mediation shopping.

