Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today's consideration of the question of East
Timor in the Security Council is marked by a
singularly important event in the development of that
territory, namely, the successful holding of elections to
the Constitutional Assembly. As members of the
Council are aware, the first general elections in East
Timor took place freely and without any incident
whatever, and enjoyed high voter turn-out. It is
noteworthy that over 90 per cent of the electorate took
part in the election.

That is undoubtedly an important achievement for
both the East Timorese themselves and for the United
Nations as a whole, which for two years now has been
actively involved in determining the future of East
Timor. Naturally, high marks also go to the activities of
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), headed by Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello.

In our View, the atmosphere in which the
elections were held should cause us to take note of the
consistent and good-neighbourly attitude of Indonesia.
We are convinced that, in the interests of strengthening
stability in the region, both the Indonesians and the
East Timorese must do everything necessary to further
nurture the first tender shoots of mutual understanding
and respect.

The elections for the Constitutional Assembly
were the first step towards the independence of East
Timor since the 1999 referendum. The birth of a new
State will undoubtedly be an important event in the life
of the world community. But we should not forget that
this very welcome fact will have to be accompanied by
a great deal of work to consolidate the State structure,
lay the foundations of the economy and build a
democratic society. Naturally, responsibility for that
lies first and foremost with the East Timorese
themselves.

At the same time, no one should have any doubt
that the international community must keep an eye on
East Timor and give it all the help it can. The success
that has been achieved by the United Nations in this
territory should not turn into failure. We expect that,
upon receipt of the Secretary-General's
recommendations in October of this year, there will be
a specific discussion of the form of a future United
Nations presence in East Timor. It is our hope that no
one will harbour any doubts about the actual presence
of the United Nations in East Timor after
independence. Its specific parameters will have to be
agreed with the future Government of East Timor.

In conclusion, may I say that we believe the
international community has every reason to give a
positive assessment of the developments in East Timor
and of the prospects for its development.

