Mr. Owada (Japan): The dire situation that has
prevailed in Afghanistan for some years now, and the
consequent plight of the Afghan people, cannot but cause
concern and a sense of alarm in the international
community. We have been closely following recent events
in the wake of the Taliban's seizure of Kabul and the
counter-offensive by the Rabbani faction to the north of
the capital. The Government and people of Japan share
the deep concern expressed by previous speakers over the
continued fighting and the tremendous suffering that it
has caused the Afghan people.

Japan is profoundly aware that the continued
hostilities among the various Afghan factions threaten the
territorial integrity and unity of Afghanistan and pose a
 

threat to Nations neighbouring countries and to the stability
of the region. The situation also seriously hampers efforts
to tackle drug problems and international terrorism. In this
situation, it is important that we be clear about the basic
principles that we should uphold in our common interest to
restore peace and order in that conflict-tom country. First,
no infringement of the principle of the territorial integrity
and unity of Afghanistan should be allowed. Secondly, no
foreign intervention which could render the conflict in
Afghanistan even more complex and intractable should be
tolerated. Thirdly, no country should attempt to expand its
influence by providing arms and money to various factions;
rather, they are strongly urged to use their influence with
the Afghan factions to help the United Nations facilitate a
lasting peace settlement.

What can we in the international community do in this
difficult situation to help mitigate the suffering of the
people of Afghanistan and to bring about a cessation of
hostilities that would lead to a more lasting peace? Japan
believes that there is a role that the United Nations can and
should play, even in this intractable situation. First and
foremost, the mediating role of the United Nations has to
be re-evaluated and reinforced, in particular through an
intensified framework of cooperation by the countries in the
region and other interested countries.

The Afghan parties should also be urged to work more
closely with the mediating efforts of the United Nations
Special Mission, led by Mr. Norbert Holl. Japan continues
to support those efforts, and recently sent a political affairs
officer to participate in the Special Mission. On the basis of
such cooperation on the part of all the Afghan parties, a
further proactive initiative by the United Nations could be
envisaged as a constructive step towards the attainment of
national reconciliation, with the ultimate aim of establishing
a broad-based government in Afghanistan.

While the details would have to be considered
carefully, Japan would, in principle, be supportive of the
idea of holding, under United Nations auspices, an
international meeting among concerned countries to
exchange views on how to help the Afghan parties work
out a peace settlement. Japan has been maintaining close
and impartial contacts with the various Afghan parties, and
is inclined to think that with proper and elaborate
preparation, the Afghan parties might be persuaded to listen
to the call of the international community to work out a
political settlement. Indeed, Japan could consider hosting a
meeting among them if and when such an offer would
assist in bringing the parties to the negotiating table.

 

It may also be important to consider, in conjunction
with such an approach, the possibility of organizing a
forum in which to examine what possibilities there are for
offering the hands of help and support to the Afghan
parties for post-conflict reconstruction and rehabilitation,
once the Afghan parties themselves demonstrate the
political will to achieve a settlement. Japan is prepared to
make an appropriate contribution in this regard.

Let me conclude my brief statement by reiterating
that, while the situation in Afghanistan is a problem that
concerns us all, there can be no real progress toward
peace until the Afghan parties themselves lay down their
arms and bring an end to the hostilities that are
devastating their country. The people of Afghanistan
should be entitled to have the chance to realize what it is
like to live in peace, and to strive for that realization with
the help of the international community.

