Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting and for the
opportunity to address the Council. Malaysia welcomes
today's meeting, which aims to tackle head-on the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.

I wish to reiterate Malaysia's strong and unequivocal
condemnation of all acts, methods and practices by
individuals and groups that employ terror to coerce
others and strike fear in their hearts. In line with our
long-standing position against terrorism, we fully
support resolution 2178 (2014), adopted by the Council
today and which Malaysia co-sponsored. We support
the resolution's aims to strengthen and galvanize
international action to combat terrorism in general and
the scourge of foreign terrorist fighters in particular.

In the past, Malaysia grappled with terrorism on
its soil, when terrorists stoked fear and hatred among
the population as they sought to assert the claim that
communism was superior to democracy and religion.
In countering that threat to national sovereignty, peace
and stability, the Government undertook massive and
broad-based measures informed by the need to win the
hearts and minds of the people. The Government's aim
was simple: to assure the population that they and their
children and future generations would have a decent,
secure life and a promising future and would not join
the ranks of the terrorists. In Malaysia's experience,
such an approach has worked. My delegation believes
that the hearts-and-minds approach must be fully
considered in our common endeavour to combat the
scourge of the foreign terrorist fighters.

The growing foreign terrorist fighters phenomenon
suggests that ideologies rooted in violent extremism
have spread around the globe and are continuing to do so.
In that regard, Malaysia is of the View that the existing
mechanisms under the United Nations framework,
including the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations and the relevant Security Council
Sanctions Committees, among others, could be further
strengthened with a view to effectively addressing
terrorism and violent extremism in all their aspects. In
recent months, details have emerged with regard to the
possible participation of a small number of Malaysian
nationals who have gone abroad and reportedly joined
the so-called Islamic State (IS) in the mistaken belief
that doing so would serve the cause ofjustice andjihad.
I wish to unequivocally stress that, for Malaysia, there
is nothing Islamic about kidnapping, raping, torturing
and murdering civilians. We do not condone or support
the involvement of Malaysian nationals who commit
terrorist acts or participate in conflicts abroad.

For its part, the Malaysian Government authorities
have designated IS as a terrorist organization and will
spare no effort in acting against its members. We have
also taken steps to review certain aspects ofthe legal and
policy frameworks with a view to further strengthening
counter-terrorism capabilities at the national level.

Malaysia strongly believes that terrorism needs
to be addressed in a comprehensive manner, not
necessarily through the use of force alone. Countering
terrorism effectively requires a multifaceted approach
in addressing the underlying factors that support
terrorism. On that note, Malaysia believes that there
is a serious need to look into the support mechanisms,
including the funding and supply of weapons that
sustain foreign terrorist fighters.

Malaysia takes this opportunity to reiterate its
call for greater cooperation and understanding among
cultures, religions and civilizations. Some years ago,
Malaysia called for the establishment of a global
movement of moderates in order to drown out the voices
of the extremists and their ilk.

In the light of the threat posed by the foreign
terrorist fighter phenomenon and the need for a
concerted and coordinated effort to counter it, Malaysia
believes that it is imperative now, more than ever, that
the Global Movement of Moderates be embraced by the
international community.

