Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the Jordanian presidency for its initiative in
convening today's meeting. We also thank Foreign
Minister Judeh for presiding over today's meeting
during his visit to New York.

China has listened attentively to the briefings by
Under-Secretary-General Amos, High Commissioner
Guterres, Special Envoy Jolie Pitt and Executive
Director Cousin.

The Syrian crisis has now entered its fifth year.
Over the past four years, war has been waged in Syria,
resulting in profound suffering to vast numbers of
civilians, in particular vulnerable groups such as women
and children, and leading to serious consequences,
including a deteriorating humanitarian situation and an
exploding number of refugees.

Presently, the Syrian crisis has expanded well
beyond its domestic borders, thus posing a serious
threat to the peace and stability of its neighbouring
countries and the region at large. The international
community has made unremitting efforts to address
the grim security and humanitarian situation in Syria.
Its neighbours - Jordan, Lebanon, Turkey, Iraq and
Egypt - have accepted nearly 4 million Syrian refugees
and provided them with basic services. The United
Nations and other humanitarian agencies have overcome
myriad difficulties in conducting humanitarian relief
operations in Syria and the neighbouring countries,
in an effort to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian
people. International donors have been most generous
in lending support to the relevant countries and the
United Nations. Last month, at the Syrian humanitarian
assistance donor conference held in Kuwait, donors
pledge contributions totalling $3.6 billion. China
appreciates those efforts.

Rome was not built in a day. For the Syrian crisis to
develop into what it has become today is the result of a
combination of convoluted factors involving historical
grievances and present-day frictions. Therefore,
a solution simply cannot be found overnight. The
international community should take a comprehensive
approach to try to find a practical, feasible and long-
lasting solution - one that tackles both the symptoms
and root causes and mitigates the pressures and the
burdens on Syria, its neighbours and the Middle East
region. For that purpose, China wishes to make the
following three points.

First, the top priority is to step up assistance, based
upon the needs of host countries. At present, the Syrian
humanitarian situation is continuing to deteriorate.
Syria and its neighbours have increasing needs for
humanitarian assistance. The range of that assistance
has expanded from the traditional forms - material
and funding - to infrastructure, education, social
order, border control and so forth. In accordance
with the priorities as decided by the host countries,
the international community should extend targeted
support, to match the needs of the host countries, with
an eye on coordination. The assistance efforts of the
international community should abide by the guiding
principles of the United Nations on humanitarian
relief, while respecting the will of the host countries.
China calls upon the donors to promptly honour their
commitments in full so as to mitigate the pressures
resulting from the shortage of funds facing the United
Nations.

Secondly, pushing for a political solution to the
Syrian question is the fundamental way out. The
international community should unswervingly pursue
a political solution, give full play to the mediation
of the United Nations as the main channel, and lend
full support to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, and
his Special Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, in their
mediation efforts, while promoting an immediate end
to hostilities and violence among the Syrian parties.
Through negotiations and dialogue, a middle way should
be found that is in keeping with the circumstances
in Syria, while accommodating the various interests,
thereby providing a definitive solution to the Syrian
question. During this process, it is imperative to
consistently comply with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations as well as the
basic norms governing international relations, while
maintaining the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria.

Thirdly, stepping up counter-terrorism efforts is
key. Lately, terrorist organizations and extremist forces
have been ravaging and wreaking havoc in Syria and
other countries, harming and killing people while
deliberately blocking the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and interrupting the implantation of
ceasefire agreements. As such, they have become the
main reason for the deteriorating situation in Syria.
The international community should give full play to
the central role of the United Nations and the Security
Council while categorically stepping up its efforts to
roll back and fight against terrorism.

China attaches great importance to the humanitarian
situation in Syria. We sympathize with the Syrian
people for their suffering. Through various channels
and in various ways, we have extended material and
cash support to the Syrian people, including assistance
for refugees outside Syria, in amounts totalling over
¥230 million. In accordance with the developments in
the situation and actual needs, China will continue to
lend assistance to the Syrian people, including Syrian
refugees outside the country, to the best of its ability.
Together with the international community, we will
vigorously push for a political solution to the Syrian
question and contribute to realizing a comprehensive,
sustainable and proper solution to it.

