Mr. Pahad (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this crucial open debate
focusing on the situation between Palestine and Israel.

The unresolved matter of Palestine is nothing
less than a gaping wound in the international political
landscape - one that the Council has failed to
adequately address for over 70 years. The Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is as old as the Organization, and it
therefore deserves to be a top priority of this organ. The
resolution of that long-standing conflict will contribute
to the stability of the region. However, the recent events
in Gaza can be seen as symptomatic of the lack of will
and commitment to a political process for the resolution
of the conflict. We therefore urge the Security Council
to redouble its efforts towards minimizing the internal
differences that have long made it impossible for the
Council to shoulder its charter responsibility with
regard to this matter.

Every year that goes by appears to make peace
even more elusive. New generations of Israelis and
Palestinians grow up knowing nothing but the conflict
between themselves. In all this time, new challenges,
as we have seen recently with the developments
pertaining to the status of Jerusalem, Israeli illegal
settlement activity and the recent events in Gaza, have
compounded the crisis.

South Africa is deeply concerned by the excessive
use of force by the Israeli military on the frustrated
people of Gaza who were protesting the blockade
imposed on their territory. As the conflict continues and
their political and humanitarian situation worsens, the
Palestinian people feel a constant existential threat as a
metaphorical and literal wall closes in around them. It
can only be expected that they would want to resist such
a constant threat and have their voices heard. While
those voices continue to be ignored, the parameters of
what we have come to accept as a two-State solution are
beginning to dwindle. Indeed, a peace process that is
stagnant without any progress gradually loses the trust
of the people who depend so desperately upon it. That
loss of trust will be the death knell for the prospects of
peace in the region.

It is frightening to imagine the alternative to a
political solution to the conflict. While the occupation of
Palestine continues, there will continue to be resistance
and the entrenchment of hatred between peoples who
have a shared history and have the potential to be
peaceful neighbours, benefiting from mutual support
and cooperation.

Today, during the centenary year ofthe birth of late
President Nelson Mandela, we must draw on his legacy
and those of countless other leaders in our own country,
which have resulted in South Africa benefiting from the
reconciliation of its people and overcoming entrenched
divisions among people. With that in mind, South
Africa supports all initiatives towards a negotiated
solution to the crisis, including the recent proposal by
the President of the State of Palestine, Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas, to convene an international summit to pursue a
means of salvaging the two-State solution.

South Africa reaffirms that the central
responsibility for attaining peace is primarily in the
hands of the Palestinians and Israelis themselves. We,
as part of the international community, should support
and encourage the parties towards that endeavour. The
international legal framework for those negotiations has
already been set. Those include the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Plan and the Quartet road
map, to name a few. Unilateral action, particularly
on final-status issues, undermines the revival of a
peace process. Those include the building of illegal
settlements and the recognition by some Member States
of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.

Before I conclude, there are two additional issues
of concern that we wish to raise.

The first issue is the plight of children in military
detention in Israel. While the immediate injustice of
those abuses cannot be overstated, it is the psychological
and developmental harm to those young individuals
that is most troubling. Furthermore, such abuses merely
seek to reinforce hatred between the two sides to the
conflict, prolonging the crisis and doing nothing to
reconcile the parties.

The second issue is the dire financial situation
faced by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
The continued generous support of the international
community is necessary to ensure the Agency's
continuity of services, and is especially needed in
light of the recurrent and severe financial shortfalls
that continue to affect its programmes. We would like
to emphasize that the funding for UNRWA should be
sustainable, predictable and sufficient. For its part,
South Africa will continue to support UNRWA through
its financial contributions.

Finally, we believe that the commitment and good
faith of all Council members are utterly essential
if we are to mend the open wound that continues to
harm generations of innocent people. We hope that
these quarterly debates, which unfortunately have so
far yielded no outcome or action, will very soon be
converted into concrete and practical steps towards
a political dialogue for a durable and sustainable
resolution, with a negotiated solution based on the
relevant United Nations resolutions. The resolution of
the situation in Palestine will be the ultimate test of
the ability of the United Nations to fulfil its central
purpose of saving succeeding Palestinian and Israeli
generations from the scourge of war. Israel will never
have peace and security if the legitimate right to self-
determination is not given to the Palestinian people.

