Mrs. Haley (United States ofAmerica): Iwould like
to thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. Before I go to
the main point of my remarks, I want to emphasize one
item that Mr. Mladenov touched upon. In the past three
months, the terrorist flaming swastika kites that have
crossed over from Gaza into Israel have damaged or
destroyed 7,500 acres of land. Israel is a small country.
The equivalent proportion of land in the United States
would be the size of the entire state of Connecticut. In
France, the equivalent would be 10 times the entire land
area of the city of Paris. That is no small thing. If it
were happening to any of our countries, there would be
quite a lot of discussion of it. While the international
media pays very careful attention to every step Israel
takes in self-defence, we must not lose sight of the very
real damage that is being done to Israel by terrorist
attacks coming from Gaza.

The main purpose of my remarks today is to shed
light on another important and frequently overlooked
issue when it comes to the Palestinian community. If
one were to judge every nation's commitment to the
Palestinian people by the words that are spoken in the
Security Council and in the General Assembly, one
would come away with an extremely distorted picture.
Here at the United Nations - thousands of miles away
from Palestinians, who do have real needs - there is
no end to the speeches on their behalf. Country after
country claims solidarity with the Palestinian people.
If those words were useful in the schools, hospitals and
streets of their communities, the Palestinian people
would not be facing the desperate conditions that we
are discussing here today. Talk is cheap. No group
of countries is more generous with their words than
the Palestinians' Arab neighbours and other States
members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
But all of the words spoken here in New York do not
feed, clothe or educate a single Palestinian child. All
they do is get the international community riled up.

Let us take the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), for example. Last year, Iran's contribution
to UNRWA was zero. Algeria's contribution to UNRWA
was zero, and Tunisia's contribution to UNRWA
was zero. Other countries did provide some funding.
Pakistan gave $20,000. Egypt gave $20,000, and Oman
gave $668,000. Now, it is not only the Arab and Islamic
countries that warrant highlighting. Other countries
talk a big game about the Palestinian cause. In 2017,
China provided $350,000 to UNRWA. Russia provided
$2 million to UNRWA. Moving up the list, Turkey gave
$6.7 million. Kuwait gave $9 million, and the United
Arab Emirates gave $12.8 million.

Again, if a nation's commitment to the Palestinian
people is judged by the words heard in this Chamber,
the conclusion might be drawn that the United States
has been less generous simply because we stand
proudly with our ally, Israel, here at the United Nations.
But once again, that conclusion would be entirely
false. Last year, while Algeria was providing nothing
to UNRWA and Turkey was providing $6.7 million,
the United States gave $364 million. That is 10 times
the combined amounts from every country that I
just named. Moreover, that is in addition to what the
American people give annually to the Palestinians in
bilateral assistance, which was another $300 million
just last year and averages more than a quarter-of-a-
billion dollars every year since 1993. Since that year,
the United States has provided over $6 billion in
bilateral assistance to Palestinians. How much have the
Arab countries - some of which are wealthy - given
to the Palestinians? It does not come anywhere close to
what the United States has done. Words at the United
Nations or actions on the streets and in the schools of
Palestinian communities, which matters more?

Judging by the vitriol that is directed towards the
United States from the Palestinian representatives,
including the one here today, and from some of their
allies, one might fairly conclude that our support is
unappreciated or unwelcome. Americans are very
generous people. We are humanitarian-oriented people,
and we continue to seek ways to help the Palestinian
people, whose plight is of genuine concern to us. But
we are not fools. If we extend a hand in friendship and
generosity, we do not expect our hand to be bitten. As
we extend our hand, we also expect others to extend
their hands as well.

Importantly, this is not an issue of funding
alone. Where are the Arab countries when it comes
to encouraging reconciliation between Palestinian
factions, which is essential to peace? Where are the
Arab countries when it comes to denouncing Hamas
terrorism? Where are the Arab countries when it comes
to supporting compromises that are necessary for peace?
Too often, the Arab countries give just enough money
and mouth just enough uncompromising words to stay
out of the crosshairs of Palestinian representatives.

But ifthey really cared about the Palestinian people,
they would not do that. Instead, they would condemn
extremism and they would put forth serious ideas for
compromises that could end the struggle and lead to a
better life for the Palestinian people. They would tell
the Palestinian leadership how foolish they look for
condemning a peace proposal they have not even seen
yet. The Palestinian leadership has been allowed to live
a false reality for too long, because Arab leaders are
afraid to tell them the truth. The United States is telling
the truth, because we do care about the Palestinian
people. But we should all recognize that Palestinians'
needs are not an American problem any more than they
are a Russian or French problem. And they are certainly
not more of an American problem than an Egyptian,
Saudi, Emirati or Turkish problem. So the next time we
have a meeting like this one in the Security Council or
the General Assembly and we hear speech after speech
about the plight of the Palestinian people, I would ask
those who are making those speeches to examine what
their countries are doing to help besides speechmaking.
It is time for the States of the region, in particular, to
step up and really help the Palestinian people instead of
just making speeches thousands of miles away.

