Mr. Mbeki: I can assure you, Mr. President, there
is no problem in Johannesburg; the failure is in the
lines.

The African Union High-Level Implementation
Panel for Sudan would like to thank the Council for
giving us the opportunity to address the Council for the
second time this year.

As the Council is aware, three of the urgent
challenges facing the Sudan are, one, the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA); two, negotiating the post-
referendum arrangement; and three, achieving a just
and lasting peace in Darfur.

With regard to the first challenge, we would like
to confirm that the registration of voters for the
Southern Sudan referendum started yesterday. We are
convinced that everybody concerned is determined to
ensure that the entire referendum process proceeds in a
manner that will contribute to the credibility of the
referendum. As part of this process, the political
parties, including the National Congress Party (NCP)
and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM),
have acceded to the code of conduct prepared by our
Panel, which binds them to ensure free and fair
referendums and popular consultations. At the same
time, they have committed themselves to respecting the
outcome of the referendum.

To support the referendum process, the Panel will
sustain its close contact with the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission, the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS), the NCP, the Government of
the Sudan, the SPLM, the Government of the Southern
Sudan, the United Nations monitoring panel headed by
His Excellency Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, and the Political
Parties Council which is responsible for the
implementation of the code of conduct.

Secondly, during the week beginning Monday,
22 November, our Panel will facilitate negotiations
involving Their Excellencies President Omer Hassan
Al-Bashir and First Vice-President Salva Kiir Mayardit
to resolve the Abyei matter. These principals have
agreed that, with the assistance of our Panel, they will
do everything possible to reach an agreement on this
issue as a matter of urgency. In this context, we would
also like to take this opportunity to commend the
Sudan Council of Churches for the initiative it has
taken to convene an important meeting of the leaders
of the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya, which will be
held in about 10 days.

Thirdly, the Technical Ad Hoc Border Committee
will begin immediately to demarcate the North-South
border. Similarly, the political committee of the NCP
and the SPLM. is ready to begin discussions on the five
disputed areas along the border.

Fourthly, partners remain committed to
maintaining peace and are therefore using the
structures created by the CPA that involve UNMIS to
address all matters relating to the task of sustaining
peace and security. To assist in this regard, our Panel
maintains regular contact with the parties, as well as
with UNMIS.

As members of the Council know, our Panel
serves as the facilitator of the negotiations to conclude
the post-referendum arrangements, which we launched
on 10 July. And as the Council also knows, the
negotiations include such matters as security,
citizenship, oil and water resources, currency matters,
assets and liabilities, international treaties and
agreements. The parties have indeed been engaging
each other on these issues. However, our Panel is
concerned that the discussions are not proceeding at a
satisfactory pace. We will therefore convene a special
meeting with the parties before the end of this month to
agree on the ways and means by which we can
accelerate and better coordinate the negotiations.

In this regard, we would like to inform the
Council of the important meeting of the parties - the
SPLM. and the NCP - that our Panel convened in
Khartoum between 7 and 13 November at the request
of the parties, and which Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haile Menkerios and United States
Special Envoy Scott Gration and Ambassador
Princeton Lyman attended as observers. The meeting
agreed to a seminal document that contains, first, a

framework of principles that will guide the work of the
parties on all issues and inform the relations between
the North and Southern Sudan regardless of the
outcome of the Southern Sudan referendum. Secondly,
it contains decisions relating to the implementation of
the outstanding CPA matters, to which I have referred.
Thirdly, it contains decisions that will guide the
content of the negotiations relating to the post-
referendum arrangements.

The document, entitled "Framework for
Resolving Outstanding Issues Relating to the
Implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and the Future Relations of North and
South Sudan", will be completed, signed and published
once the negotiations on Abyei, which I have
mentioned, have been concluded.

Recent and current events in Darfur, especially
relating to the clashes between the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the rebel Justice and Equality Movement,
which the Secretary-General mentioned, have
underlined the need urgently to bring peace to Darfur.
In this context, I am certain that the Council is aware
of the decisions adopted at the 6 November meeting of
the Sudan Consultative Forum in Addis Ababa. I refer
here specifically to the decision that our Panel and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), supported by the Government of
Qatar, should, in December and ahead of the Southern
Sudan referendum, initiate a political process in Darfur
that would lead to the convening of an inclusive
Darfur-Darfur conference. The conference will base its
discussions on the outcomes of the Doha negotiations
and on other relevant documents, such as the report of
the African Union Panel on Darfur. It will take the
necessary decisions that would contribute to the
earliest possible conclusion of a global political
agreement on Darfur.

We have also agreed with the Government of the
Sudan that, in the meantime, it should take all
necessary action, in cooperation with UNAMID, to
improve the security situation in Darfur, to facilitate
the voluntary return of refugees and internally
displaced persons to their places of origin, and
therefore to begin to address issues of recovery and
development, and to address the issue of justice and
reconciliation. We believe that we will see progress in
all of these areas in the next few months.

We are pleased to inform the Council that both
President Al-Bashir and First Vice-President Salva Kiir
Mayardit have continued to extend full cooperation to
our Panel, driven by a shared determination to do
everything possible and necessary to address the
various Sudanese challenges. We trust that the Council
will convey a firm message of encouragement to them
as they work jointly and severally over the next few
months, which will be critical in determining the future
of the Sudan and, to that extent, the future of Africa.

As we have done in the past, we commend both
UNMIS and UNAMID for the valuable work they are
doing and reiterate our appreciation of the excellent
cooperation they consistently extend to our Panel.
Accordingly, we trust that the Council will continue to
provide them with such support as they may need.

