Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We would like to
express our gratitude to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for
his extensive briefing and for his team's efforts in
Afghanistan. We welcome the unanimous adoption of
the resolution 2274 (2016), extending the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for a year, and we thank the delegation of
Spain for a job well done. Ukraine aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered shortly by the observer of the
European Union (EU).

Ukraine is persuaded that robust peace can be
established in Afghanistan and that the only path to that
result is through a broad-based national reconciliation.
We are of the opinion that there is no viable alternative
to the National Unity Government and we deplore any
initiatives resulting in internal tensions that could put
Afghanistan's much desired stability at risk.

Like others, we commend the efforts of the recently
established Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the
Afghan Peace and Reconciliation Process to enable
the holding of early peace talks between the Taliban
factions and Afghan Government representatives. We
also call on members of the international community
with a degree of influence on the Taliban to use
it to encourage their earnest participation in early
peace negotiations.

We commend the Afghan Government's determination
to focus its efforts on resolving economic issues and
addressing the fiscal gap, poverty and unemployment,
as stipulated in the Self-Reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework, as well as to promote
regional economic cooperation. However, the ability
of the Government of Afghanistan to promote further
reforms, in particular in the economic sphere, and
to effectively confront the numerous challenges and
threats posed by the insurgency and the activities of
violent extremists, depends on the continued support
provided by the country's international partners.

In this regard, we look forward to the July 2016
NATO Conference in Warsaw to consider further
military support to Afghanistan and the 2016 Ministerial
Conference hosted by the EU in Brussels in October
2016, where renewed donor assistance to civilians will
be discussed. Nevertheless, we note that the extent of
the donor community's commitment to security and
development assistance to Afghanistan goes hand in
hand with the progress made by the Afghan Government
in advancing its reform and good-governance agenda.

Unfortunately, the efforts of the Afghan Government
and its international partners are overshadowed by the
overall deteriorating security situation in the country,
with the intensification of violence by the Taliban
movement and other terrorists and violent extremist
groups as well as the dangerously growing presence
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and its
affiliates. On the territories upon which the Taliban
and other violent extremist groups impose their cruel
terror, one can witness the alarming picture of flagrant
violations of human rights, the maltreatment of civilian
populations, summary executions, deliberate abuses
and continuing discrimination against women and
girls, as well as the use of child soldiers. That creates
an atmosphere of fear and terror in the entire region and
contributes to instability and prolongation of conflicts.

Ukraine condemns all violations of international
humanitarian law, in particular deliberate and
indiscriminate attacks against civilian objects,
internationally protected places, such as hospitals and
clinics, as well as humanitarian and health personnel,
thereby creating insurmountable difficulties for the
implementation of the international community's
humanitarian programmes in Afghanistan. We call on
all parties in Afghanistan to take measures to minimize
civilian casualties by taking all feasible precautions
in that regard. We also call on the Government of
Afghanistan to systematically investigate, with the
support of UNAMA, all violations of international
humanitarian law to ensure that all perpetrators are
held accountable, as well to ensure that the victims and
their families are provided with appropriate remedies.

Given the appalling practice of the recruitment
of children by the armed groups in the territory
of Afghanistan, we commend the Government's
commitment to ending and preventing grave violations
against children, namely, through the full and complete
implementation of the relevant action plan within the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, as well
as its pledge to the United Nations "Children, Not
Soldiers" campaign.

Ukraine is also highly concerned about the serious
threat that anti-personnel mines, explosive remnants
of war and improvised explosive devices pose to the
most vulnerable parts of the population, in particular
women and children, in Afghanistan. We are of the
opinion that the international community should
continue to enact relevant measures to prevent the
flow of weapons and military equipment to the Taliban
and other violent terrorist extremist groups. We also
consider it necessary for UNAMA, together with other
United Nations entities, such as the United Nations
Mine Action Support Team, to promote mine-risk
education programmes in order to reduce the risks
posed to civilians.

Ukraine, as a troop-contributing country to the
NATO-led Resolute Support Mission, commends its
national efforts in assisting Afghanistan in building
effective and viable national security forces. We call
on the United Nations and Afghanistan's international
partners not to relent in helping the country bring about
lasting peace, security and stability.

In conclusion, I would like to confirm Ukraine's
full support for Afghanistan's unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity and for its endeavours to combat the
scourge of international terrorism.

