Mr. Berml'idez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her detailed briefing. I also welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Relations of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Mr. Jorge Arreaza.

Uruguay is following with deep concern the
escalation in tensions in the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and the regrettable incidents that were
reported this past weekend, which led to the loss of
life and dozens of wounded. We believe that, now
more than ever, we must call for caution and restraint,
which must guide our actions so as to prevent a further
deterioration of the situation at a time when initiatives
are under way that seek to bring the parties together in
order to reach an understanding aimed at a reaching
peaceful and democratic solution to the current crisis.

The Montevideo Mechanism and the International
Contact Group are helping search for a peaceful and
negotiated solution to the conflict. The Montevideo
Mechanism calls for creating channels of dialogue that
would provide the conditions necessary for direct contact
and negotiation among stakeholders. The International
Contact Group also proposes a political, peaceful,
democratic and Venezuelan-owned solution. Both the
Montevideo Mechanism and the International Contact
Group held meetings in Montevideo on 7 February. In
that regard, we encourage exploring those pathways
and building others leading to understanding, while
sparing no effort to move forward in the search for a
solution fostering the stability and the well-being of the
Venezuelan people and the restoration of peace.

Uruguay reaffirms its position that there is no
other possible solution to the situation that Venezuela
is undergoing than one which is freely decided by the
Venezuelans themselves. An environment of dialogue
and negotiations, such as the one we are advocating
for, would naturally lead to the holding of free and
credible elections with reliable international oversight.
That will be the best way to safeguard against a
potential scale of bloodshed that we all want to avoid.
My country will continue to make every effort within
its means to encourage dialogue and understanding,
including with regard to the conditions necessary
for the delivery of humanitarian aid on Venezuelan
territory in order to alleviate the situation affecting the
country's population. We believe that the delivery of
such aid must be carried out in strict compliance with
the principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality and
independence. To that end, Uruguay will continue to
adhere strictly to the same principles that it has always
abided by in its international conduct, namely, full
respect for international law, the peaceful settlement of
disputes, the sovereign equality of States, the principle
of non-intervention and respect for human rights.

As a democratic and profoundly pacifist country,
Uruguay will always opt for dialogue and concerted
action and will exert its maximal effort to find apeaceful
and negotiated solution to this crisis. In his statement
yesterday at the opening meeting of the fortieth session
of the Human Rights Council in Geneva, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay, Mr. Rodolfo Nin
Novoa, emphasized,

"Uruguay is not willing to contribute to increasing
tensions and polarization with regard to positions,
given the very serious risk ofa civilian and military
confrontation, including foreign intervention,
which we reject in the strongest terms".

We therefore urge all the parties involved to decrease
tensions and renew dialogue and negotiations that will
allow for restoring stability and peace to all Venezuelans
without exception.

