Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Like many other
speakers before us, we welcome this open debate on an
issue that is of singular importance for global security
as well as for the future of this Organization. It would
hardly be appropriate to say that discussions on the
topic before us have never been held before - quite
the contrary, every aspect has been covered from every
possible angle. But not in this format and not in this
room, and this is what is needed, since any action of
the Council on this issue requires the broadest possible
consensus.

There can be no doubt that all Security Council
resolutions, on Iraq or otherwise, must be implemented
in full. Defiance and non-compliance with legally
binding decisions undermine the effectiveness, as well
as the credibility, of the Organization as a whole and
must, therefore, not be accepted. It is thus imperative
that the Council act with common resolve to enable the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) to resume the work that the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) was
never able to finish, and that Iraq extend unconditional
cooperation and provide full and unrestricted access to
all sites and facilities UNMOVIC chooses to visit. The
destruction and removal of all weapons of mass
destruction, as mandated by the Council 12 years ago,
must finally be carried out. While a new resolution to
this end is not strictly needed from a legalistic point of
View, it is at this point certainly a political necessity.
Given the implications of the present situation, clarity
of the rules governing compliance by Iraq will be of
the essence. Furthermore, these rules must be designed
in a manner that ensures that the inspection process
remains credible at all times.

If ensuring full compliance with its decisions is
indispensable for the Council's credibility, the Council
is, at the same time, also facing another challenge: as
an Organization designed to promote peace and, in
particular, to provide for the peaceful settlement of
disputes, it must do everything possible, and be seen as
doing everything possible, to ensure compliance with
and implementation of its decisions without resorting
to the use of force. Military action should, therefore,
only be contemplated if all other means have failed and
non-compliance by Iraq has been clearly established.

It is the Security Council that provides for the
terms for the inspection regime, and the Council is
therefore the arbiter of compliance and
implementation, based on the findings of UNMOVIC.
In accordance with the Charter, it is also the Council
that must authorize the use of force.

There are clearly enormous consequences of the
use of armed force in Iraq, which the Council has to
weigh carefully before making such a decision. First,
there is the risk of further instability in an already
deeply troubled region, the existing instability being
caused not least by the non-implementation of Security
Council resolutions. But there is also the question of
what involvement or action the Council foresees for the
time after a possible armed intervention. Given these
questions and the magnitude of what is at stake, it is of
crucial importance that the Council acts with the
broadest possible unity and the strongest possible
support from the membership as a whole. This - and
only this - can provide for the necessary political
legitimacy.

