Ms. Hoppe: It gives me great pleasure to
introduce to the Security Council the report of the
Secretary-General on small arms, contained in
document S/2008/258, which is being submitted
pursuant to the Security Council's request to the
Secretary-General in document S/PRST/2007/24 to
submit on a biennial basis, beginning in 2008, a report
containing his analysis, observations and
recommendations, as well as his observations on the
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects.

The Security Council's open debate today once
again underscores the importance that the Council
attaches to this issue, which cuts across most of the
issues that are on its agenda, be they the ongoing
armed conflicts in various parts of the world, children
in armed conflict, terrorism, drug trafficking, cross-
border issues, the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, or others. The threat to international peace
and security posed by the uncontrolled trade in small
arms and their excessive accumulation and
proliferation cannot be overemphasized.

We have all witnessed how those weapons have
been used to maim and kill, plunder and rape, instil
fear and insecurity, block humanitarian aid, hold
communities at ransom and destroy the social fabric of
entire countries, and how their excessive accumulation
and misuse have hindered stability and development in
every way imaginable.

The report discusses various aspects of the issue
of small arms, with an emphasis on the negative impact
that illicit small arms have on security, human rights
and social and economic development, in particular in
areas of crisis and post-conflict situations. It also
analyses global instruments of relevance in stemming
the uncontrolled proliferation of small arms, including
the United Nations Programme of Action.

In addressing the issue of small arms, the report
places particular emphasis on fostering enhanced
cooperation and assistance among national authorities;
enhancing synergies between various bodies within the
08-32354
United Nations involved in the issue, including the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Peacebuilding Commission; exploring possibilities for
further improving the monitoring of Security Council
arms embargoes; developing forms of standardization
of end-user certificates; drawing urgent attention to the
destruction of surplus ammunition stockpiles and to
stockpile management; encouraging the development
of measurable goals for reducing armed violence; and
building capacity for States that need it.

The report underscores the importance of
developing practical exchanges between the Security
Council and the General Assembly on stemming the
illicit flows of arms and ammunition to areas of crisis
and conflict. In this regard, the Secretary-General
considers it promising that the Council has requested a
report on the issue on a biennial basis following the
same two-year cycle as that of the meetings held
pursuant to the Programme of Action.

Furthermore, the report draws attention to the fact
that the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms
could be instrumental for the Security Council and for
efforts undertaken in the framework of the Programme
of Action, since it has opened the possibility for States
to report on man-portable air defence systems and on
small arms.

Finally, the report presents a total of
13 recommendations with respect to the negative
effects of illicit small arms. Six of the
recommendations directly address the Security
Council, and it may wish to consider them, where it
deems relevant to do so. The first of these is to
encourage a strengthened cooperation between the
Council's sanctions monitoring groups, peacekeeping
missions, States and regional and international
organizations. The second is to strengthen the
synergies between the Council's arms embargoes and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts.
The third is to encourage States and peacekeeping
missions to use the new International Tracing
Instrument and INTERPOL's global police
communication system. The fourth is to increasingly
apply its practice of linking arms embargo exceptions
with security sector reform. The final recommendation
that directly addresses the Security Council is for the
Council to encourage States to enhance their efforts to
certify and standardize end-user certificates.
08-32354

The Secretary-General is encouraged by the
continued efforts of the Security Council to address the
challenges posed by illicit small arms and light
weapons in the context of matters under the Council's
consideration. For his part, the Secretary-General is
committed to further improving coordination within the
United Nations system with a view to strengthening its
actions on issues related to small arms. In this regard,
he has identified reviving the United Nations
Coordinating Action on Small Arms (CASA)
mechanism as one of his priorities in the field of
disarmament this year.

It is my hope that this report will be helpful to the
Council and that it will serve to facilitate the Council's
further consideration of the issue of small arms. I also
hope that today's meeting will enhance the
determination of Member States to strengthen their
implementation of the Programme of Action.

