Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Chambas, for his briefing today and recognize and
acknowledge the very important work he does, of which
today he listed the very important positive developments
in the region. I know and I would like to pay tribute to
the fact that his discreet, delicate hand has played a part
in supporting many of those developments. So, I thank
him again for that.

The United Nations regional offices have an
important role to play in delivering on the ambition of
the Secretary-General, and supported by the Council,
to put prevention at the heart of our work. As we have
heard, the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS) continues to carry out a number
of important preventive functions, in particular though
the use of its good offices. UNOWAS plays a critical
role by contributing to the strategic and integrated
analysis of the opportunities, risks and challenges
faced by national and local authorities in their efforts
to sustain peace. I think Mr. Chambas has presented
many of those today. I would like to say that we strongly
support that work and would like to see it replicated in
other regions.

A conflict prevented rarely makes the front pages,
and success stories often go unnoticed. However,
while political tensions continue in some countries
of West Africa and the Sahel, it is important that we
acknowledge positive developments and reforms in the
region, such as in Liberia, The Gambia and Burkina
Faso, as we have heard today. The Council and the
United Nations should seize opportunities to support
the region in consolidating democratic practices
and sustaining inclusive economic development and
growth. UNOWAS also has an important role to play
in that regard.

I would like to take just one minute to mention
Liberia again, as my colleague from Cote d'Ivoire did. I
think it is very important that we commend the country
for the peaceful, transparent, free and fair election
process that has just been concluded. We acknowledge
the important supportive role played by the region
and the United Nations, including by former President
Obasanjo of Nigeria and again Special Representative
Chambas. We look forward to continuing our support to
Liberia as it moves to a new chapter of its development,
including through the Peacebuilding Commission.

As we ask UNOWAS to do more - including in
support of the transitions from peacekeeping missions
to non-mission settings in Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire and
in support of regional efforts to combat terrorism, and
so on - we must also ensure that adequate resources
are available to it to carry out those tasks.

Many of the challenges facing the countries of the
region - terrorism, transnational crime, humanitarian
crises, increasing competition for scarce resources,
including as a result of climate change - show no
respect for national borders. Only sustained and
holistic approaches that take into account the root
causes of conflict and instability in the region, and the
linkages between them can lead to long-term solutions.
The ongoing cooperation between UNOWAS and other
regional organizations provides the potential for the
development of such approaches. The decision taken
at the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Summit in December that ECOWAS and
UNOWAS would work together on the role of changing
transhumance patterns as they relate to a potential
conflict between herders and farmers and conflict
dynamics across the region is a good example of
such cooperation.

In conclusion, I once again want to thank the Special
Representative for his briefing today and assure him of
our continued very strong support.

