Mr. Morjane (spoke in French): At the outset, I
wish to express my gratitude and thanks for the great
honour of being allowed to participate in this open
meeting devoted to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is further evidence of the Council's interest
in settling the conflict that has shaken that country,
which is essential for peace in Africa.

The historic visit of an important Security
Council delegation, led by Ambassador Levitte, to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region last
May, as well as the Council's regular meetings and
consultations on the situation there, are striking
demonstrations of its commitment and tireless
determination to spare no effort to support and
accompany the people of the Congo and all the peoples
of the region on the long and difficult road to peace
and harmony.

As the mission relevantly noted following its visit
on the ground, the prospects and real opportunities for
a successful conclusion to the concerted efforts to
restore peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and throughout the region have never
been as great as they are today. Respect for the
ceasefire, at least between the signatories; the
disengagement and redeployment of forces, although
not fully accomplished; the political changes in
Kinshasa; preparations for the inter-Congolese
dialogue; and the deployment of military contingents of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) are
certainly positive signs of that favourable situation.

However, we must also note that peace is not yet
certain and that there will undoubtedly be pitfalls and
obstacles along the way. The recalcitrance of certain
parties and the temptation to preserve the status quo are
indications of the anxieties and fears concerning the
difficulties threatening peace. In the immediate future,
it will be crucial for all parties to demonstrate restraint
and a spirit of compromise and responsibility by
adhering strictly to the ceasefire and by refraining from
taking any action and act that could contribute to the
deterioration of the situation. Only the pursuit of the
dialogue and effective cooperation to strengthen the
climate of trust between the parties will make it
possible to overcome the reluctance, fears and doubts
of the parties concerning each other's true will and
commitment. All of the parties must transcend mistrust
and resentment to build trust and peace through
dialogue.

It is therefore with satisfaction and hope that we
perceive the continuation of contact and dialogue
among the leaders of the region. It is in that context
that we see the initiative of the Secretary-General to
bring Presidents Kagame and Kabila together at
Lusaka, at the margins of the summit of the
Organization of African Unity. This dialogue and
exchange should be pursued without fail, because
cooperation and understanding between the leaders are
the only effective way to identify viable arrangements
to ensure the peaceful coexistence between the peoples
in the region by addressing together the factors of
instability and violence that hinder development and
progress.

The issue of the armed groups whose attacks and
Violent actions, especially in Kivu, have threatened the
peace efforts urgently requires a visionary strategy with
a View in particular to establishing an effective
ceasefire throughout Congolese territory, as well as the
remobilization of all parties in the implementation of
their obligations in accordance with the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
neighbours, Rwanda and Uganda in particular, must
show political will and an unwavering commitment to
reconciling security concerns and requirements for
regional stability with the fundamental need to work
for the rehabilitation of the territorial integrity and
unity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Not
acting in this way to restore the hope for peace will
make the present moment a mere lull before an
escalation of Violence and a resumption of hostilities,
which would be fatal for peace. This imposes on all
parties not only the pressing obligation to continue to
respect the ceasefire, to refrain from any action that
would create a climate of tension or engender Violence,
including attacks by armed groups, and especially to
cooperate with MONUC frankly and without
hesitation.

All of the parties must stop creating difficulties,
obstructions and obstacles by making their respect for
their commitments dependent on conditions or
demands intended only to delay. The frank cooperation
and facilitation that the parties to the peace process
must provide MONUC in order to contribute to the
effectiveness of its deployment and its operations
certainly include firm and credible guarantees for the
security and freedom of movement of the civilian and
military personnel of the Mission. I must remind the
parties that this also includes the need for them to show
good faith and to build mutual trust, not only by
favouring consultation and dialogue, as we have
indicated, but also by refraining from using delaying
tactics and making extreme or threatening declarations.
The preparations for the plan for the disarmament of
the armed groups, which we call disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration, repatriation or
resettlement (DDRRR), as well as the preparations for
the plan for the withdrawal of foreign forces, require
the total cooperation of the parties with MONUC and
the Joint Military Commission.

Allow me to welcome the initiative of the
Ugandan Government, which has set up a partial
withdrawal plan for its troops and has begun to
implement it. We would also like to welcome the
willingness recently expressed by Namibia to proceed
with the withdrawal of its troops from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the coming months.

For MONUC, Security Council resolution 1355
(2001) is the framework and plan for all of these future
activities for the next stage. The disarmament of armed
groups, the withdrawal of foreign forces, the
demilitarization of Kisangani, the freedom of river
navigation - all of these objectives have been set for
MONUC. Certainly, when all of these actions begin to
be implemented, along with the start of the inter-
Congolese dialogue, the point of no return to war may
have been achieved. Peace can be lasting only if it is
accompanied by a joint project between former
belligerents. We all should devote ourselves now to the
design of such a project, in order to make the natural
resources that fuel the war today factors of economic
cooperation and necessary, indivisible common
interest. I am convinced that water, the source of life
and energy, could be for the countries of the Great
Lakes today what coal and steel were for the Europe of
yesteryear.

Finally, I would like to welcome the efforts of
President Masire, the facilitator, and his team. I
fervently hope that they will manage to begin the
dialogue on 20 August, as planned. The success of the
peace process depends on it.

I will soon have to leave MONUC, as you, Mr.
President, just announced and as the Secretary-General
has confirmed. I would like to thank you for the very
kind words you expressed to me. Having to leave
MONUC for pressing personal reasons, I would like to
ask for your patience as I publicly and solemnly
address a few words of thanks to those who have
helped me to carry out this difficult but exciting
mission that the Secretary-General did me the honour
of entrusting to me. I can begin only by thanking the
members of the Council for the unwavering support
they have given me, which allowed me, especially at
the most difficult times, to continue to believe that this
mission was not impossible. I would like to express my
utmost gratitude.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
who gave me this great opportunity to serve two causes
that are very dear to me: peace and Africa. I hope that I
was able to measure up to his confidence. I would like
to assure him that I have been proud to be his Special
Representative.

I could not have accomplished my mandate
without the trust and cooperation of all parties, who
even in moments of uncertainty and disagreement have
never let me down, whether within the Political
Committee or in our bilateral relations. For that, I will
be eternally grateful.

This is also an opportunity for me to thank my
Government for having allowed me to carry out this
mission and fully benefit from Tunisia's policy of
moderation and tolerance, for which it is known in
Africa and throughout the world. I would also like to
mention with great gratitude the diplomatic corps in
Kinshasa and my colleagues from the United Nations
system for the unconditional support and the friendly
welcome I received from them. Without their active
solidarity, the peace process would not exist today. I
would also like to thank my colleagues in the
Secretariat, particularly those from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, for their support and
cooperation. I must also mention with great emotion
the Congolese, all Congolese, of every social category,
who have done me the kindness of showing me their
confidence and support in various ways. I hope I have
not let them down. I will remember them warmly and
will maintain the hope of seeing their great country
soon regain the unity of its territory and peace with all
its neighbours.

I shall conclude with a few words for those
without whom my presence here would have no
meaning, those who have built this Mission and who,
in the field, create a real chance for peace every day. I
would like to mention all of my colleagues in
MONUC, both civilians and military personnel, from
the ordinary soldiers to the Force Commander, General
Diallo. I would like to express my sincere gratitude and
loyalty to them.

