Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Judge Jorda, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) for his report and his briefing. The
Chinese Government believes that the independence
and impartiality of the ICTY, as an organ of
international criminal justice, are extremely important.
The Tribunal should not be affected by international
politics and other factors; yet it has become a political
tool. The authority of the ICTY can be ensured only
through its independence and impartiality. Only in this
way can the work of the ICTY withstand the test of
history.

In this regard, there are many areas of the ICTY
that need to be improved, which is one of the problems
facing the ICTY. We hope that the ICTY will become a
real, independent and impartial organ of international
justice; it is not one now because it is affected too
much by politics. Some representatives just gave
examples that I will not repeat. I believe my criticism
is constructive. I hope that the ICTY will work towards
becoming more independent and impartial.

Of course, we know that the ICTY faces other
problems, as was mentioned by Judge Jorda. It faces a
lack of trial capacity, which seriously constrains the
trial process. In order to ensure the rights of the
accused to a speedy and fair trial, it is necessary to
consider taking appropriate measures to speed up the
trial process. We are very gratified by the assessment
report submitted by the Expert Group appointed by the
Secretary-General. This report provides a detailed
analysis of the operations of the ICTY and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and
includes specific recommendations and measures that
warrant our further serious consideration.

In his report and briefing, Judge Jorda made
reference to the establishment of the pool of ad [item
judges in order to address unforeseen trial needs. This
is a very interesting idea that might be helpful in
expediting the trial process. Adding ad [item judges
requires amendments to the statute. It also involves
many important legal and technical details and
resources. The Security Council cannot make hasty
decisions on this. Time is needed by all sides to further
study the opinion of the Expert Group and the report
submitted by President Jorda on behalf of the judges
and the Tribunal in order to find a definitive solution,
taking all factors into account. We are willing to
consider any measure that will help the Tribunal
administer justice and expedite the trial process.

In considering the option of adding ad [item
judges, we believe that equitable geographic
distribution and balance among the world's major legal
systems should be considered. The proper way to select
the ad [item judges is by election by the General
Assembly. As for the cost of ad [item judges, various
options should be seriously considered on the basis of
the opinion of the Expert Group. Furthermore, there
should be equal opportunity in selecting ad [item
judges to participate in trial work.

As for the streamlining of the pre-trial process,
we have noted that the Tribunal has been carrying out
appropriate amendments and adjustments to its Rules
of Procedure and Evidence, in accordance with the
opinion of the Expert Group.

However, in carrying out any amendment, the
Tribunal should strictly abide by its statute and the
resolutions of the Security Council. As for the pre-trial
stages, practical administrative work can be handled by
the Trial Chambers' senior legal officers, under strict
and clear mandate, while the Trial Chambers closely
monitor them in this regard. Efficiency should not be
achieved at the expense of the strict conduct of the trial
procedure and the fairness of the trial.

In conclusion, please allow me to express my
thanks again to Judge Jorda, the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, for his work.

