Ms. Marcaillou (spoke in French): I am honoured
and pleased to be present among members to brief the
Security Council today on an unusual angle for the
Council on the situation in Syria. Allow me to thank the
Council for the opportunity to share information that
the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) can
contribute to its deliberations.

(spoke in English)

I want to begin by affirming the full commitment of
the UnitedNations Mine Action Service to alleviating the
suffering of the people of Syria, where a humanitarian
crisis is further exacerbated by the contamination of
explosive ordnance. In Syria, mine action is considered
by all stakeholders to be an immediate and essential
requirement to respond adequately to humanitarian
needs in the country. While the full scale of
contamination is not known, preliminary findings for
the 2020 Humanitarian Needs Overview indicate that
2,563 communities are contaminated with explosive
ordnance, affecting some 11.5 million people.

That is a dramatic increase from the 2019 figures,
when 10.2 million people were estimated to be at risk
in 1,980 communities. So far, the year 2019 recorded
an average of 184 explosive incidents a day. The impact
of explosive hazards on communities is immediate
and devastating and the extensive use of improvised
explosive devices further compounds the complexity
of the threat. Most times, explosive hazard incidents
result in serious injury and/or death, leading to long-
term physical and psychological trauma for survivors
and their families.

Based on available data, for each known explosive
accident, an average of 1.5 people are killed and two
people are physically injured, with approximately one
in three survivors suffering the amputation of at least
one limb. The number of casualties from explosive
hazards is increasingly putting pressure on an already
weakened and struggling health sector.

In addition, we must not forget the overwhelming
number of civilians suffering from eight years
of psychotrauma inflicted by explosions and the
consequences that that kind of trauma will have, for
instance, on children's learning ability as well as on
individuals' behaviour, including community as well as
gender-based violence.

The explosive ordnance contamination affects
agricultural land, roads, homes and critical civilian
infrastructure, such as schools and health centres,
but also water and electricity plants in need of repair.
The contamination severely impacts the lives and
livelihoods of the population and further amplifies the
social and economic crisis.

Internally displaced persons fleeing violence
are among the most vulnerable, as are those who are
farming, herding and removing rubble - activities
reported to be among the most risk-prone activities in
Syria. Available reports show that about 50 per cent
of accidents take place in rural areas and one out of
every four accidents occurs in the immediate vicinity
of residential buildings.

By way of information, the truffle season is just
starting in the Aleppo governorate. That provides
one of the main incomes of communities in need. It
is extremely difficult to prevent people looking for an
income and a way of surviving from accessing rural
areas although they are contaminated. That is the
reality that we the United Nations see nearly every day
when we are operating in the country.

While men and boys are considered to be more
exposed to the direct immediate threat of explosive
incidents, women and girls are also affected by the
indirect impact linked to limitations in freedom
of movement and the exacerbation of underlying
vulnerabilities. Moreover, the death and injuries of men
and boys now compel women to increasingly take on
their husbands' former activities, thereby increasing
their exposure to the threat of explosives.

During my mission to Syria earlier this month, all
members of the Damascus-based humanitarian country
team and the mine action sub-sector affirmed that
humanitarian access is impeded by the contamination
of a wide variety of explosive ordnance.

During my visit to Aleppo, I personally witnessed
the level of destruction and contamination of areas
where people come back to live when, together with
my colleagues from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and UNICEF, based in Aleppo,
we also visited damaged and destroyed schools, where
children had been recently killed and wounded by
explosive ordnance when they had just run back to
school to play.

UNMAS has been supporting the humanitarian
mine action sector in Syria since 2016 at the request of
the Resident Humanitarian Coordinator at the time and
in line with resolution 2165 (2014). In October 2018,
UNMAS opened its Damascus office, and in January
2019, we were ready with Syria-specific material and
gender and age-tailored curricula to complement the
explosive-hazard-risk education of UNICEF.

Since then, UNMAS has been working towards
the expansion of humanitarian mine action activities
across Syria. The objective of UNMAS is to reduce the
impact of explosive hazards on the civilian population,
including by providing overall coordination of the
humanitarian mine action sector to address the most
urgent needs more safely and more effectively.

Since January 2019, UNMAS in Damascus has
trained 70 risk-education facilitators, who have since
been deployed to rural Damascus. To date, they have
reached out to some 18,000 people in 60 communities;
current plans are to conduct outreach in southern
governorates before December. That number is
insignificant compared to the 11.5 million people in
need, but it is a start, and we intend to use all means
and tools at our disposal to reach a greater number of
Syrians throughout the country. In addition, this month
UNMAS has also started its risk-education activities in
Hama governorate, where an estimated 46 communities
severely affected by explosive hazards will be reached
by the end of the year. Training trainers and national
staffworking in United Nations local outposts will also
contribute to expanding our outreach.

In support to the United Nations country team,
UNMAS has provided train-the-trainers sessions for 32
agency staff in 2019, enabling them to deliver explosive
hazards-risk awareness briefings to their colleagues
working to provide humanitarian aid and relief in
locations where explosive hazards impact their safety.
The United Nations staff who were trained are based
in different regional sub-offices, including in north-
eastern Syria.

Earlier this year, UNMAS launched a one-month
awareness campaign on social media and through text
messaging, reaching all subscribers of the two Syrian
telecommunication companies. That allowed us to
reach out to over 55 million people with brief messages
on risk-education awareness.

The launch of the Mine Action subsector on
9 October in Damascus, during my visit, was well
attended by the humanitarian sector, comprising
humanitarian civil society operators and United Nations
entities. Their statements at that meeting evidenced the
sector's interest and need to benefit from the platform
in order to enhance coordination, exchange information
and support the prioritization of tasks.

Pursuant to resolution 2449 (2018), 365 communities
in Aleppo, Idlib and northern Hama governorates were
surveyed and more than 370 hazardous items were
identified and marked through collective efforts by
the Mine Action subcluster between January and July.
In addition, some 677,000 people received direct risk
education in 73 subdistricts ranked from highly severe to
catastrophic in accordance with the protection severity
scale. Risk-education materials have been distributed
to over 280,000 at-risk individuals and more than 100
schools. Approximately 3,800 survivors of explosive
hazards have received victim assistance services,
varying from physical rehabilitation, continued medical
support and psychological support.

In the absence of an UNMAS presence in north-
eastern Syria, UNMAS has made available standardized
risk-awareness materials to be distributed to affected
populations as part of the ongoing emergency
humanitarian response. UNMAS continues to stand
ready to support United Nations inter-agency missions,
including assessment missions. With the evacuation
by international mine action non-governmental
organizations earlier this month, owing to recent
military developments in the country, there are
currently no humanitarian mine action operations in
north-eastern Syria. On behalf of the humanitarian
mine action sector, I would like to stress the importance
of continuity and of the resumption of humanitarian
mine action in that area of the country.

UNMAS works closely with the Office ofthe United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, in Syria and
in neighbouring countries that host Syrian refugees on
the integration of mine action into national returnee
response plans. The aim is to achieve consistent and
coherent messaging on explosive hazard-risk education
from the area of departure to the area of resettlement
when the conditions are met for voluntary, dignified
and safe return.

Since 2016, the humanitarian response plan for Syria
has increasingly prioritized mine action, risk education,
victim assistance and explosive hazard survey and
clearance. As clearance of explosive hazards is the only
means of definitively removing the threat, plans for the
identification of explosive contamination and surveys,
as well marking, fencing off and removal, are currently
under discussion. The Government of Syria has agreed
that UNMAS should now consider reinforcing the
implementation of its activities with the assistance of
international mine action operators. The registration of
the operators will be done by the Government of Syria.
In the absence of national humanitarian mine action
capacity, the Government has also agreed that UNMAS
will undertake to accredit, coordinate and assess the
work of such operators. The humanitarian response
plan for Syria, the humanitarian needs overview and
strict adherence to the humanitarian principles of
impartiality, neutrality, independence and humanity
will continue to frame UNMAS activities.

