Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia voted in favour of resolution 1929
(2010) on the basis of its consistent principled position
regarding the Iranian nuclear issue. We have
consistently advocated a resolution of all the
international community's questions concerning Iran's
nuclear programme through dialogue and constructive
cooperation with Tehran.

We hope that Iran will view the resolution as a
further signal of the need to respond positively to the
numerous appeals of the E3+3 and the entire
international community to fulfil its non-proliferation
obligations and to launch substantial negotiations with
the E3+3 to ensure full and transparent cooperation
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
in order to clarify all issues related to the Iranian
nuclear programme.

Russia has made and will continue to make
significant multilateral and independent efforts to
convince Iran to cooperate constructively with the
E3+3 and to fulfil in good faith all provisions of the
relevant Security Council resolutions and IAEA
decisions. In building the Bushehr nuclear power plant,
Russia is reaffirming not just in words but in actions
the fundamental right of Iran, as a party to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), to
develop a peaceful nuclear energy programme.
Unfortunately, the intensive efforts of Russia and our
partners in the E3+3 have yet to receive an appropriate
response from Iran. Tehran has yet to take the decisions
necessary to pave the way to its full enjoyment of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and the
strengthening of the nuclear non-proliferation regime.

Under these conditions and in the context of the
dual-path approach developed by the E3+3 and
approved by the Security Council, it has become
inevitable that additional restrictive measures should
be adopted to constrain development in those Iranian
activities that run counter to the task of strengthening
the non-proliferation regime.

The Security Council's adoption of sanctions is a
forced step, and we approach their use in a balanced
and proportional way. During the negotiation of the
resolution, Russian delegation's efforts were targeted at
ensuring that the Council's decision aimed exclusively
at bolstering the non-proliferation regime and
contained no provision that would harm the well-being
of the Iranian people.

We are firmly convinced that there is no
alternative to a peaceful, diplomatic settlement of the
Iranian nuclear issue. This postulate was reflected in
the text of the resolution. We expect that Tehran will
ultimately signal its full readiness to engage in
negotiations with the E3+3. In the framework of such
dialogue, the critical discussion of the Iranian nuclear
programme would also address the E3+3's proposed
package of constructive incentives for our Iranian
partners, in cooperation with the IAEA, to remove any
lingering doubts about the programme. This package
remains on the table, as reaffirmed by the resolution
just adopted and the statement of the E3+3 Foreign
Ministers at today's meeting.

We are convinced that the contents of the package
fully demonstrate the benefits to Iran of cooperation
with the international community in various fields,
which is impossible in the context of its disregard for
Security Council resolutions and IAEA decisions on its
nuclear programme. We hope that Iran will see these
clear benefits and initiate cooperation with the E3+3,
including in implementing all the understandings
reached in Geneva on 1 October 2009. Clarifying the
nature of Iran's nuclear programme through Tehran's
full and transparent cooperation with the IAEA could
reverse the Security Council's sanctions against the
country and afford it the opportunity to fully exercise
all the rights enjoyed by non-nuclear parties to the
NPT, including to uranium enrichment for nuclear
power plant fuel production.
We hope that the fuel-swap mechanism for the
Tehran Research Reactor, which Russia originated, will
be implemented. We welcome Brazil and Turkey's
efforts in that regard. Relevant work related to this
initiative is continuing within the framework of the
Vienna Group, with our active participation.

In conclusion, I should like again to underscore
that we expect that Iran will act in a pragmatic and
reasonable manner and respond positively to the six
facilitators' openness to dialogue to effectively resolve
the Iranian nuclear issue in the interest of the entire
international community.

