The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Australia,
Bangladesh, Brazil, Cuba, the Czech Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Israel, Jordan, the Republic of Korea, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Mali, Morocco, Norway, Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Qatar, South Africa, the Syrian Arab
Republic and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Shalev
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
23 March 2009 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2009/153 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council that will
be held on Wednesday, 25 March 2009, regarding
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
2
provisional rules of procedure and previous practice in
this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. B. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 20 March 2009 from His
Excellency Mr. Paul Badji, in which he requests to be
invited, in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. If I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Paul Badj i.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Badji to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations. At this
meeting, the Security Council will hear a briefing by
Mr. B. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, to whom I give the floor.


