Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would first like to warmly
welcome Under-Secretary-General Lacroix to his first
meeting of the Security Council. We are very much
looking forward to working with him.
(spoke in French)

We also welcome Foreign Minister Diop back to
the Council.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to express our condolences to
France on the loss of yet another French peacekeeper
in Mali.

Despite positive developments, the situation in
Mali continues to warrant our attention. We commend
the progress that has been made on establishing interim
authorities and launching mixed patrols, but with only
three months of the interim period remaining, making
progress on implementation is even more pressing,
and numerous actions still have to be completed. We
therefore encourage the Government to redouble its
efforts to deliver on the December benchmarks and the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali so that
Malians can reap the peace dividend. We also call on all
actors to acknowledge that time will be needed beyond
the expiration of the interim period to consolidate
progress, not least Where the interim authorities are
concerned. Algeria's sustained commitment to the
process will be crucial.

All Malians must feel a sense of ownership in
the country's future. The Government should make
every effort to ensure that inclusive consultations and
channels for interaction between citizens and the State
form part of the constitutional review process. That
will include addressing the crucial issue of relations
between the centre and the periphery, and the essential
provisions of the peace agreement. We were encouraged
by the broad participation of women in the Conference
d'entente nationale last week, and we emphasize
the importance of ensuring women's full and active
participation and leadership at all levels of the peace
process. We encourage the Secretary-General to take
further stock of progress in that area in his next report.

It is urgent that we address the dire security
situation in Mali's central regions. That should to be
taken into account in the next mandate for the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). The revised mandate
should strengthen the enabling capacity of the United
Nations and its ability to use its good offices to promote
security. The Government's aspiration to re-establish
State authority throughout the country, particularly
in Mopti and Segou, must go beyond mere physical
presence and be built on a people-centred approach to
governance. It is important to build confidence in the
legitimacy of State functions, including by providing
basic social services. We welcome the Government's
development of a multidimensional strategy for the
region and encourage its swift implementation. A
trustworthy, community-oriented and human rights-
focused police service, along with a clear vision for
security-sector reform, will be essential.

Later today, the Council will hold a debate on
peacekeeping. We will underline how important we
believe it is that peacekeeping operations be seen as
part of a broader peace strategy. In Mali, as elsewhere,
the primacy ofpolitics should be a guiding principle for
United Nations engagement. That also means that we
must invest in the right resources for making sure that
we can provide adequate support to political solutions.
For that reason, in the lead-up to mandate renewals,
we encourage the Secretariat, working with the wider
United Nations system, to provide conflict and political
analysis that is context-sensitive. Such analysis should
form the basis for action-oriented Council discussions,
including on greater coherence between civilian and
military components.

We welcome the steps that the Secretariat has
already taken to enhance transparency, predictability
and efficiency in MINUSMA's force-generation process,
as was called for at the troop- and police-contributing
countries' meeting in January (see S/PV.7874). In
order to address the long-standing capability gaps in
MINUSMA, we urge the troop- and police-contributing
countries to make use of that initiative, particularly
during the upcoming force-generation conference in
May. Sweden would also like to emphasize our shared
responsibility for increasing the number of women in
all types ofposts and at all levels within MINUSMA.

Lastly, the joint force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel is a positive step in addressing the regional
dimension of the challenges in Mali. A number ofissues
should be addressed before it becomes operational,
particularly its relationship with MINUSMA and
its rules of engagement. Ensuring cooperation
and interoperability with other security actors and
guaranteeing differentiation between humanitarian
actors and the military, as well as between the military
and the police, should be priorities. In that regard, we
also underline the need for making progress in the areas
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security-sector reform, including by accelerating the
efforts to establish the criteria for reintegration, so as
to ensure a truly reformed national army.

The commitment of the signatories to the peace
agreement to moving forward in a way that benefits all
Malians should be welcomed. However, we still need all
parties to make an intensified effort if the agreement's
full potential is to be realized. MINUSMA has proved
to be a critical tool for those efforts. Sweden remains
fully committed to supporting it, not least through
our considerable contribution to MINUSMA and our
extensive cooperation on development.

