Mr. Ramos-Horta: Speaking here from Bissau,
I would like to let the Council know that with me is
my very loyal team - the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
family, who sustain the United Nations presence
here. To my right is Mr. Gana Fofang, Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Resident
Representative; to my left is my chief of staff; and,
following the order from the left, are our head of
administration, Guadalupe Sousa, head of the Human
Rights Section, Antero Lopes, head of security sector
reform and rule-of-law assistance, Martinho Chachiua,
head of the Political Affairs Section, Linda de Souza,
also from Political Affairs, Ruddy Flores, from Political
Affairs, Musafiri Prosper, from the Strategic Planning
Unit, and Raluca Eddon, from the Peacebuilding
Support Office. Other staff who do not fit at the table
are sitting behind us in the room. We all extend our
warmest greetings to you, Madam President, and to
members of the Security Council.

We wish to express our utmost satisfaction
with and appreciation for the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/l9) issued by the Council as a result of
our interaction in November 2013. The report of the
Secretary-General before the Council (S/2014/105)
covers developments in Guinea-Bissau since my last
briefing, on 26 November 2013 (see S/PV.7070). Now
I would like to highlight some developments since the
report was drafted.

On the political front, after much delay the largest
party, the African Party for the Independence of Guinea
and Cape Verde (PAIGC), held its national congress, from
2 to 11 February. Mr. Domingos Simoes Pereira, former
Minister of Public Works and Infrastructure under
former President Koumba Yala and former Executive
Secretary of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, was elected leader with a majority of over
60 per cent of the votes. The candidate with the second
highest number of votes, Braima Camara, President of
the Chamber of Commerce of Guinea-Bissau, obtained
37 per cent of the votes.

Although the contest was bitterly fought, the
defeated candidates graciously conceded. For his part,
Mr. Simoes Pereira called on his rivals to join him
in promoting reconciliation and unity in the party.
Mr. Simoes Pereira's election offers real hope for a new
generation of leaders to emerge and foster the required
changes for the country. His election has generated
a very positive mood across the nation. He faces a
challenge to unite the party.

Nevertheless, there are still pending issues between
Mr. Pereira, supported by his constituencies in the
party, and the candidate with the second highest number
of votes, Mr. Camara, including on the composition
of the Central Committee and the Political Bureau.
Negotiations between Mr. Pereira and Mr. Camara are
ongoing. I continue to engage all in active dialogue,
providing ideas and advice when asked. I am confident
that they will reach the necessary compromises to
enable stability and governance.

While Mr. Pereira is expected to lead PAIGC in the
legislative elections, now scheduled for 13 April through
a recently issued presidential decree, discussions are
still ongoing within the party on whom to support for
the presidential elections.

The divisions in the second largest party, the Party
for Social Renewal (PRS), have continued and led to
the emergence of four presidential candidates among
the senior members of the party. While the historic PRS
leader and founder, former President Koumba Yala,
publicly declared that he would abandon active politics
and decided to endorse Mr. Nuno Na Bian, Director
of Civil Aviation in the country, for the presidential
elections, the party itself nominated Mr. Abel Incada, a
known businessman and Vice-President of the Chamber
of Commerce, as its official presidential candidate.
Opposing the party's decision, two senior members
declared themselves independent candidates as well.

The mushrooming of independent candidates is
symptomatic of the fragmented nature of politics in
the country, further compounded by the crisis since the
coup on 12 April 2012. So far, there are 12 candidates,
eight independent and four from the political parties,
still excluding PAIGC, all running for the presidency.
A presidential decree, issued yesterday, shortens the
legal timelines to allow for the election on 13 April
and provides the date of 5 March as the deadline for
candidates to submit applications to the Supreme Court
to run in the presidential and parliamentary elections.

The Supreme Court says that it needs about
12 days to properly scrutinize the list of candidates.
Some 40 political parties are expected to contest the
parliamentary elections. However, on the basis of the
existing electronic data system, donated and set up
by Timorese electoral and information technology
specialists, the Supreme Court may be able to scrutinize
the list of candidates in about five days.

As I have mentioned, following a consultation
process with stakeholders, in particular the national
political actors, as well as international partners,
Transitional President Nhamadjo formally announced,
on 21 February, that the legislative and presidential
elections would finally be held on 13 April. That
adjustment was justified in order to enable the
conclusion of the pioneering information technology-
based voters' registration process throughout the
country, while political will was also being secured. If
all runs smoothly, the electoral process could therefore
be concluded before discussions on the renewal of
the mandate of UNIOGBIS are held by the Security
Council in May.
The Government declared the end of the voter
registration process on 10 February. The 15-day period
for the exhibition and correction of the provisional
voter lists started on 18 February and is ongoing. It
is expected that the final voters list will be ready by
the end of next week. The provisional figures indicate
that more than 770,000 voters have been registered.
That is at least 95 per cent of the estimated potential
of the voting population of 810,961. That is indeed a
surprising, impressive record.

The National Electoral Commission, with technical
support from an international expert team hired
through UNDP, has been gearing up to ensure that all
logistics are in place to conduct elections operations.
The first batch of election materials was delivered on
12 February. A civic education outreach campaign will
also be conducted. I would like to commend all donors
to the electoral process, especially Timor-Leste, the
Economic Community of African States (ECOWAS)
and Nigeria, and those who have contributed to the
UNDP-managed basket fund in support of the activities
run by the National Electoral Commission, notably the
European Union, for their generosity.

The voter registration has been an undeniable
success. Timor-Leste, Nigeria and ECOWAS must be
commended for their support and provision of critical
equipment for that essential step, enabling the electoral
process and the restoration of constitutional order.
Timor-Leste allocated $6 million and deployed more
than 20 Timorese election advisers and information
technology specialists, all working round the clock in
a very challenging environment. So far, ECOWAS has
disbursed $5.6 million. Nigeria has provided well over
$2 million in support of the activities and needs of the
technical electoral support office.

A national plan for electoral security is being
implemented, operationally supported by UNIOGBIS
and the Economic Community of West African States
Mission in Bissau, with the establishment of national
joint command structures to be led by the police.
The military are to assume a reserved role. In that
framework, a successful training of 60 national and
international senior police and military officers was
conducted on 14 February, at the National Defence
Institute, supported by UNIOGBIS. Furthermore,
about 1,500 national police and military are expected
to be trained in the next few weeks, in a partnership
between UNIOGBIS and Brazil. UNIOGBIS will also
gradually strengthen its presence in the regions during
the elections.

While we are mindful that intra-party issues are
still being worked out, which is to be expected in such
kind of scenarios, the technical conditions for elections
are in place and no further delays should be considered.
Elections are to finally be held no later than 13 April
and no further excuses should be accepted at all. The
Council's express support in that regard would be
highly appreciated.

Each day that passes affects the economy and
the livelihoods of the people. The mission of the
International Monetary Fund to Bissau earlier this
month noted that the economy was still strongly
affected by the economic and political consequences
of the April 2012 coup and had not recovered. The
economy is likely to have grown by only 0.3 per cent
in 2013. Civil servants are currently owed at least three
months' salary, and in many families they are the single
source of income. The humanitarian situation has
deteriorated, despite direct support to the population by
international partners through United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations.

I urge all stakeholders to play their part in ensuring
a meaningful election in a climate of peace and
security. Citizens must be able to fully exercise all their
rights, including the right to freedom of expression
and assembly. At the same time, all political parties
and their supporters must play their part in ensuring a
climate of peace and security. The media must engage
in fair, equitable and unbiased reporting.

The defence forces and security institutions must
act within the limits of their roles, as defined in the
Constitution and specific laws, and refrain from any
interference and intimidation. They should also ensure
the security of State institutions, including the ones
involved in the electoral process, as well as the security
of all candidates.

While mindful of the record of rule of might in the
country and the series of incidents reported, I have no
concrete reason thus far to state that the defence forces
and security institutions will interfere with the process
as the elections approach. We will continue to be
vigilant, while seeking the Council's express support
in that regard.

Similarly, I believe that the political parties and
candidates, as well as their supporters, will show the
utmost discipline and fully respect the verdict of the
people and the elections' results to be announced by
the Supreme Court which, as the Council knows is
the final arbiter in the event of electoral complaints
and also declares the final results. I recommend that
the Security Council consider a robust and prompt
response, including targeted sanctions, to any attempt
to undermine the electoral process and post-electoral
stability.

It is with regret that I note the inability of the
authorities to follow up the investigations into human
rights abuses and serious crimes, such as the beating
of the Minister of Transport and Communication on
5 November 2013. It is also a matter of concern that
no conclusive judicial action has been taken on either
the violation of the integrity of the Nigerian Embassy,
on 8 October, or with regard to the case of the abusive
onboarding of alleged Syrian citizens who ended up
traveling on fake Turkish service passports to Portugal,
despite an inquiry that has been completed.

While I commend international partners for their
generous contributions, which have made the prospect
of elections and the return to constitutional order
possible, I would urge them to look beyond the horizon
to the post-electoral transition. The newly elected
Government will face enormous challenges, and it is
paramount that international partners stand ready to
resume engagement with the country from day one
following the installation of the new, democratically
elected authorities. That specifically means providing
emergency assistance and support to critical
reforms, prior to a pledging conference, which will
comprehensively address the overall State-building and
development needs of the country.

Fast-tracking reforms in the defence and security
sectors, including the urgent modernization of the
armed forces, thus fostering civilian oversight, is
paramount for stability and democratic governance in
Guinea-Bissau. The demobilization and reintegration
strategies need to be supported immediately after the
elections, along with community-oriented internal
security reforms and support to the independence
of the judiciary in order to fight impunity, as well as
combating all forms of transnational organized crime
and drug trafficking.

Decades of neglect and instability in Guinea-
Bissau have made its institutions ineffective, corroded
by corruption and porous to military might. In the
post-election period there is a need to start rebuilding
the State institutions. A programmatic response is the
Government's efficacy amelioration programme. My
staff and I have provided our national and international
partners with an executive summary of what I believe
the international community role should be in assisting
Guinea-Bissau on the path of reform, modernization
and sustainable development, following the elections.

The temporary co-location of qualified
international advisers with co-executive powers in the
critical structures of decision-making within the civil
service is essential for enduring stability, democratic
governance and the development of the country, as it
will allow for the confidence of international partners
to be gained.

While the reform and modernization of the armed
forces and security institutions should remain a key
priority for the democratically elected authorities
following the general elections, it will also be important
to rebuild the other State institutions, notably the
judiciary and public administration in general.

I hope that multilateral and regional bodies, such
as the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund,
the African Development Bank, the European Union,
United Nations agencies and regional and bilateral
partners, will seriously consider the draft strategy now
being made available, and promptly begin consultations
so as to agree on how best to assist Guinea-Bissau and
its legitimate authorities in moving forward with no
further ado.

I would propose that a presidential statement
reinforcing those key considerations would help our
work in the field throughout the ongoing electoral
process and beyond.

Finally, I would like to offer some words of gratitude
to the staff of the United Nations, both at Headquarters
and in the field, and the other international partners
working with us in Guinea-Bissau, such as the
Economic Community of West African States, the
African Union, the European Union and the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries, who have always
shown great professionalism and dedication.

Madam President, you and all other Council
members, as well as the Secretary-General, are always
in my prayers. I beg the Almighty and Merciful to
continue to bestow on them all endless wisdom as they
try to bring peace to our troubled world. May our God
bless us all.

