Ms. Bensouda: I take this opportunity to thank
all speakers for their statements of support regarding
my Office's work and the work of the International
Criminal Court.

On the question relating to the difference between
the cases of Al-Senussi and Al-Qadhafi before the
Court, which I believe was raised initially by the
representative of the Russian Federation, let me state
that the assessment of admissibility is on a case-by-
case basis. It is not enough for a State to assert that it
can undertake a trial, and the Court does not judge the
system as a whole.

In the case of Al-Senussi, the volume of information
submitted was sufficient to show that the Libyan
courts are trying the same case, that is, of the same
individuals for the same crimes. Furthermore, the
case is factually different from that of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi. Al-Senussi is in detention and benefitting
from the due process guarantees that are offered by
confident State control. That is not entirely the case
with respect to Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. The judges
found that the information that was submitted in the
case of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi lacked the degree
of specificity that is necessary to meet the test. The
Libyans have offered to submit more information, and
the Court is considering that request. I think that the
different positions of the Court's judges and my Office
highlight respectively in these two cases the impartial
legal proceedings before the Court, which are always in
strict conformity with the legal framework of the Rome
Statute.

On the question of the detentions in Zintan, the
Court takes the matter very seriously and is intent
on decyphering precisely what transpired during the
course of that mission. We are taking appropriate
measures. The matter is in the hands of President Song
and the Registry, and they are doing the assessment. I
understand that both the Presidency and the Registry
have been in contact with the legal authorities in that
regard. I respect the President's and the Registrar's
respective mandates in this regard.

On NATO's conduct during its operation in Libya,
I noted in my last report that the Office had found
no information to conclude that NATO's air strikes,
which may have resulted in civilian deaths or injury,
or damaged civilian objects, were the result of the
intentional directing of attacks against the civilian
population, as such, or against civilian objects, which
would be clearly excessive to the anticipated military
objective and advantage. My Office has encouraged
NATO to cooperate fully in Libya's national efforts to
investigate civilian casualties. In the current report, my
Office welcomes the agreement between NATO and the
Government of Libya to work more closely together in
the future.

Allow me to conclude by stating firmly that the
Office will always conduct its mandate impartially and
in strict conformity with the Court's legal framework,
devoid of extraneous considerations, and that we will
pursue perpetrators where we have jurisdiction. The
establishment of international rule of law, impartially
applied, requires this of us.

