Mr. Linkevicius (Lithuania): I would first like
to convey my condolences to the family of Mr. Vitaly
Churkin, whom I knew personally for many years. I
would also like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your country's successful presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February, and on your
organization of today's important debate. The theme for
today's discussion will enable us to evaluate the current
threats posed to international peace and security by
the conflicts in Europe and to discuss the best ways to
tackle them.

The end of the Cold War, the dissolution of the
Soviet Union and the termination of the ideological
stand-off that divided Europe for almost five decades
created expectations for a new era in European
security. However, today's Europe is neither free from
confrontation nor at peace. The frozen conflicts in
Moldova's Transnistria and in the Nagorno Karabakh
region, a military intervention in Georgia, increasing
influence in the Western Balkans and an aggression
against Ukraine, along with the illegal annexation of
Crimea - those are not isolated cases but rather a
broader pattern of behaviour over the years that one
of the founding members of the United Nations has
been pursuing in its neighbourhood, with the aim of
redrawing European borders.

With its well-established, large-scale, soft-power
system, using energy, economic and military levers,
Russia continues to hamper the integration of the
countries of the Western Balkans into Euro-Atlantic
structures, attempting to preserve the status quo
through the distrust and animosity that still continues
between those nations. In Transnistria, Russia defends
and sometimes defines the aspirations of the separatist
regime and threatens neighbouring countries through
the presence ofits own troops. Russia is also fuelling an
arms race between Azerbaijan and Armenia that could
once again lead to their considering military options.
With its ongoing creeping annexation of Georgian
Abkhazia and South Ossetia and through its so-called
referendums, elections and even name changes of those
occupied regions, Russia is once again violating the
bedrock principles of the international order.

It is clear that we should use all the available tools
and mechanisms to revive negotiation processes that
have been seriously stalled and unite our efforts in
order to avoid new protracted conflicts, particularly
in Ukraine, where Russia's unprovoked Russian
aggression, sheltering behind the rebels it supports,
will soon enter its fourth year, with almost 10,000
people killed and more than 23,000 injured. The recent
indiscriminate shelling of Avdiivka showed that the
military confrontation is spreading, endangering many
thousands more. I visited Avdiivka recently myself, met
with people who live in houses that have been destroyed
and witnessed clear violations of the Minsk agreements
in person. Once again, we need to give serious impetus
to the stalled implementation of the agreements, which
can be achieved only when Russia withdraws its troops
from Ukrainian territory and Ukraine re-establishes
full control over its State border.

In order to make progress in dealing with the
enormous challenges in Europe, we need collective
action at various levels. First, we see the United
Nations as a key actor in effective multilateralism and
a basis for our international system. We need a robust
United Nations, capable of addressing complex global
challenges. A close and proactive working relationship
between the Secretary-General and the Security
Council would contribute to that. Regardless of the
Council's frequent inaction, owing to the practice of
the veto, it should pay closer attention to the protracted
conflicts in Europe, because they are liable to escalate
and therefore threaten the region's overall stability and
security.

Secondly, regional and subregional organizations
such as the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the European Union (EU) are
playing a leading role in the conflict and post-conflict
environments in Europe. We greatly value the OSCE's
engagement in frozen conflicts, from Transnistria to
the Caucasus, and in the ongoing conflict in Ukraine,
particularly through its Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine. We call for unrestricted access for the Special
Monitoring Mission throughout the territory of Ukraine.
We must rethink the role and engagement of the OSCE
in Ukraine, including through the possible creation of
an OSCE security mission for the local elections.

Thirdly, through its enlargement policy, the EU
is playing a significant role in promoting normalized
relations between Serbia and Kosovo and the
reconciliation process in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as among individual countries in the Western
Balkans. The EU Monitoring Mission in Georgia has
ensured a long-term international monitoring presence
in the country and is a key factor for its stability.
The EU Advisory Mission Ukraine, which deals with
civilian security-sector reform and has a regional
presence in Lviv and Kharkiv, is an important tool that
should be further strengthened and expanded. Lastly,
the EU has progressively imposed restrictive measures
on Russia, including a sanctions regime, that will be
in place as long as the Minsk agreements are not fully
implemented. We therefore strongly advocate for a
comprehensive partnership between the European
Union and the United Nations that would increase their
ability to act and deliver.

In conclusion, two years ago, in this Chamber, we
commemorated the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations, reflecting on its history and reaffirming our
strong commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Today, a Europe whole,
free and at peace is not yet a reality. But it remains
our lodestar. If we are to succeed, we must share those
same aspirations and recommit to the principles on
which European security is built.

