Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Allow me at the outset, Mr. President, to
congratulate you on Equatorial Guinea's assumption
of the presidency of the Council. I should like also to
congratulate the delegation of the Dominican Republic
on the outstanding work it did during its presidency of
the Council last month.

I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate, and the Secretary-General and
the Chairman of the African Union Commission, as
well as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda, for
their interesting statements.

This debate is very timely given that mercenary
activities are a destabilizing factor that have had a
significant impact on a number of countries on the
Security Council's agenda. Several of those countries
are in Africa, but the continent is certainly not the only
one concerned by this problem. Mercenary activity
not only complicates and compounds conflicts that
are already under way, but can also contribute to the
germination of latent conflict. We must therefore
remain attentive in the context of an approach aimed at
conflict prevention.

As indicated in the concept note for this debate
(S/2019/97, annex), tackling these kinds of activities
is a complex task, as they most often take place in a
context with an overlapping array of various interests
and motives that encompass organized crime, violent
extremism and attempts to achieve political goals
through non-democratic means. Mercenary activities
can also be a source of financing for armed groups
created for other purposes, while other such groups are
merely seeking to enrich themselves.

While there are various definitions of mercenary
activities, a debate such as today's is useful in terms of
broadening our understanding of the issue. In its work,
the Council is currently dealing with several cases of
mercenary activity. For example, in Libya combatants
from Darfur sell their services to the various factions.
In doing so they remain operational and pose a threat to
the Sudan or, eventually, other countries of the region.
In Yemen, we are concerned at the use of children by
mercenary groups. And let us not forget either that
maritime piracy can also represent a form of mercenary
activity, but here I do not wish to infringe on tomorrow's
debate on this topic.

To contain the phenomenon of mercenary activity,
which usually has an international dimension, States
should take full advantage of existing international
instruments, in particular the 1989 International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing
and Training of Mercenaries. Allow me on this point,
Mr. President, to congratulate your country on having
ratified that Convention. Given that today only 36
Member States, including Belgium, are signatories
thereto, we call on all Member States to ratify it without
further delay.

That being said, the legal standards and instruments
to which we are signatories will have an impact only if
States enforce them at the national level. Here we refer
to international humanitarian law; international texts
on human rights; and texts emanating from regional
organizations. In this area, as in others, we advocate
for a strengthening of cooperation among States.

The Security Council already has at its disposal
mechanisms aimed at affecting the interests of the
sponsors and organizers of mercenary activities, in
particular targeted sanctions aimed at those individuals
who act against efforts towards peace and at their means
of financing. Here I would cite the illicit trafficking
of weapons, illicit financial transfers and the illegal
exploitation of natural resources.

In conclusion, all States can be faced, one way or
another, with the issue of mercenary activities, to which
they must respond. Belgium, for its part, will always
opt for transparency and international cooperation.

