Mr. Salifou (Togo) (spoke in French): I wish,
like other delegations, to thank Mr. Nigel Fisher for
his presentation of the interim report (S/2013/139)
on the United Nations Mission for Stabilization in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). I also congratulate him on his
appointment as Acting Head of Mission and assure him
of the full support of my country in the performance of
its new duties.

I shall focus my statement on the security, political
and humanitarian situations.

Efforts in the security sector have been among
the achievements of the cooperation between the
Haitian Government and MINUSTAH. The Secretary-
General's report indicates that the security situation
remained stable despite the upsurge in civil unrest and
a rise in crime. My country welcomes that stability
and urges the Haitian authorities to continue the
process of strengthening the operational capacity and
modernization of the National Police, as well as to
effectively fight against armed gangs, which are the
main sources of insecurity in the country.

We therefore welcome the adoption by the Council
of the National Police development plan for the period
2012 to 2016, which defines the strategic vision,
objectives and means for implementation. We encourage
Haiti's partners to continue to support the country so
that the funding gap is bridged in order to allow for
the achievement of all the objectives. We also call upon
the competent authorities to carry out crime prevention
and repression efforts in strict observance of the rule
of law. In that regard, we encourage them to continue
with the modernization of the legal and institutional
framework of the security, judicial and penal sectors.
However, we remain concerned by the gender-based
and sexual violence highlighted in the report, especially
against children. We commend the work undertaken by
MINUSTAH and the Haitian National Police aimed
at raising awareness among potential victims of the
remedies available to them.

With respect to the political situation, Togo
welcomes the progress achieved by Haiti in stabilizing
and building the rule of law, even though the positive
dynamic set in motion last year by the Haitian
political class might have led one to expect much more
significant progress. Parliament's approval, in May
2012, of the appointment of Mr. Laurent Lamothe as
Prime Minister, which put an end to months of political
crisis, the enactment of constitutional amendments that
had been pending since June 2011 and the establishment
of the Superior Council of the Judiciary should pave
the way to an end to the crisis. All of those events
seemed to indicate that the political partisan divisions
of the Haitian political class had been overcome and a
collective commitment had been undertaken to quickly
organize elections, thereby making it possible to gauge
the true democratic progress achieved in Haiti.

Unfortunately, that dynamic was slowed by the
failure of the political class to come to an understanding
on the composition and designation of the institution that
would organize the elections. In that regard, we applaud
the work carried out by the Religions pour la paix
coalition, which led the representatives of the executive
branch and Parliament to sign, on 24 December 2012, an
agreement on the modalities establishing a temporary
electoral council. We welcome the information provided
on the designation ofthe members ofthe three branches
of Government that will have a seat in that body - an
important step towards the holding of elections in Haiti.

We welcome the commitments undertaken by the
President of the Republic and the National Assembly
on 14 January, at the opening of the Assembly's first
ordinary session of the legislative year, to organize free
partial legislative, municipal and local elections this
year and to see to it that the country takes responsibility
for over half of the electoral budget. In that regard, we
urge all Haitian political stakeholders to work on the
basis of consensus so that preparations for the elections
can be undertaken and the latter can take place in an
inclusive and transparent manner. Moreover, Togo
calls on Haitian authorities to continue the necessary
reforms to restore the State's legal framework, establish
and strengthen public institutions and improve their
people's lives.

The humanitarian situation in Haiti remains a
source of serious concern for my country. With the
gradual Withdrawal of humanitarian agencies, the
living conditions in the camps, where there is still a
very high number of internally displaced persons,
continue to deteriorate. The Secretary-General's report
also notes that there was a significant decrease in the
provision of basic services owing to a decrease in the
level of funds available, and Togo fears a return of the
cholera epidemic, the beginnings of which have already
been announced. My country therefore calls on the
international community to further help the Haitian
authorities to invest in the provision of drinking water
and sanitation infrastructure in order to counter the
resurgence of the epidemic. My country believes that,
in the absence of clear legal responsibility incumbent
upon it, the United Nations should continue to fulfil
its moral responsibility to help the Haitian authorities
to eradicate that disease, the source of which is well
known.

I would like to conclude by calling upon the
entire political class and people of Haiti to face the
significant obstacles and challenges before them
in terms of improving governance in their country,
stimulating growth and reducing poverty in order to
stop the fruitless political infighting that impedes their
country's path towards progress. My country believes
that the international community should remain at
Haiti's side, but that it is up to Haitians themselves to
face their own challenges and find the most appropriate
solutions to them. To that end, their political institutions
and structures responsible for upholding the rule of law
must be reinforced, and the electoral process must be
free, transparent, peaceful, credible and legitimate in
order to contribute to the consolidation of democracy
in the country. Finally, my country hopes that the plan
for restructuring and reorganizing MINUSTAH and its
activities and its progressive withdrawal from Haiti will,
rather than weakening support to the Haiti, contribute
to refocusing its efforts on the areas of priority interest
to the country.

