Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): Iwould
like to thank Special Envoy Ahmed, High Commissioner
for Human Rights Al Hussein, and Assistant Secretary-
General Kyung-wha Kang for their briefings.

Thanks to the active good offices of the international
community, including the United Nations, the settlement
process in Yemen has made progress recently. The
Yemeni parties have restarted their political dialogue in
Switzerland and have arrived at agreements, including
on a temporary ceasefire, developments that China
welcomes. China greatly appreciates the good offices
of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and his Special
Envoy, Mr. Ahmed, in mediating the conflict in Yemen.

In Yemen, history has repeatedly shown that war
offers no solutions and that political dialogue is the
only path to achieving a durable peace. The parties
must sit down and continue their talks. It is hoped that
they will proceed based on the long-term interests
of their country and their people and in the interests
of peace and stability in the region in general. They
should take this opportunity to continue to participate
unconditionally in the political dialogue, conducted
under United Nations auspices, ensure that it continues
as scheduled, demonstrate their good faith and see that
it produces policy decisions that can result as soon as
possible in a political settlement that reflects reality in
Yemen and accommodates all the parties" concerns. We
hope that the international community will work hard
to promote the peace talks, build confidence and allay
suspicions, and that other States in the region and the
relevant regional organizations will continue to play a
constructive role.

The protracted conflict in Yemen has resulted
in a deteriorating humanitarian situation. China
sympathizes deeply with the suffering of the Yemeni
people. Alongside the efforts to advance Yemen's
political settlement process, we hope that the United
Nations will continue to improve its coordination of the
delivery of humanitarian assistance there. The parties
concerned should also cooperate actively with United
Nations efforts by ensuring that there are no obstacles
to safe humanitarian access. International donors
should honour their commitments as soon as possible
in order to ease Yemen's humanitarian crisis.

China has been following the situation in Yemen
closely. We have actively promoted the peace talks and
provided large amounts of humanitarian assistance.
China will continue to work with the international
community in a concerted effort to push for an early
resumption of peace and stability in Yemen.

