Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I am honoured to brief the Security Council on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1540
(2004).

Since I last briefed the Council in this Chamber
in June (see S/PV.7463), I think that, without a doubt,
the most important occurrence has been the increase
in the number of acts of extreme violence being
perpetrated by terrorists in nearly every region of the
world. I have begun my briefing with this introduction
because resolution 1540 (2004) is the cornerstone
of the non-proliferation regime of weapons of mass
destruction. However, despite the resolution's strength,
there is no doubt that in certain regions, including the
Middle East, events have demonstrated that it has not
been respected. We have received information from
organizations such as INTERPOL indicating attempts
by various countries to smuggle nuclear material.

Non-proliferation is a phenomenon reflecting a
global challenge, and for that reason the response must
be wholly global. I believe that we all share the idea that
it is far more economical and safe to invest in prevention
than in cure. That is why I shall suggest in this briefing
that if we all work together, by the end of the exercise
culminating next year with the review of resolution
1540 (2004) we shall adopt a more effective resolution
that will truly prevent weapons of mass destruction
from falling into the hands of non-State actors.

I shall now discuss the activities of the 1540

Committee in the four areas of its work.
The first is implementation. "Implementation" is
a word that the Spanish language has imported from
English, and is now considered to be Spanish. To
implement is basically to interact with the Committee.
The Committee must receive national reports
and regular information from States. Ideally, the
Committee should receive voluntary action plans. In
other words, implementation is interaction between the
1540 Committee and the States Members of the United
Nations. Preliminary indications in recent times are
that implementation is going well but unevenly, both
thematically and geographically. Geographically, not
all regions of the world have implemented resolution
1540 (2004) equally; thematically, deficiencies remain
in export controls, to cite but one example.

Members have heard me say on more than one
occasion that my goal as Chair of the 1540 Committee
is to achieve its universal application. That will
essentially require all States Members of the United
Nations to submit their plans and projects. Yet there
remain 17 States that have yet to submit their plans. I
trust that, over the course of the coming year, we shall
achieve our goal.

One fundamental element of implementation is the
training of national experts responsible for ensuring
the proper implementation of the resolution. In that
regard, I would underscore the important work done
in the reporting period by the Chinese Mission, which
convened in Chingdao a training course for all 1540
experts of the Asia-Pacific region. I had the honour to
attend and inaugurate that event. I also note the efforts
undertaken by Chile to host a similar training course
for the countries of Latin America next year.

The second area of the 1540 (2004) Committee's
work is assistance. Assistance basically means helping
to train the States that do not have the necessary means
or expertise to implement the resolution appropriately.
Unfortunately, I am forced to acknowledge that,
in this area, our efforts have not enjoyed their due
success because we are not always sufficiently adept in
matching donor and recipient States so as to establish
the most effective assistance mechanisms. That is why
I propose to deepen the regional approach to assistance.
In that respect, I hope to attend a very important African
Union in Addis Ababa in March 2016.
The Committee's third area of work involves its
cooperation with regional organizations, of which
there are many. I shall try to brief. We are also working
well with the International Atomic Energy Agency.
In that regard, the most important event to have taken
place in the reporting period was the participation of
representatives of the 1540 Committee in an exercise
on the security of the maritime transportation of
nuclear material that was organized by Morocco and
Spain, in cooperation with Agency. We continue
working with the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, naturally on the issue of chemical
and biological substances. I highlight in particular the
outstanding effort undertaken by Jordan in organizing a
meeting in Amman in June that met with great success.

I should like to refer to three especially important
organizations. The first is the World Customs
Organization. There is no doubt that resolution 1540
(2004) seeks to establish customs controls to prevent
illicit trafficking in banned substances and materials.
The second is INTERPOL, which can provide early
warning and information on illicit cross-border
trafficking. The third is the Financial Action Task
Force. The financial aspects of resolution 1540 (2004)
are very important, as is hindering the ability of
non-State actors to tap into sources of illicit funding.

Another very important organization is the African
Union, which plays a critical role in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), as does the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which
achieved great progress in appointing 1540 points of
contact. I also note the important role played on the
American continent played by the Organization of
American States, which has proposed establishing the
post of manager for 1540-related projects. The 1540
Chair has maintained contacts with other organizations
working to prevent proliferation, including the Missile
Technology Control Regime and the Nuclear Suppliers
Group, with which we maintain frequent exchanges
of view. Obviously, within the United Nations system
we work very closely with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

Another area of the Committee's work is
transparency and outreach. With respect to transparency,
it is important to stress that one significant aspect of
the Committee's work is ensuring that the industries
that produce relevant substances and materials clearly
understands the dangers involved in the manufacture
of certain materials that could be converted into
ingredients for the production of nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons. On this point, we note the
important ongoing cooperation of Germany through
the Wiesbaden Process, in which participants have the
opportunity to exchange views and ideas on the best
ways to share controls with the industrial sector so as to
ensure that its products are not used in the manufacture
of weapons of mass destruction.

I also underscore the importance of outreach to
parliamentarians. Ultimately, the Security Council
adopts resolutions and national Parliaments are obliged
to implement them. However, it is important that we
have a smooth exchange of information and experiences
between the 1540 Committee and national Parliaments
in order to understand where there are deficiencies and
where successes, and which areas need strengthening
in order to ensure more effective implementation of this
resolution.

In the forthcoming year, we start an important
countdown, beginning on 1 January and continuing
over the next 12 months, to the completion of the
comprehensive review of the 1540 Committee.
Resolution 1540 (2004) was a qualitatively new and
fundamental leap in combating the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. Enough time has passed
since 2004 to enable us to see its achievements and
inadequacies, and many events have occurred during
that time that have forced us to act more effectively.

I would like to offer a practical case. Suppose that
in some country, in some region of the world - say, in
a country that is unfortunately unable to fully control
its borders - a non-State actor managed to produce
a weapon of mass destruction. It would probably not
be a nuclear weapon, but it could be a chemical or a
biological one. As Chair ofthe 1540 Committee, I would
first ask where we had failed. What had we not done
that had allowed that to take place? I would convene
the Committee and would tell all our experts that, well,
we have to work together to ensure that such a case
never happens again. As Chair of the Committee and
representative of Spain, I am mentioning this in order
to focus the direction of the comprehensive review, by
whose end, in December 2016, I hope that we will be
able to adopt a draft resolution that can be even more
effective in combating weapons of mass destruction
and ensuring that they do not fall into the hands of
non-State actors, which I know is a goal shared by
every Member of the United Nations.

Ultimately, that is the job we have to undertake,
all of us together. Improving the non-proliferation
system is expensive, but it is more expensive to try to
deal with the results of acts or attempted acts involving
weapons of mass destruction. I think that is obvious.
However, I would like to conclude by emphasizing the
efforts that all countries are making with the aim of
supporting resolution 1540 (2004), particularly those
that are contributing to the United Nations Trust Fund
for Global and Regional Disarmament Activities,
managed by the Office for Disarmament Affairs. The
Committee is grateful for the Office's support in that
regard, and especially for the resources contributed by
the United States, Kazakhstan, the Republic of Korea
and the European Union. Without them, the Committee
would not be able to do its job effectively.

