Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I too would like to pay tribute to my friend Ambassador Pierce for her devoted service to the Security Council and thank her for her wisdom and partnership. While I will miss her being seated to my right, I can personally say that the Trump Administration is most excited to have her as our ally in Washington, D.C., and I am looking forward to seeing her frequently on my trips there. I thank her for her service. I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and the Acting Assistant Secretary-General for their briefings. Regrettably, little has changed in Yemen since we met last month (see S/PV.8725). Violence has escalated, including by the Houthis taking the city of Al-Hazm in Al-Jawf governorate. We are hopeful that the parties will recommit to de-escalation, followed by a resumption of talks towards a political solution. We urge full implementation of the Riyadh agreement. When the United Nations is ready to convene talks, the parties must be prepared to field strong delegations and represent all Yemenis, including women. Once again, we are forced to call specific attention to Houthi obstruction of humanitarian operations, which has become the unacceptable refrain of these briefings. We reiterate our message from last month to the Houthis - time is running out. We ask that they please not make it impossible for us to continue providing aid in the areas where they are present. Aid obstructions are unacceptable and have already caused many aid programmes to shut down. We therefore urge the Houthis to take immediate steps to meet all the minimum conditions forprincipled humanitarian operations before the end of this month. Those include lifting access restrictions; allowing unimpeded assessments and oversight of projects; approving backlogged agreements with non-governmental organizations; implementing biometric registration; and maintaining the elimination of so-called taxes on aid projects. While there have been faint glimmers of progress in negotiations with the Houthis, statements and agreements alone will not save lives. We expect the Houthis to demonstrate verifiable progress and a commitment to ensuring the minimum operating conditions for the principled delivery of assistance. In the absence of credible Houthi actions to address our concerns, the United States will suspend United States assistance to MHouthi-controlled areas in Yemen at the end of March, except for certain critical life-saving programmes. We are actively engaging with other donors on that effort to create a permissive environment for the delivery of humanitarian assistance - consistent with the principle of independence - in the world's largest humanitarian emergency. We continue to look to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to play a strong role in coordinating with United Nations agencies and donors, as discussed in Brussels. We recognize, however, that each agency must make its own decision regarding the suspension or reduction of assistance. The United States welcomes the adoption of resolution 2511 (2019) on 25 February, renewing the Yemen sanctions regime, and we reiterate the obligation of all Member States to implement the sanctions in full. Finally, the United States once again urges the Houthis to allow United Nations inspection and maintenance of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. In adopting resolution 2511 (2020), the Security Council emphasized the environmental risks and the need, without delay, for access of United Nations officials to inspect and maintain the tanker. We are grateful to the Special Envoy for continuing to raise this issue in Sana'a and we believe that an arrangement can be worked out for the disposition of the oil. The Houthis must stop using the FSO SAFER as a bargaining chip.
