Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, the delegation of France wishes to express its

 

profound sympathy to the delegation of China. We extend
our condolences to the families of the Victims and to the
authorities of the People's Republic of China. We also
associate ourselves with the regret expressed over the tragic
event to which the Embassy of China and its personnel in
Belgrade have fallen victim. This event is at the moment
the subject of an investigation by the authorities of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

France is engaged in an action undertaken with its
allies that is aimed at putting an end to the intolerable
actions of the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, a policy of deportation that has made it
necessary and legitimate to apply the severest measures,
including military action.
At the same time, France, which, like all the members
of the European Union supports the initiative of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations dated 9 April
1999, is working together with its the Russian, American,
English, Canadian, Italian, German and Japanese partners
to develop a political solution. The meeting of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of our eight countries - which was held
the day before yesterday, 6 May - made it possible to
adopt general principles for a political solution to the
Kosovo problem.

Those principles are as follows: immediate and
verifiable cessation of violence and repression in Kosovo;
withdrawal from Kosovo of the military, police and
paramilitary forces; deployment of an international presence
in Kosovo - an effective civil and security presence
endorsed by the United Nations that is able to guarantee the
achievement of the shared objectives; establishment of a
provisional administration for Kosovo, pursuant to a
decision by the Security Council, in order to guarantee
conditions that will make it possible for all the inhabitants
of Kosovo to lead a normal existence in peace; freedom
and security for the return of all refugees and displaced
persons and unhindered access by humanitarian
organizations to Kosovo; a political process leading to the
establishment of an interim political agreement, involving
substantial autonomy for Kosovo, that fully takes into
account the Rambouillet accords, the principles of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and the other countries of the region and the
demilitarization of the Kosovo Liberation Army; and
finally, a comprehensive approach for the stabilization and
economic development of the region.

I have cited these principles because it is our desire to
arrive at the adoption of a Security Council resolution under
Chapter VII that will endorse and adopt these principles
for a settlement and that will, we hope, finally make it
possible to restore peace and stability to that region in
crrsrs.

