Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada is most concerned at the violence that has
occurred in recent days in Israel, the West Bank and
Gaza. We appeal to both parties to do everything
necessary to put an immediate end to the hostilities and
to work together on specific measures to prevent the
repetition of such a situation.

Israeli and Palestinian leaders must do everything
necessary to ensure that security forces and civilians
act with restraint, and to prevent any statement or other
action that could make the situation more tense than it
already is.

(spoke in English)

We deplore the loss of life on both sides,
particularly the deaths of innocent children, which have
understandably appalled the world. Canada extends its
sincere condolences to the families of the victims.

Further inflammatory actions at this critical time
will serve only to disrupt the negotiations and to
provoke further violence. Responding to them will
serve only the interests of those who would seek not to
make peace. In that context, Mr. Sharon's visit to
Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount last Thursday did
not serve the cause of peace, and has in fact damaged
it - if only, as we hope and expect, temporarily.

There has been violence on both sides, but the
disproportionate and excessive use of force and the
very large number of Palestinian civilian fatalities have
been particularly disturbing. This violence is especially
heart-wrenching because it is so unnecessary. Israeli
and Palestinian leaders have demonstrated the ability to
understand the needs of the other party and the
willingness to work together to achieve a just and
honourable peace. Over the past decade, together, they
have achieved through negotiation what many thought
impossible. They must not falter so close to the goal.

Both Prime Minister Barak and Chairman Arafat
understand that the needs and aspirations of both
Israelis and Palestinians can be met only through
negotiations and through the peace that negotiations
will bring. Canada therefore strongly endorses the
efforts of the United States and Egypt to bring the
parties together again.

Perhaps this chapter of the conflict will finally
have persuaded everyone concerned that peace is
necessary and possible now. The Security Council will
have fulfilled its role if our efforts contribute to the
return of the parties to the negotiating table with
renewed determination to end this conflict and to make
the peace that is the right of ordinary Israelis and
Palestinians.

