Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). I will present a summary of my
statement; the full version will be circulated. I convey
the Movement's appreciation to the Japanese presidency
for convening this open debate at this critical juncture
for the Palestinian people and the Middle East. I also
thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, for his briefing.

Each and every time this Council holds an open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestine question, NAM. appeals for urgent
international attention and action to address the illegal
and brutal Israeli occupation that is causing so much
anguish to the Palestinian people and dangerously
inflaming tensions in an already volatile situation. How
can the Council remain silent as Israel deliberately and
systematically continues its repression ofthe Palestinian
people, its denial of their rights and its colonization and
de facto annexation of Palestinian land?

During the last open debate we - along with the
whole international community - condemned Israel's
declarations that it was designating 370 acres in the
West Bank as so-called State land as part of its ongoing
illegal settlement campaign. This has now been followed
by yet another decision by Israel to advance plans for
the construction of at least 800 more settlement units in
and around occupied East Jerusalem, in grave breach
of international law and in total contempt for Security
Council resolutions and the calls of the international
community to cease those violations. It should be
noted that this announcement was made in the days
immediately following the release of the Quartet report,
further highlighting the inadequacy of such efforts to
compel Israel to halt that illegal practice.

Emboldened by that impunity and by Security
Council inaction, Israel, the occupying Power, has
intensified its illegal, oppressive measures against the
defenceless Palestinian civilian population, including,
inter alia, the use of excessive force against Palestinian
civilians, including children and women, causing more
death and injury and depriving them of their right to
protection. The destructive impact of such Israeli
violations is immense, as reflected in rising tensions
and deteriorating socioeconomic conditions, and that
impact is deepening among the Palestinian civilian
population living under this nearly half-century of
Israeli occupation. Anyjustification for such criminality
must be rejected and action on the matter - in line
with United Nations resolutions, international law
and our moral responsibilities towards the question of
Palestine - is long overdue.
NAM. once again takes the opportunity to urge
the international community, particularly the Security
Council, to take a decisive, historic and long-overdue
step towards ending the occupation of the Palestinian
and other Arab lands and paving the way for fulfilment
of the rights and independence of the Palestinian people
and for a just and peaceful settlement to the conflict,
including a just solution to the plight of the Palestine
refugees, in line with the relevant United Nations
resolutions. Here, we must once again caution that the
status quo cannot be sustained forever.

In that regard, we recognize the ongoing regional
and international efforts to generate the political will
and momentum needed to resolve the conflict, including
the 3 June 2016 ministerial meeting convened in Paris
in support of Palestinian-Israeli peace and the pledge to
convene an international peace conference toward that
objective in the coming months. We call on the Security
Council to perform its rightful role.

The Non-Aligned Movement seizes this
opportunity to reaffirm its longstanding solidarity
with the Palestinian people, recognizing their decades
of resilience despite so much suffering and injustice.
NAM. reiterates its support for the realization of
their legitimate national aspirations and inalienable
rights, including self-determination and freedom in
an independent and viable State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as for finding a
just solution to the plight of the Palestine refugees, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

Lebanon continues to suffer from successive
Israeli Violations of its borders and incursions into its
territory, followed by year after year of occupation
and aggression. Unfortunately, Israel continues to
violate Lebanese airspace, intensifying its incursions
over Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant violation
of Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006). The
provisions of that resolution should be implemented
in a manner that guarantees the consolidation of the
foundations of stability and security in Lebanon and that
prevents Israel from violating Lebanese sovereignty on
a daily basis.

With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement condemns all the measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status ofthe occupied Syrian Golan, which
have intensified since the outbreak of the Syrian crisis.
The Non-Aligned Movement demands once again that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June
1967, in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).

