Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): Ireland aligns itself with
the comprehensive statement delivered by my Swiss
colleague on behalf of the 22-member Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, a cross-
regional grouping of Member States established earlier
this year to press for a more accountable, coherent and
transparent Security Council. Ireland is pleased to be
a founding member of ACT. We care deeply about the
United Nations and how each of its institutions works.
And we believe that there is abundant evidence for
the proposition that the Security Council's working
methods are in urgent need of improvement.

Among the points to which Ireland attaches
particular importance in the statement delivered on
behalf of the ACT are first, the welcome we give to the
proposal by France that the five permanent members
of the Council could voluntarily regulate their right to
exercise the veto in the case of mass atrocity crimes;
secondly, the appreciation we express for the greater
level of interactivity with the Council recently, which has
been achieved through, for instance, horizon-scanning
meetings.It is clearly desirable that briefings take place
regularly on situations where populations are at risk of
mass atrocities.

The ACT group was established in May to develop
proposals for concrete action to improve the Council's
working methods and to build momentum around that
agenda. All United Nations States Members have a
legitimate stake in how the Security Council is run.
After all, the Council was established to ensure prompt
and effective action on behalf of the full membership.
We hope that we can persuade the United Nations
membership as a whole of the need for urgent action to
reform the Council's method of operation and ways to
communicate and interact with the wider membership.

We want to work constructively and cooperatively
with the members ofthe Security Council in encouraging
a more businesslike and responsive approach. We could
accurately be termed - and have been termed i a
group of friends of the Security Council, supportive but
also frank and direct, the hallmarks of true friendship.
Just to be clear, we are taking no position on issues
relating to the reform, composition or enlargement of
the Council.

Improvements in relation to the Council's working

methods are already under way, and we readily recognize
them. We welcome the presidential note of 28 August
(S/2013/515), on transparency and improvement of the
Council's dialogue with non-Council members and
bodies.

As a co-lead with Uruguay on the peacekeeping
dimension of the Council's work, Ireland warmly
welcomes the commitments of the presidential note
contained in document S/2013/630, on the enhancement
of consultations with troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs). The
challenge now is for Council members to ensure the full
and consistent implementation of that presidential note,
and other preceding resolutions, statements and notes
on peacekeeping working methods.

Ireland was pleased to respond positively this year
when we were asked to supply military personnel to
reinforce and stabilize the mission of the politically
sensitive United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force. As a significant peacekeeping troop contributor,
we are strongly of the view that a more dynamic,
interactive and meaningful partnership among Council
members, the Secretariat, TCCs and PCCs will benefit
all parties.

On peacekeeping and across a broad range oftopics,
the ACT group will continue to work for constructive
and cooperative engagement with Council members on
practical steps that could improve the way in which the
Council does business.

Finally, we commend Azerbaijan for organizing
today's debate as an important step in that process.

