Mr. Schwarz-Schilling: First, I want to express
my thanks for the broad support I heard today for our
work and for the partnership together with the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Adnan Terzic. I
will also say that I think that this partnership is the key
to this year's progress; I hope that we will make every
effort to reach the goals mentioned at today's meeting.

I think there was broad consensus on the goals
and the priorities. But there were some questions about
possible ways of settling the question of decertified
police officers. Perhaps I will just make a brief
comment about that. I believe that, on this matter, it is
necessary to address it as part of the international
community's phasing-out plan. The Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is under tremendous
pressure - by decertified officers, as well as by the
media and human rights organizations - to act
decisively on this matter. Thus, I too joined in that
effort in my 10 February 2006 letter to the Security
Council.

I understand that of late there have been
discussions on this subject in the Security Council
drafting group. I would like to inform the Council that
the matter has received significant attention both in the
Peace Implementation Council (PIC) and in the
European Union's Political and Security Council.
Those two bodies have stated their readiness to assist
the United Nations if the Organization were ready to
take the lead in resolving this matter. I believe that the
certification of police officers by the International
Police Task Force was an ambitious and largely
successful attempt to rehabilitate the ranks of police
officers in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Many of those
officers had been compromised by involvement in
criminal activities during and after the war. When the
process was concluded, at the end of 2002, no
provision was made for reviewing decisions where
credible evidence existed that the right procedures
were not followed. I am concerned that the absence of
measures to address those cases could strengthen the
case of those claiming that the United Nations-led
process was altogether flawed. A review mechanism
would consolidate the certification process by
overturning confirming decisions that currently raise
questions about the process as a whole.

Members have probably seen the report prepared
by the European Commission for Democracy through
Law - the Venice Commission - of the Council of
Europe. Although I acknowledge that the report is not
legally binding, I believe it nevertheless provides a
good basis for discussion. The proposal confines the
scope of the review to the cases of those who have
challenged their dismissal before a court. That is in
line with the idea that the exercise would be meant to
strengthen the United Nations process rather than
undermining it. As members know, I have been invited
by the PIC, along with the European Union (EU)
Council secretariat, to follow up with the United
Nations the line suggested in the non-paper presented
by the EU Council secretariat. European Union
member States that are also members of the Security
Council have lent their support to that dialogue - of
course, without prejudice to their responsibilities under
the provisions of the United Nations Charter. The
Office of the High Representative will, of course, do its
best to send help to New York to go into the details of
these cases.

Thus, I think that we should really bring this to a
final conclusion, in good faith and in line with the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, so that no bad
impression attaches to the legal system of the young
State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I therefore fully
support this process.

I thank participants very much for all their
comments. I will study them carefully. At this crucial
time, I hope that Council members will continue to
support me in the future, and I thank them for the
opportunity to participate in today's meeting.

