The President: I thank the representative of
Benin for the wide-ranging concerns that he has raised
that relate to the role of civil society as an effective
interlocutor in peace processes.

I should now like to make a statement in my
capacity as the Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the
Philippines.

Indeed, our discussions could not have come at a
more opportune time, as the views expressed here
today certainly enrich the elements of the Cardoso
report (A/58/817) on United Nations relations with
civil society, recently released by the Secretary-
General.

I thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan and
Marjatta Rasi, President of the Economic and Social
Council, for their valuable inputs in today's debate. I
also thank Mr. Denis Caillaux of CARE International
and Ian Martin of the International Center for
Transitional Justice, for their views on the role of civil
society in post-conflict peace-building, which clearly
reflect their vast experience in this area. I must confess
that I am overwhelmed by all the constructive
contributions they have given in the consideration of
our chosen theme.

Indeed, the wounds of conflict are manifold.
They touch upon sensitive roots imbedded in peoples'
psyches. The healing process should therefore lead to a
recovery of confidence, an assurance of integrity and a
deeply internalized sense of peace. This requires a
delicate but firm touch moved by an intimate
understanding of and sympathy with a people. By its
nature, civil society is gifted with such understanding
and sympathy.

In efforts to rebuild peace on more enduring
foundations, Governments, as well as the United
Nations, can be helped by a caring and sharing civil
society. Civil society must be compassionate but
resolute, helping suffering peoples let go of negative ill
feelings, grasp the value of reconciliation, concentrate
on reintegration and reconstruction and rehabilitate
society through hard work and dedication.

With the help of civil society, Governments and
the United Nations should aim to restrengthen the
national self-confidence and social fabric of
traumatized peoples and to encourage and to assist
them to help themselves overcome enormous human
security challenges.

The ruin of factors of production, economic
breakdown, and conflict-caused poverty, the collapse
of law and order and the exacerbation of long-standing
fractiousness must be addressed with professional
sobriety.

We are witnesses to the cooperative effort in
recent years of national Governments, the United
Nations and numerous representatives of civil society
in such places as Afghanistan, the Balkans, East Timor
and West Africa, to which many members have
referred. We are poised to pursue the same cooperative
endeavour in Iraq.

The partnership of civil society with the United
Nations in post-conflict peace-building can start from
the very design of the project blueprint. Civil society
can assist in identifying, understanding and addressing
root causes of conflict, in helping formulate
collaborative reconstruction strategies and perhaps
even in resolving conflict itself.

In the actual peace-building phase, civil society
can, with United Nations coordination, assist in
providing relief, health, education and other public
services; spur economic revival and social recovery;
promote advocacy of human rights, ethics and the rule
of law in catalysing total human development, for it is
with such development that a more lasting peace is
achieved.

Owing to civil society's grassroots charisma,
manifested in its participation in the reconciliation,
reconstruction and rehabilitation process - even its
mere presence can be therapeutic, a balm to sore
wounds - it can evoke a deeper realization of life's
worth after the havoc of war. Civil society's
participation is therefore vital for public support and,
consequently, for the greater legitimacy of peace-
building endeavours.

I need not dwell on the elements of cogent
strategies, including those for post-conflict peace-
building. We all realize that they should be
comprehensive in scope and in implementation detail.
They must be integrated, recognizing the symbiotic
relationship of legal, political, economic, social and
cultural concerns. They must be participative, with
contributions from all stakeholders, national and
international; and they must be flexible, capable of
adjustment to changing circumstances and continuing
assessment.

There is absolutely no doubt that civil society can
help formulate and implement strategies, contributing
information, know-how, fervour and even financial and
material resources. What is now imperative for the
United Nations is to have a clearer view of its relations
with a civil society that has grown in size and numbers.
Cognizant of its intervention mandate for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
profiting from the normative idea of Heifetz and
Linsky in their book Leadership on the Line, which
entails

"getting on the balcony and stepping back to have
a perspective of what is happening while
remaining fiercely on the ground",

the United Nations should base its engagement with
civil society on policies, mechanisms and procedures
that are coherent, consistent and predictable.

Birgitta Dahl, one of the eminent persons tasked
by our Secretary-General to consider such engagement,
has reported on her Panel's endorsement of four
normative paradigms: first, the United Nations role of
convening, facilitating and leading partnerships not
only of Governments, but also of all stakeholders,
including civil society; secondly, country-level focus in
analysis and implementation; thirdly, encouragement of
greater parliamentary and national standing committee
participation; and fourthly, a shift from an omni-
governmental bias to a multilateral society mobilizing
the cooperation of coalitions of the willing, following
the "highest common principles".

These paradigms deserve serious attention, not
only for the involvement of civil society organizations,
non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders
in post-conflict peace-building, but also for their
involvement in other issues of global concern.

Let me interject at this point a notion that is by no
means new, but deserves keener appreciation: the role
of faith groups, as civil society actors, in conflict
prevention and post-conflict peace-building. Religions
do preach peace, not violence; forgiveness, not
revenge. Upholding human dignity, justice,
accountability and the rule of law, they exercise a
strong moral influence. Based on in-depth appreciation
of problems, their inputs to conflict-prevention and
post-conflict peace-building plans and implementation
should be optimized.

Clearly, as we have heard today, there is a
consensus on the crucial role of civil society in global
issues. The Secretary-General's report to the Economic
and Social Council and the General Assembly should
spur bold and pragmatic action, for it provides us with
the mechanics of accreditation, the procedures of
consultation, the equilibrium of North-South actors and
of stakeholders with differing views, the sharing of
costs, and similar practical matters that impact on good
order. The delineation of roles and a sound respect for
leadership and coordination must be present. This
leadership and coordination are expected of us in the
United Nations.

The Philippines looks forward to a meaningful
outcome of the Secretary-General's initiative of
convening an international NGO conference in 2005 on
the role of civil society in the prevention of armed
conflict. We believe that this dialogue will further
crystallize the partnership of the United Nations, civil
society and other stakeholders, including the religious
sector, particularly in post-conflict peace-building.
When conflict ends, healing must begin, and civil
society, Government and the United Nations must
stand together, bravely, past the frontiers of conflict.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are still a number of speakers remaining on
my list for this meeting. I intend, with the concurrence
of members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 pm. this afternoon.
The meeting was suspended at 1.30 pm.
