Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): When the Security Council established a
regime for cross-border supplies of humanitarian aid
through the United Nations, we all assumed that it was
a temporary emergency measure that perforce infringed
on Syria's sovereignty. It was introduced in 2014 when
the armed conflict was in an acute phase during which
at times there was no other way to provide the civilian
population with the necessary assistance.

It was intended, and as such written into resolution
2165 (2014), that humanitarian supplies transported
through specific border crossings would go to residents
throughout Syria, a provision that has never been met.
The mechanism mainly serves areas controlled by
illegal armed groups that dispose of incoming aid at
their discretion. The United Nations has not exercised
due control in this area, including of the distribution
of humanitarian assistance in Syria. In fact the United
Nations agencies do not play the leading role in this
plan, which essentially belongs to non-governmental
organizations. How and what they are supplying, and
to whom, continues to be a mystery wrapped in an
enigma. The authorities in Damascus are essentially
dealing with a chaotic situation that they are powerless
to introduce some order into.
At this point, since our guiding light is first
and foremost the interests of the Syrians in need of
aid, we have not blocked the latest extension of the
transboundary regime. But the proposed text did not
take all our priorities into account, so we could not
support it. We deplore the unnecessary haste with
which resolution 2393 (2017) was adopted. We could
have continued the discussions for the sake of reaching
a consensus.

We expect the Secretary-General to review the
transboundary mechanism within the established time
frame with the aim of bringing its activities to their
inevitable end. We hope to see recommendations on how
to improve its monitoring during the current transitional
stage, while the Syrian Government's opinion must be
taken into account without fail. The Secretary-General
must also give the Security Council detailed information
every month about where the aid is being sent, what it
consists of and in what quantities. We hope the reports
will not be a formality. We will double-check all the
information that the Council receives.

We are grateful to the delegations of Egypt and
Sweden for their careful, honest and constructive
work. Unfortunately, thanks to the position taken by
various Council members that attempts to present the
transboundary mechanism as an ideal plan that needs
no improvement, and to freeze it as it is indefinitely,
some important amendments that we proposed were
not included in the final draft. Within the framework
of the planned review, we would like to hear from the
Secretary-General as to how the effectiveness and
transparency of the mechanism could be improved,
as well as some details on the partners of the United
Nations in this area. Having given permission for these
cross-border shipments, the Security Council has the
right to know these things. But it would seem that there
is some mystery here involving some kind of carefully
guarded extraneous interests. The result is that the
people and the sovereignty of Syria suffer, despite the
fact that in every resolution we adopt we reaffirm our
commitment to those fundamental principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

The situation in the country is radically different
now, and the mechanism for cross-border supplies is a
remnant ofwhat is past. In our view, it will be important
to work to gradually end this rudimentary plan, based
on a divided Syria. The United Nations humanitarian
agencies should begin to reorient themselves to
traditional ways of working in the country in cooperation
with its official authorities and in accordance with the
universal principles of humanitarian assistance. We
hope that the Secretariat will start making plans for the
gradual abandonment of the cross-border shipments. A
year from now, the question of whether to extend the
mandate of resolution 2165 (2014) will loom.

