Mr. Hasan (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to extend to you, Madam, and to the
friendly delegation of Jamaica our thanks and
appreciation for convening this meeting to discuss the
important subject before us.

I also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Olara Otunnu; Ms. Carol
Bellamy, Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund; and the International Committee of
the Red Cross for the important work they have been
doing to protect children.

I express my special appreciation for the vigorous
campaign being waged by Mr. Otunnu to end regional
sanctions imposed on Burundi, given their unjust
repercussions on children and families. We hope that
Mr. Otunnu will undertake a similar initiative on behalf
of the children of Iraq.

Before I address the substance of the issue, I wish
to emphasize that the Security Council's discussion of
this issue should in no way prejudice the competence
and terms of reference of the General Assembly and
other United Nations organs. Given the fact that the
protection of children involves a wide range of issues,
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council are the appropriate forums for conducting
more comprehensive and in-depth discussions of these
matters.

The report of the Secretary-General and the views
expressed by Member States at this meeting will
undoubtedly help to identify an approach towards a
more forward-looking, integrated strategy to end the
suffering of children in armed conflict. While there is
an urgent immediate need for modalities to alleviate
the suffering of children in conflict areas and to
reinforce commitments to international conventions in
the area of child protection, it is equally pressing to
consider a comprehensive approach to protecting
children over the long term.

Perhaps the optimal way to protect children in
armed conflict lies in preventing armed conflicts in the
first place, containing them and addressing their root
causes, foremost among which is the unstable and
unbalanced international political and economic
climate, which is characterized by hegemony and by a
deepening divide between the States of the North and
those of the South. The North has come to monopolize
wealth, power, influence and technological dominance,
leaving the States of the South with poverty, illiteracy,
starvation, unemployment and disease. All this
provides fertile ground for the growth of bigotry,
violence and conflict. Thus, the United Nations has an
important role to play in correcting these imbalances in
the current international environment.

The indiscriminate and excessive application of
sanctions by the Security Council ever since the United
States achieved dominance over it in 1990 has had
catastrophic consequences in several third world
targeted countries. Children have been the primary
victims of these sanctions. In his report on children in
armed conflict before the Council, the Secretary-
General has devoted a special section to the issue of
protecting children from the impact of sanctions. He
expressed his deep concern over the adverse impact of
sanctions on children and emphasized that

"The potential long-term benefits of sanctions
should be weighed against the immediate and
long-term costs to children, including the collapse
of health and education infrastructures, reduced
economic opportunities, increased child labour in
informal sectors and increased infant morbidity
and mortality. The suffering of Iraqi children, as
reported by UNICEF, and of children in the
Balkans are troubling cases in point."
(S/2000/712, para. 25)

The Secretary-General suggests the dispatch of
evaluation missions to the targeted States and
neighbouring countries prior to the imposition of
sanctions with a view to assessing the potential
negative impacts of sanctions. My delegation supports
this recommendation and hopes that it would
constitute, along with other recommendations
submitted by several States, a basis for restricting the
use of Article 41 of the Charter of the United Nations,
to keep it exclusively within the purposes of the
Charter and to prevent the use of sanctions as a means
of mass killing, as in the case of sanctions imposed on
Iraq, sanctions which targeted the civilian population,
chiefly children.

The claim by some that the suffering of hundreds
of thousands of Iraqi children is an unintended result
arising indirectly from the sanctions is made in total
ignorance of the facts on the ground and total disregard
of moral values. The comprehensive sanctions imposed
on Iraq were designed to kill as many Iraqi children as
possible. Since they were imposed, those sanctions
have not achieved any other objective except that. Let
me cite the following data.

First, the comprehensive sanctions imposed on
Iraq by resolution 661 (1990) of 6 August 1990 did not
exclude in reality even foodstuffs and medicines. Later,
children's textbooks, clothing, toys and even their
coffins were excluded. Until today, the United
Kingdom and the United States put on hold contracts
for the acquisition of ambulances and medicines that
would save the lives of children under the pretext of
dual-use materials.

Secondly, five months after the imposition of
comprehensive sanctions, Iraq, under the cover of
Security Council resolutions, was the target of the most
horrendous military aggression known in contemporary
history. A total of 88,000 tons of ordnance were
dropped on Iraqi cities and villages, equivalent to
seven or eight nuclear bombs similar to those dropped
on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Those bombs and missiles
destroyed, among other things, schools, playgrounds
and hospitals for children. They also destroyed an
infant-formula factory which the Americans claimed
was a biological weapons factory.

Here, let me recall what was stated by the former
United Nations Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Marti
Ahtisaari, who visited Iraq in the wake of the
aggression as head of the United Nations humanitarian
needs assessment mission. In his report, in document
S/22360, he stated that nothing that they had seen or
read had quite prepared them for the particular form of
devastation that had now befallen the country. The
recent conflict had wrought near-apocalyptic results, he
said, upon the economic infrastructure of what had
been, until January 1991, a rather highly organized and
mechanized society. Now, Mr. Ahtisaari wrote, most
means of modern life support had been destroyed or
rendered tenuous, and Iraq had for some time to come
been relegated to a pre-industrial age, but with all the
disabilities of post-industrial dependency on an
intensive use of energy and technology.

Thirdly, the United States and the United
Kingdom exploited the Security Council resolutions as
an opportunity to test a new radioactive weapon made
of depleted uranium missiles. They dropped on Iraq a
total of 300 tons of this weapon of mass destruction.
The use of this weapon resulted in the death of 50,000
Iraqi children in the first year. Furthermore, the use of
this radioactive weapon would have a long-lasting
effect on future generations in Iraq, including a higher
incidence of cancer, especially leukemia among
children, and fetus deformation and forced abortions.
This means that the primary victims are the children of
Iraq. Also, the use of depleted uranium has contributed
to environmental pollution in terms of air quality, soil,
water and plants. The rate of pollution has increased
ten-fold over normal levels.Estimates of expenses to
clean the Iraqi environment are now at some 375
billion dollars.

Fourthly, following the systematic military
destruction of Iraq, comprehensive sanctions still
remain. The cumulative impact of the sanctions has
been on the civilian population, especially children.
The field study conducted by UNICEF and issued in
August 1999 emphasized that the sanctions on Iraq
have resulted in the death of half a million Iraqi
children under the age of five. According to the
UNICEF field study, the infant mortality rates have
increased from 56 per 1,000 live births during the
period 1984-1989 to 131 per 1,000 in the period 1994-
1999. This is in addition to the death of one million
Iraqis of other age groups, especially women and
elderly.

Of the children who survive, some 25 per cent
suffer from chronic malnutrition. School enrolment has
declined. Mrs. Rossing, the UNICEF Regional Director
in Iraq, announced on 21 July 2000 that nutrition in
Iraq was not a problem in the 1980s, but this problem
appeared in the 19905 only.
She added that the sanctions had extensively hurt
children, many of whom were forced to leave school
and go on the road to earn their living, which would
have a negative impact on the country's future human
resources. Those facts and figures are further proof that
the economic sanctions that the Security Council
imposed against Iraq constitute an act of systematic
genocide.

Fifthly, since 1991, the United States and the
United Kingdom have been unilaterally enforcing
no-fly zones in northern and southern Iraq, engaging in
a flagrant abuse of force against an independent State
before the very eyes of the United Nations and of the
entire international community. Indeed, to deflect
attention from their own internal crises, they stage
empty military heroics and commit military aggression
against Iraq, most recently the large-scale aggression
against Iraq that took place between 16 and 20
December 1998. The chief victims of the no-fly zones,
the aggression and the relentless daily bombing are the
children of Iraq, as has been demonstrated in reports by
United Nations representatives who visited residential
neighbourhoods in Iraq that had been the targets of
bombing. Besides the actual bombing, the noise of
supersonic military aircraft flying over Iraqi cities and
villages causes panic and other psychological problems
in children.

At the dawn of the new millennium, the time has
truly come for the international community to wake up
and reject the mind-set of imposing inhuman
comprehensive sanctions, which is a legacy of the Dark
Ages. That mind-set was manifested in the well-known
words of United States President Woodrow Wilson:
"A nation boycotted is a nation that is in sight of
surrender. Apply this economic, peaceful, silent,
deadly remedy and there will be no need for
force. It is a terrible remedy."

The same mind-set was also to be expressed in
the words of Mrs. Madeleine Albright, Secretary of
State of the United States, who famously said in 1996
that the death of half a million Iraqi children was a
price that was "worth it" in continuing the sanctions
against Iraq.

Drawing a distinction between combatants and
civilians is a key principle of international
humanitarian law. The comprehensive sanctions
imposed against Iraq target civilians. The United States
and the United Kingdom bear full responsibility for the
genocide that is being committed in gross violation of
international humanitarian law. There can be no further
doubt that this principle of international humanitarian
law has been materially and morally violated. The
principle of permitting no impunity for those who
disregard international humanitarian law must be
applied. Those who target children must be brought to
justice.

The Security Council, in whose name the
sanctions were imposed, unquestionably lost its
credibility when it agreed to lend bogus legitimacy to a
scheme in which Iraqi civilians would be considered
enemy targets. Because of the United States insistence
on maintaining the sanctions against Iraq to attain its
own vicious political objectives, and because of its
constant threat to use its veto power, the Council has
been rendered unable to rectify the situation and to lift
the sanctions against Iraq. We would therefore expect
such an initiative to come from the States of the world,
which have authorized the Security Council to act on
their behalf. Those States should reconsider that
authorization, because we now have evidence that it
has been misused to kill the children of Iraq.

The Council must be reminded that Article 25 of
the Charter stipulates that the Members of the United
Nations agree to accept and carry out the decisions of
the Security Council in accordance with the Charter.
Since the imposition of comprehensive sanctions
against Iraq was in contravention of the provisions of
the Charter - starting with its Preamble, which
stresses Members' faith in fundamental human rights
and in the dignity and worth of the human person - it
is the legal and moral duty of States Members of the
United Nations to renounce participation in the
implementation of resolutions that are inconsistent with
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
that are being used to carry out a policy of genocide
against the children of Iraq.

The children of Iraq, like all other Iraqi civilians,
bear deep wounds on their hearts and their minds.
Seven thousand Iraqi children perish each month as a
result of the sanctions regime that has been imposed in
the name of the Security Council. Will the Council
remain silent?

