The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Sudan, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Erwa
(Sudan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2005/57 and Addendum 1, S/2005/68,
S/2005/I4O and S/2005/60. Members of the Council
also have before them document S/2005/206, which
contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by the
United States of America.

I welcome the presence at this meeting of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Benin, Brazil, Denmark, France,
Greece, Japan, Philippines, Romania, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America

Against:
None

Abstaining:
Algeria, China, Russian Federation


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows: 12 votes in favour, none against and 3
abstentions. The draft resolution has been adopted as
resolution 1591 (2005).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


