Mr. Bettel (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): At
the outset, as our colleague, the President of France,
stated, we offer our most sincere condolences for what
happened today. We express our condolences to all of
the families and victims, regardless of their nationality,
who have been attacked by terrorists using religion to
justify their barbarous acts. Iwould echo what the Prime
Ministers of the United Kingdom and Australia and the
King of Jordan just said: using religion to commit such
barbarous acts is the worst thing one can do.
I would also like to thank, you, Sir, for having
taken the initiative of convening this Security
Council debate. We take this opportunity to recall the
commitment undertaken by my country, Luxembourg,
to counter the threat of foreign terrorist fighters. That
threat has gotten worse over the past few months, and is
of concern to us all, as the Secretary-General explained
just a little while ago.

I think the speakers before me described the
problem well. For Europe and for my own country, the
threat of foreign terrorist fighters is a matter of growing
concern. At present, it is estimated that thousands of
foreign fighters have joined terrorist groups, such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the Nusra
Front and Al-Qaida and its affiliates, particularly in
Syria and in Iraq. When they return to their countries
of origin, those terrorist fighters continue to present a
danger. The arrests of numerous fighters in the Middle
East and in Europe, the recent atrocities committed in
Arsal in Lebanon and the terrorist attack perpetrated
against the Jewish Museum of Brussels on 24 May are
examples that attest to the fact that the threat is real.

There is no magic formula for combatting this
threat. Since we are all affected by it, it is obvious
that we must all act together. The response of the
international community and the Security Council
needs to be commensurate with the challenge. In that
regard, I welcome resolution 2178 (2014), which we have
just adopted unanimously on the initiative of the United
States, and which Luxembourg has been honoured to
co-sponsor.

As for the actions we should undertake, I see three
priorities. First, we must intensify our efforts to prevent
radicalization, which could lead to terrorism, and to
counter violent extremism. Why and how does a young
person with a clean record yesterday become a terrorist
tomorrow? In Europe, a Radicalisation Awareness
Network has been put in place by the European
Commission, following an approach based on support
to local communities. The Network connects those
who are in direct contact with targeted individuals or
vulnerable groups in order to facilitate an exchange of
experiences and best practices. The Network is part
of the preventive component of the European Union's
counter-terrorism strategy and should be strengthened.
That is a long-term effort that we intend to pursue, in
particular when Luxembourg assumes the presidency
of the Council ofthe European Union during the second
half of 2015.

Secondly, we must make every effort to prevent
those who want to leave to fight with terrorist groups
from travelling to conflict zones. To that end, we
need to strengthen the exchange of information and
cooperation among Member States. The European
Union is actively working on that. We also need to
put in place sufficiently robust legislation to ensure
that foreign terrorist fighters can be effectively
prosecuted and brought to justice upon their return. In
Luxembourg, the incitement to commit a terrorist act,
terrorist recruitment, the creation of a terrorist group
and terrorist training constitute criminal offences.
My Government is already working on updating the
criminal code in order to fully take into account the
threat of foreign terrorist fighters, in accordance with
the provisions of the resolution we have just adopted.

Thirdly, we must redouble our efforts to cut off
the sources of financing of foreign terrorist fighters.
As an international financial centre, Luxembourg
is aware of its special responsibilities in that regard.
My country has adopted a full and consistent arsenal
of legislative and regulatory measures in the fight
against money laundering and terrorist financing,
and it is paying particular attention to their effective
implementation. Those measures fully take into
account the recommendations of the Financial Action
Task Force.

I would like to conclude by stressing an essential
point. Respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law need to be an integral
part of our counter-terrorism strategy if we want it to
achieve its aim. All the measures we take to counter
the threat of foreign terrorist fighters must respect
international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law. Otherwise, we
shall only heighten the sense ofinjustice and impunity,
which fuels radicalization and the spread of terrorism.

(spoke in English)

This morning, before the General Assembly, you,
Mr. President, asked the world to join in the fight
against the Islamic state in Iraq and the Levant. Faced
with those killers, who have no regard for our human
values and do not hesitate to recruit children for their
dark cause, we must be steadfast in upholding the values
upon which the United Nations was founded.

