Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would first like to
congratulate Sweden on a very active and productive
presidency of the Council this month. I would also like
to thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.

One of the world's brightest minds once said
that peace can be achieved only by understanding.
Regrettably, Israel's enactment last week of a new
basic law struck the ultimate blow, driving us further
away from understanding by enshrining in law a
policy of discrimination by the Israeli authorities
against Arabs, especially Palestinians. The law drew
widespread condemnation in the Arab and Muslim
worlds, from the Palestinians to the Arab League
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, as well
as Israelis and Israeli-Arab lawmakers. The new law
is seen as foreclosing the future of the peace process
and of the concepts of a two-State solution and land
for peace, and rendering them dead on at least three of
the final status issues - Jerusalem, the settlements and
self-determination. The law therefore contravenes the
dozens of United Nations resolutions that address the
question of Palestine and form the basis for any lasting
and just solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. If
international law and international legality are tossed
aside, what is the future of peace in the Middle East?

My fear is that we will be eternally condemned to
the same cycle of violence and to perpetual wars. Look
at Gaza. After so many wars and military operations by
the Israelis, and after thousands of casualties, we may
be facing another new conflict today. Gaza continues
to suffocate under unimaginably difficult humanitarian
conditions. The situation for its residents is beyond
desperation, and the cuts in the funding for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) will not help ease
their plight. For more than seven decades, UNRWA's
vital work in Jordan, Syria and my own country as well
as in Gaza has helped millions of Palestinian refugees,
keeping them from burying their last ounces of hope
six feet under. It acts as a stabilizer in our region. The
UNRWA pledging conference last month in New York
and the Extraordinary Ministerial Conference held in
Rome on 15 March were successful in demonstrating
support for the Agency. We must now build on that
momentum in order to meet the deficit of an agency
that no one can afford to let die.

In Lebanon, a country that embraces diversity,
we are in the process of forming a new Government
after completing successful parliamentary elections in
May. They were held according to a new electoral law,
with participation by the diaspora for the first time,
and several international observers commended the
Lebanese authorities for the transparency with which
they were conducted. A new Lebanese Government is
in the making. Naturally, among its key priorities will
be to start implementing the recommendations of the
Conference e'conomique pour le de'veloppement, par
les reformes et avec les entreprises, held in Paris, and
enacting the relevant structural reforms in order to help
boost our economy. Another ongoing challenge will be
addressing the issue of displaced Syrians in Lebanon so
as to arrange for their safe return. However, that must
not wait until a political solution materializes in Syria.

A few weeks from now, the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) will
be up for renewal. We count on Council members to
acknowledge the efforts ofUNIFIL by ensuring a smooth
renewal of its mandate. My country firmly believes that
UNIFIL remains instrumental to preserving peace and
security in southern Lebanon and thereby contributing
to our stability. The latest report of the Secretary-
General on the subject (S/2018/703) testifies to that role.
It is instrumental despite - and because of- Israel's
continuing daily violations of Lebanon's sovereignty.
Daily Israeli violations, especially airspace violations,
continue unabated; the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the issue noted 456 air violations
during the reporting period. We call on the Security
Council to use its authority to insist that Israel respect
and implement resolution 1701 (2006) by withdrawing
from the occupied Lebanese territory and ending its
continuing violations of our sovereignty.

Progress also needs to be made in order to resolve
the remaining border disputes, including the maritime
one. In this regard, allow me to recall once again my
Government's initiative to seek the Secretary-General's
good offices to that end.

We continue to view the tripartite mechanism as
a useful tool for reducing tensions, resolving disputes
and achieving the goal of a permanent ceasefire in
the south.
In conclusion, I wish to welcome the appointment
by the Secretary-General of the new Commander of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL),
Major General Stefano Del Col, to whom we express
our full confidence. We wish him the best of luck in
his new mission. We also pay tribute to the excellent
work carried out by the outgoing UNIFIL Commander,
Major General Michael Beary.

