The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Croatia in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nobilo
(Croatia), took a place at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

The members of the Council have before them
document S/ 1995/395, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by France, Germany, Italy, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to the following amendments to the text of the
draft resolution published in its provisional form as
document S/l995/395: in the fourth line of the second
preambular paragraph, the correct date is "7 May 1995" and
not "8 May 1995"; furthermore, operative paragraph 3
should read as follows:

"3. Stresses the need for the early
reestablishment of the authority of UNCRO in
accordance with its mandate;"

I would also point out that the original languages of
the draft resolution were English, French and Russian.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/1995/363,
letter dated 8 May 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Croatia to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, and S/1995/383,
letter dated 10 May 1995 from the charge d'affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

The members of the Council have received
photocopies of a letter dated 17 May 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of Croatia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, which will be issued as document S/1995/397.

It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/1995/395) before it, as orally revised in its provisional
form. If I hear no objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Botswana, China, Czech Republic,
France, Germany, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy,
Nigeria, Oman, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


