I thank the Secretary-General for his introductory remarks. I also thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing. I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States and the many ministers present today. We welcome the written report (S/2020/555) and fully subscribe to its observations. We share the deep concern expressed here today by the Secretary-General regarding the stated intention of the Government of Israel to annex parts of the occupied West Bank. It is a concern largely shared by the Council and the wider international community, as was also stated in the report. A unilateral decision formalizing an annexation, even limited in scope, would constitute a clear breach of international law, as the Secretary-General said, including the United Nations Charter, the Fourth Geneva Convention and the resolutions of the Council. Belgium will not recognize any changes to the pre-1967 borders, including Jerusalem, other than those agreed upon by the parties through direct negotiations. The West Bank will remain an occupied territory under international humanitarian law. We will continue to distinguish between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967. In view of our obligations under international law and European Union law, annexation will have an impact on the bilateral relations between Belgium and Israel and will also inevitably have significant consequences for the relationship between Israel and the European Union, as stated by the High Representative and Vice-President of the European Commission, Josep Borrell. In addition to its legal, political and economic consequences, annexation also risks gravely imperilling the security situation on the ground and in the wider region, thus undermining efforts to achieve regional peace and stability. Belgium is equally concerned by the negative impact of such a move on human rights and the humanitarian situation in the occupied territory, including through the potential imposition of a two-tiered system of unequal political, social and economic rights based on ethnicity. Not only will it further exacerbate issues related to the occupation - such as movement and access restrictions, basic service delivery and land property - it will also further affect communities that are already among the most vulnerable in the Palestinian population, leading to an increased coercive environment that would further fuel instability. Furthermore, annexation would deliver a devastating blow to the viability of a Palestinian State and the two- State solution and would close the door to future negotiations. We therefore strongly urge Israel to refrain from any unilateral decision that would lead to the annexation of any parts of occupied Palestinian territory. We also call on the international community, especially those States with influence, to exert all efforts to prevent any such steps. The intention of the Israeli Government to annex parts of the occupied West Bank has led the Palestinian Authority to consider itself absolved of the agreements and understandings with Israel and the United States in the security and civilian areas. On 3 June, the Palestinian Authority announced that it would refuse to receive the clearance funds collected by Israel on its behalf. We are concerned about the consequences of those developments, specifically their socioeconomic and humanitarian impact. Only through meaningful and direct negotiations will it be possible to arrive at a two-State solution that meets Israeli and Palestinian security needs and Palestinian aspirations to statehood and sovereignty. We have taken note of the Palestinian leadership's willingness to achieve a just and comprehensive peace, as mentioned in the report. Against that backdrop, it is all the more important that all Palestinian factions invest in the reunification of Gaza and the West Bank under a single, democratic national Government. We strongly encourage the holding of elections once conditions permit it. It is important that the international community put its weight behind efforts to restart meaningful negotiations. In that regard, we welcome the conference call held on 22 May at the level of Envoys of the Middle East Quartet. We hope that efforts within this format or an enlarged format can continue. We are convinced that only through a negotiated solution based on internationally agreed parameters and respect for international law can just and lasting peace be achieved. The fulfilment of the aspirations of only one side will lead only to more instability in Israel and Palestine and the wider region as well as to the perpetuation of conflict.
