Mr. Matussek (Germany): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The candidate
07-20483
countries Turkey and Croatia align themselves with
this statement.

I would like to thank you for giving the European
Union the opportunity to report on the implementation of
the mandate of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(EUFOR). I will make some introductory remarks and
then ask you, Sir, to give the floor to the High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security
Policy of the European Union (EU), Mr. Javier Solana.

A year ago, in late December 2005, the United
Nations requested the European Union to provide
additional security in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo while the country went through the election
process. The EU - after close consultation with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
- agreed to support the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
to assist in ensuring security in the interest of a
successful transition. In April 2006, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1671 (2006), which
authorized the European force. In July, EUFOR was
launched as an autonomous EU-led operation within
the framework of the European Security and Defence
Policy, with a total of 21 member States participating.
As envisaged in resolution 1671 (2006), EUFOR was
concluded after four months, at the end of November.

Following operation Artemis in Bunia in summer
2003, the operation was another milestone of
cooperation between the European Union and the
United Nations in the field of peacekeeping in Africa.
The EU and the United Nations - both at the level of
headquarters and of the missions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - worked together intensively
before and during the operation. Our joint efforts helped
to provide stability, defuse tensions and deter potential
spoilers during critical stages of the election process.
The lessons drawn from that experience will be important
for our future partnership in the field of crisis
management, which is growing ever more intensive. That
increasing cooperation must be accompanied by
appropriate mechanisms of dialogue and exchange -
issues we should look into in the coming months.

The European Union warmly welcomes the
success of the first democratic elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in more than 40
years and congratulates the Congolese people on that
major step towards stabilization and reconstruction in a
07-20483

spirit of national reconciliation. The European Union
calls on all political players to engage constructively in
the post-transition process.

The European Union recalls the substantial
efforts it has undertaken in support of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo at the political level, as well as
through instruments of the European Security and
Defence Policy, the EU Electoral Observation Mission
and the assistance provided through the European
Development Fund and, bilaterally, by EU member
States.

The EU remains fully committed to continuing its
support for the consolidation of stability and
reconstruction, notably through assuming a coordinating
role for international efforts in the security sector, in
close cooperation with the United Nations, to support
the Congolese authorities in that field. It is essential
that future cooperation be based on the new authorities'
strong commitment to good governance and to
strengthening the rule of law. Appropriate flexible
mechanisms will need to be developed with the new
Congolese Government to ensure effective
coordination of support and political dialogue.

In concluding, let me thank the people, the
Government and the political actors of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for their confidence in the
European force, which demonstrated its neutrality and
effectiveness throughout its mandate. The EU is also
grateful to the Government of Gabon, which allowed
the European force to use Gabon as an important base
for the operation. We appreciated the excellent
cooperation with the United Nations, both in New York
and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and with
the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We hope that the successful elections will be
the first step towards a brighter future for the
Congolese people and the entire region of the Great
Lakes.

