Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura for his briefing. We support and
appreciate his indefatigable efforts in the search for a
peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis and in response to
the urgent and difficult situation in Idlib. We also thank
Director John Ging of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs for his briefing. We commend
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners for
continuing to provide much-needed assistance to all in
need under extremely challenging circumstances.

We are concerned about the situation in Idlib and
the possibility of a humanitarian disaster should the
fighting escalate. We recognize that there are United
Nations-designated terrorists in Idlib, who must be
defeated through coordinated international efforts.
What worries us is that military escalation would
aggravate the humanitarian, crisis in a province
where there are approximately 1.4 million people
who have already been displaced, and exacerbate the
suffering of vulnerable groups. We therefore believe
that everything possible should be done to protect
the lives of millions of civilians. In that regard, we
appreciate ongoing consultations, particularly among
the Astana guarantors, as Idlib is a de-escalation zone.
We sincerely hope that the key summit of the Astana
guarantors that is taking place today will lead to a
productive and meaningful outcome in finding a more
sustainable solution to the complex situation in Idlib.

We also call on all States that have influence over
Syrian actors to play a constructive role in the efforts to
avoid a humanitarian disaster in Idlib. We are convinced
that it is in such difficult situations that all those with
influence should work together in a genuine spirit of
cooperation, which would demonstrate the primacy and
power of diplomacy.

While we advocate a sustainable solution to the
Idlib situation, the humanitarian work of the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners should also be
fully supported so as to continue reaching all those in
need of humanitarian assistance. That will require the
protection of civilians and humanitarian workers. In
that regard, the offer of the Special Envoy to intervene to
help ensure the safety of civilians should be considered
with the ultimate objective of doing everything possible
to protect civilians in the province.

We further reiterate that all parties should ensure
safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access.
In addition, as we have heard from Director Ging,
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners
need additional funding to respond to the growing
humanitarian needs and to implement the preparedness
plan that he mentioned. Hence, we encourage all donors
to extend their generous assistance.

Finally, the people of Syria have experienced
unspeakable tragedy over the past seven years.
What they need and deserve is a comprehensive and
sustainable political solution that meets their legitimate
aspirations. While we fully recognize that avoiding
further military escalation for the sake of civilians is
our current priority, the crisis in Idlib and across all of
Syria can be resolved only through political dialogue.
There is no military solution. Therefore, at this highly
decisive and critical time, the Security Council should
support the tireless efforts of the Special Envoy both to
avoid the worst-case scenario in Idlib and to establish
a constitutional committee that could lead to the
reinvigoration of the political process, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).

In that regard, we note with appreciation that the
Special Envoy has scheduled consultations for next
week with relevant States that may have influence on
the process. Ultimately, it is through such consultations
and, more important, a comprehensive, Syrian-led and
-owned dialogue facilitated by the United Nations, that
lasting solutions to the crisis in Idlib and the whole of
Syria may be found.

