Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate on children and armed conflict. We also
wish to take this opportunity to thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Ann M. Veneman, Executive Director of UNICEF,
and others for their presentations and invaluable
contributions, which have enriched this debate.

South Africa aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Slovenia on behalf of the
Human Security Network.

This year marked the tenth anniversary of the
landmark United Nations report (A/51/306) on the
impact of armed conflict on children by Ms. Graca
Machel, the first independent expert to be appointed by
the Organization on this issue. The subject of children
and armed conflict had never before been studied in
depth. The Machel report was ground-breaking and led
to the Secretary-General's appointment of a Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict in
1997.

Over the past 10 years, there has been an
increasing focus by the international community on the
promotion and protection of children affected by armed
conflict. There are international instruments and norms
as well as national legislation providing for the
protection, rights and well-being of children. There are
also concrete commitments on children and armed
conflict that have been entered into by parties to
conflict. A growing momentum now exists for the
application on the ground of international standards
and norms aimed at the protection of children. It is
imperative that that momentum be maintained in order
to consolidate the gains that have been registered and
to further advance the agenda on children and armed
conflict.

Despite that impetus, my delegation is deeply
concerned that new situations have arisen that make it
difficult for us to enjoy the gains we have made in
ending the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict. The Secretary-General's report (S/2006/826)
states that the recent escalation of violence in the
Middle East and in other regions of the world has
resulted in countless child victims. Furthermore, the
recruitment and use of child soldiers and other grave
violations, such as the killing and maiming of children,
rape and other sexual violence, abductions, the denial
of humanitarian access to children and attacks against
schools and hospitals, have spread within regions and
across borders.

Concerted efforts should be made by all parties to
prevent or mitigate further violations through dialogue
and the active participation of all stakeholders involved
in the protection of children. For that reason, the
monitoring and reporting mechanism established by
Security Council resolution 1612 (2005) should be
supported so that it can effectively address the
widespread impact of armed conflict on children,
especially in the area of the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation of
children.

My delegation notes with interest the Secretary-
General's recommendation to expand the Security
Council's focus in order to give equal care and
attention to all categories of grave violations
committed against children. There is merit in that
proposal, and my delegation will reflect further on it.
However, the recruitment and use of child soldiers are
still a major problem, and the role of the Security
Council has been strengthened to address that issue.

The Council has been given the mandate to
consider imposing certain measures against parties on
its agenda that recruit or use children in situations of
armed conflict and are in violation of applicable
international law. Security Council resolutions 1539
(2004) and 1612 (2005) called on parties to prepare
concrete time-bound action plans to halt the
recruitment and use of children in collaboration with
United Nations peacekeeping missions and country
teams. We are pleased to note that, to date, action plans
and advocacy efforts have been made with a number of
parties in situations of armed conflict.

Much needs to be done on the ground to protect
children from the devastating impact of armed conflict.
It is therefore disturbing that sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeeping personnel continue. The ability
of Member States and the United Nations to respond
effectively to allegations of abuse should be
strengthened. In that regard, we support the
comprehensive United Nations strategy to address

sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as the
establishment by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of a conduct and discipline team at its
headquarters and in peace operations.

A positive development is the deployment on a
case-by-case basis of child protection advisers in
certain United Nations peacekeeping operations. Such
advisers have been effective in gathering information
for monitoring and reporting purposes and in
mainstreaming child protection within missions and
through mission training programmes. However, there
is room for improvement. We are looking forward to
receiving a study on the child protection experience in
peace operations, which will contain a comprehensive
assessment of the impact and effectiveness of the child
protection advisers.

Sustained investment in health and social
infrastructures, as well as education and skills training,
will ensure the successful integration of children into
their communities and will prevent re-recruitment.
Special attention should be given to girl children who
have been exploited by armed forces and groups.
Deeper understanding is required of the acute
vulnerability of girls in situations of armed conflict.
Such an understanding should inform more gender-
sensitive strategies as well as protection and
programme responses. The rehabilitation and
reintegration of all children who have been associated
with armed forces requires immediate attention.
Adequate funding and resources should be made
available by the international community to assist
national efforts to develop relevant and effective
programmes that will ensure the long-term
sustainability and success of such interventions.

