Mrs. Schroderus-Fox (Finland): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The following countries - Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia,
Liechtenstein, Ukraine and Moldova - align
themselves with this declaration.
The European Union highly commends the timely
mission to Afghanistan by the Security Council, under
the able leadership of Ambassador Oshima. The
mission is a clear sign of the continued commitment of
the international community to the stabilization and
reconstruction of Afghanistan. The European Union
supports the findings of the mission.

Afghanistan has achieved significant progress in
recent years. However, serious challenges, threatening
to undermine the achievements to date, remain and in
some cases have become more acute in the fields of
security, drug production, governance and human
rights, anti-corruption and economic development.
Afghanistan is at a critical juncture, and urgent,
coordinated steps must be taken by the Afghan
Government and the international community to face
up to those challenges. The military dimension of our
efforts should go hand in hand with a strong, high-
profile political engagement.

I would like to affirm the European Union's
unwavering and long-term support for the Government
and the people of Afghanistan. That engagement is
based on the Afghanistan Compact and the Joint
Political Declaration adopted by the European Union
and the Government of Afghanistan on 16 November
2005.

The EU's assistance fosters the establishment of a
democratic, accountable, sustainable and self-sufficient
Afghan State capable of exercising its sovereignty and
protecting the rights of its citizens. The European
Union attaches special importance to the protection of
human rights, paying special attention to the rights of
women and children. The EU encourages the
Government of Afghanistan to reinforce its
commitment to human rights and reconciliation
through increased support for the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission and the implementation of
the Action Plan for Peace, Justice and Reconciliation in
Afghanistan.

The fight against corruption and impunity
remains a cross-cutting priority. We highlight the core
importance of Afghan leadership and responsibility in
that regard.

In the period 2002-2006, the European Union
collectively contributed €3.7 billion in aid to
Afghanistan, amounting to one third of the aid pledged
by the international community. EU Member States
have played leading coordinating roles in particular
sectors and have made large contributions to security,
including through the current provision of
approximately half of the International Security

Assistance Force (ISAF) - amounting to more than
06-64703
16,000 troops - and through participation in

provincial reconstruction teams.

The European Union places particular importance
on the rule of law, and we are currently considering
ways to increase our engagement in this sector. As the
report points out, progress on the rule of law, including
police and justice, at both the central and provincial
levels is essential for the security and long-term
stability of Afghanistan. The European Commission
intends to increase its contributions for justice reform
and local governance, inter alia, through provincial
reconstruction teams led by, or with substantial assets
from, EU member States.

We have also been actively supporting counter-
narcotics efforts. Earlier this year, the EU adopted an
action-oriented plan to combat the production of drugs
in Afghanistan and their trafficking from that country
along heroin routes. The National Drug Control
Strategy represents an appropriate approach for
tackling the problem, under the primary responsibility
of the Afghan Government. Good governance and anti-
corruption policies are essential components of
counter-narcotics efforts.

The EU also encourages the development of
regional cooperation through political dialogue,
increased economic links and confidence-building
measures between Afghanistan and its neighbours. We
call on Afghanistan and Pakistan to deepen relations
and to cooperate closely to deal with insecurity in
border areas.

The European Union continues to support fully
the Afghanistan Compact and considers it the central
strategic framework for the future reconstruction and
stabilization of Afghanistan until 2010. We expect
strong Afghan leadership and responsibility in
implementation of the Compact, we and encourage
decisive steps from the Government of Afghanistan to
fulfil its commitments under the Afghanistan Compact.

The international community, including the
European Union, is fully committed to supporting this
Afghan-led process. The bottom-up development
strategies highlighted by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Tom
Koenigs, could provide a valuable contribution for
reconstruction and stabilization. The impact of
international assistance should be further enhanced
through efficient coordination and monitoring.

The United Nations, mainly through UNAMA,
continues to have a key role in coordination and
monitoring the implementation of the Afghanistan
Compact, including chairing the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board (JCMB). The EU will, together
with UNAMA, NATO and other key actors, including
the international financial institutions, work towards
effective cooperation and coordination within the
international community and with the Government of
Afghanistan.

The EU highly appreciates the work of UNAMA
and of Special Representative Koenigs in this respect
and welcomes the initiative of holding a JCMB
meeting of member States at the senior official level in
Berlin on the first anniversary of the Afghanistan
Compact.

The EU welcomes plans to expand UNAMA's
presence throughout the field, security permitting. We
also emphasize close collaboration between the United
Nations Special Representative, the EU Special
Representative and the NATO Senior Civilian
Representative.

The European Union will continue to work, on
the basis of the Afghanistan Compact, in close
collaboration with the Afghan Government and our
international partners, to build an Afghanistan whose
prosperity and stability matches the hopes, the strength
and the fortitude of its people.

