Mr. Burian (Slovakia): First of all, I would like
to join previous speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-
General Holmes for his timely briefing on the
humanitarian situations in Somalia and Darfur. His
observations are, of course, alarming. They underline
the need for more active and systematic efforts by all
stakeholders to address the problems in those two
areas. We fully agree with Mr. Holmes that the return
of peace and stability to those areas is the best
guarantee against the emerging disaster.

In the meanwhile, we believe more needs to be
done to ease the suffering of civilians trapped in the
armed conflicts in Darfur and Somalia. In that regard,
we commend the tireless efforts and work of United
Nations agencies and several non-governmental
organizations that are trying to improve the desperate
humanitarian situation and to avert catastrophe.

We would like to reiterate here that the protection
of civilians, especially the most vulnerable groups,
such as women and children, must be a permanent
priority for the Security Council.

Turning to Darfur, we are concerned that, despite
all the recent efforts on the political and peacekeeping
tracks, the overall security situation continues to
deteriorate, with an enormously negative impact on the
situation of civilians. We continue to believe that
ensuring humanitarian assistance for all of the 4.2
million people affected in Darfur is essential. In that
regard, we note with deep concern that there is only
very limited or no access for humanitarian workers in
large areas of Darfur.

Yesterday, the Council heard from the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (see S/PV.5789),
and last week from Special Envoy Eliasson (see S/PV.5784), that the situation in camps for internally

displaced persons is very worrying, with violence and
insecurity on the rise. It is appalling that people in
camps face very difficult choices: either to stay in
areas under attack or to move to other places, where
living conditions are very difficult.

We are very concerned that we continue to see
more deliberate attacks against civilians and relief
workers, ongoing displacements, vehicle hijackings,
abductions, denial of humanitarian access, bureaucratic
obstacles and the expulsion of aid workers from the
Sudan. Those are just a few examples of the challenges
that relief workers have to face while working in the
Sudan. In that regard, Slovakia would like to
emphasize the need for full respect for humanitarian
principles, in order for there to be a more effective and
efficient response to the crisis.

We are encouraged by the signing of the Joint
Communique between the United Nations and the
Sudan earlier this year. We note that there has been
certain progress in its implementation, as reported by
Mr. Holmes. But clearly, we agree with Mr. Holmes
that more needs to be done to address the remaining
problems. We believe that the Government of the
Sudan should redouble its efforts to facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian aid.

Finally, we believe that the deployment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), as was stressed by previous
speakers, must be accelerated to prevent the situation
from becoming a catastrophe. We call on the
Government of the Sudan to facilitate this process.

Briefly, we are greatly concerned about the
growing humanitarian crisis in Somalia and the
ongoing violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights. We call on the Somali Government
to immediately remove the restrictions on humanitarian
flights and shipments, and to facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. We are also concerned about
the difficult situation along the Somali coast, which has
been seriously affected by an increasing number of
incidents of piracy. In this regard, we commend the
French Navy escort for its facilitation of the delivery of
World Food Programme shipments.

In conclusion, we express our support for some of
Mr. Holmes's suggestions, specifically that there
should be more monitoring and more close attention
paid to issues of human rights Violations, as well as the
need for independent investigations of those cases.

