Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to convey to you, Sir, my congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We thank you for having
convened today's debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. I would also like to thank you for the
concept paper (S/2013/75, annex) that you have kindly
circulated in order to enrich the debate on this item,
taking into account the fact that 13 years have passed
since the Secretary-General submitted his first report
to the Council on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/1999/957).

The successive debates in the Security Council on
this subject seek to promote a global approach to and
an objective vision for the best way to protect civilians
while avoiding any politicization of the concept of
the protection of civilians and any recourse to double
standards in addressing it, because civilians who die,
who are killed by missiles, should be protected by the
Security Council. Unfortunately, the Security Council
has not even lifted a finger in several recent cases. Many
civilian populations have been exposed to danger.

Attacking the underlying causes of conflict and
achieving a comprehensive, lasting and peaceful
settlement of conflict guarantees the protection of
civilians. We fully agree with the concept paper
that the civilian population is the primary victim of
armed conflict. However, we must take into account
the important truth that armed groups target civilian
populations in order to cause civilian casualties,
including women and children, thereby provoking the
international community against Governments and
compelling its involvement in conflict situations. The
best example of this is the armed groups operating
in populated areas in Darfur, which try to provoke
the international community against the Government
by attacking civilians. It is regrettable that none of
those who have taken the floor during this meeting to
talk about the situation of civilians in the two states
of Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan has addressed
the underlying causes of that situation, namely, the
resurgence of attacks by armed groups in those two
states. That illustrates what I said earlier concerning
the politicization of the very concept of the protection
of civilians.

In that regard, we note that rebels from the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-North),
who are attacking towns in densely populated Southern
Kordofan, are also attacking the offices of humanitarian
organizations such as UNICEF and the World Health
Organization that are located in those towns. That is a
clear example of attacks by such groups against civilian
populations. Therefore, the Security Council must play
its role with respect to the so-called SPLM-North, and
call upon South Sudan to immediately disassociate
itself from those rebel groups in order to enable the
implementation of the agreements reached between our
two countries.

In considering the question of the protection of
civilians, priority must be given to ensuring successful
peacebuilding and peaceful political settlements, as
well as to requiring armed groups to participate in the
political process and peaceful negotiations in order
to achieve their objectives, rather than resorting to
military action or attempts to manipulate public opinion
by causing civilian casualties.
It goes without saying that the genuine experiences
of a number of countries have clearly demonstrated that
in the absence of peace on the ground, peacekeeping
missions, however large they may be, will not achieve
their objectives, because only peace can truly protect
civilians. Peace on the ground is conducive to the
implementation of recovery programmes, including
reconstruction, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, and the application and implementation
of rapid-impact projects to facilitate the employment of
internally displaced persons and returning refugees.

My delegation appeals to the Council and through
you, Sir, to all members of the international community
to support the ongoing peace efforts of the Government
of the Sudan. We also call upon the Council to send a
strong message to those who refuse to recognize the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur to put down their
weapons andjoin the peace process.

In conclusion, the principle of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is a noble one to which we
all aspire. However, we are concerned over attempts
to use that objective to political ends, such as the
campaign currently under way with respect to the so-
called the responsibility to protect. I reiterate that while
the concept of the responsibility to protect is included
in the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/ 1), it is interpreted in many different
ways by Member States, since it contradicts principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations regarding
the sovereignty of States and their legitimate and total
responsibility to protect their citizens.

It must also be recalled that the right to protect
civilians in armed conflict is only one element of an
integrated whole comprised of interlinked rights and
obligations that are reasserted by that very Outcome
Document. These include achieving sustainable
development, combating poverty and preventing
conflict by addressing its underlying causes.

