Mr. Ging: Last month, the Emergency Relief
Coordinator informed the Security Council (see S/PV.8320) of the dramatic increase in the number of
people in need of humanitarian assistance in Aleppo
and Idlib governorates since the beginning of the year.
Recent weeks have seen a further serious deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in the north-west, with
intense aerial bombardment and shelling reported in
parts of Idlib, Aleppo, Hama and Latakia governorates,
resulting in the death and injury of civilians and damage
to, and the destruction of, civilian infrastructure,
including schools and hospitals, thereby placing even
more strain on humanitarian responders and vulnerable
host communities.

On 10 August, there were air strikes on the town
of Oram Al-Kubra, in western Aleppo, which were
reported to have killed 41 civilians and wounded more
than 70. On the same day, bombs were dropped on
Alteh and Khan Shaykhun, in southern Idlib, killing
12 civilians and wounding dozens of others. On
12 August, 67 people were reportedly killed and 37 were
injured, including many women and children, when a
weapons depot in a residential building exploded near
Sarmada, in rural Idlib.

Over the same period, the United Nations Children's
Fund reported that three health facilities it had been
supporting were attacked, rendering two of those
facilities out of service. Separately, an unconfirmed
report was received of a projectile striking the grounds
ofa hospital in Al-Ma'arra which had been deconflicted
according to agreed procedures. In that instance, no
casualties or damage to the hospital were reported.
School activities were also suspended in several areas
owing to hostilities.

Humanitarian organizations are responding to
needs across the north-west while drawing on cross-
border assistance deliveries, which continue to provide
a critical lifeline for hundreds of thousands of civilians
who cannot be reached through other means. Some
680,000 people received food delivered from Turkey
during the month of July alone, while 254,000 people
received health assistance during the same period.

Alongside the ongoing response and prepositioning
of aid, humanitarian partners are finalizing a
comprehensive readiness plan for people in areas of the
north-west being reached by cross-border humanitarian
organizations. The plan is intended to guide a flexible
response over a six-month period, complementing
assistance mobilized from inside Syria. With an
estimated 2.1 million people already in need in areas
under non-State armed group control covered by the
readiness plan, with humanitarian workers likely to
be among the displaced and with many organizations
facing increasing funding shortfalls, the efforts of the
Council to avoid a further escalation of violence and an
ensuing humanitarian catastrophe are critical.

Turning to the situation in the south-west, the
Government of Syria has now regained control over
the vast majority of Dara'a, Quneitra and Al-Suwayda
governorates. Large-scale return of internally displaced
people has already taken place, and fewer than 60,000
people are now estimated to remain displaced across
the three governorates.

However, massive levels of humanitarian need
persist, and the United Nations continues to provide
aid in partnership with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
and other local organizations. Food assistance has now
been provided to more than 390,000 people, as have
water and sanitation, education, shelter assistance
and protection services. Two ad hoc inter-agency
convoys delivered hygiene kits, nutrition supplies and
sanitary and household items for a total of 40,000
people in Dara'a's Al-Balad and Busra Al-Sham on
9 and 16 August, respectively. As efforts to scale up
protection and basic services continue and more detailed
needs assessments are also under way, sustained and
expanded humanitarian access across the south-west
will, be critical.

The humanitarian situation remains complex and
challenging in other parts of the country. At Rukban,
on the Syrian-Jordanian border, the movement of
several hundred families out of the camp due to
deteriorating living conditions means that the current
population is estimated to be approximately 45,000, of
whom the vast majority are women and children. The
provision of humanitarian assistance in the camp is
increasingly urgent, with minimal aid delivered since
January. Discussions on a humanitarian convoy to the
area continue.

Close to 150,000 people are now estimated to
have returned to Raqqa city. Unexploded ordnance
and improvised explosive devices continue to pose a
life-threatening threat to returnees and humanitarian
personnel. Alongside the insecurity and resource
shortfalls, this is hindering the scaling-up of assistance.

In Deir ez-Zor, ongoing fighting in the east of
the governorate has continued to impact civilians,
with reports of more than 20,000 people having
been displaced to makeshift camps between July
and the beginning of this month. Many sites hosting
new arrivals are not accessible to humanitarian
organizations present in the area, and most displaced
people are reported to be prevented from leaving the
sites, although some have been able to move to other
areas to receive medical treatment.

The number of people who remain displaced from
eastern Ghouta in sites in rural Damascus is reported to
have fallen to just below 7,500. The United Nations did
not receive authorization to access these sites between
mid-June and August. However, the goods news is
that visits to some of those locations were possible
last week. Returns to eastern Ghouta are reported to
have continued, although access to the area remains
limited, delaying our efforts to scale up assistance and
provide much-needed services in the area, including
for returnees.

World Humanitarian Day was held on 19 August to
pay tribute to aid workers and rally support for people
affected by crises around the world. Syria remains
among the most dangerous countries in the world for
humanitarian workers and health-care providers. Many
have been directly targeted in the course of their work
or forced to flee their homes. Hundreds have lost their
lives. We continue to remind all parties to the fighting
in Syria of their obligations under international
humanitarian law to protect and respect humanitarian
relief personnel.

The Emergency Relief Coordinator is in Damascus
today to engage with the Government of Syria on how
best to further scale up the collective humanitarian
response across Syria and how to ensure that those
in greatest need are assisted and protected. His visit
coincides with a visit of the High Commissioner
for Refugees.

The Council's engagement is also critical to
ensuring de-escalation in Idlib and surrounding areas;
to ensure safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian
access; and to ensure the protection of civilians and
civilian infrastructure. Hundreds of thousands of
people are already experiencing dire humanitarian
conditions in overcrowded sites in which basic services
have been stretched to the breaking point for months.

Humanitarian organizations are doing what they
can with the resources available to them to sustain
the current response and prepare for a possible
further deterioration, thanks in large part to cross-
border assistance and the generosity of our financial
donors. But a worst-case scenario in Idlib would
overwhelm capacities and have the potential to create a
humanitarian emergency at a scale not yet seen in this
crisis. We therefore call on the members of the Council
to do all they can to ensure that we avoid that. In the
words of Kofi Annan, "We have the means and the
capacity to deal with our problems, if only we can find
the political will."

