Mr. Duval (Canada): I would like to begin my
intervention by thanking Ambassador Chowdhury for the
impressive leadership that he displayed as head of the
Security Council mission to Kosovo. He constantly and
very eloquently found the right words to convey to the
communities we visited the essential message of our
mandate: reject violence, ensure public safety and order,
promote stability, safety and security, support full and
effective implementation of Council resolution 1244 (1999)
and fully cooperate with the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to this end. I
can attest to his intelligent determination, good judgement
and generous humanism - qualities that ensured our trip
was exhaustive and our findings intellectually rigorous and
just. Ambassador Chowdhury honoured the Security
Council. For that I thank him warmly.

(spoke in French)

Today's meeting is a critical aspect of the Security
Council's mission to Kosovo, for the findings contained in
the report make clear that both the broader United Nations
membership and the Security Council itself must be
attentive to the achievements in the field and play an active
role in supporting the efforts of UNMIK and the Kosovo
Force (KFOR). This requires us to support the mission in
terms of ideas, messages and, above all, resources.

Having participated in the mission and in the
drafting of the report that Ambassador Chowdhury
presented, my delegation agrees without reservation with
the findings and observations contained in the section
entitled "Findings of the Mission". There is little we can
add to the report, but there are four areas that we would
like briefly to highlight concerning our responsibilities as
members of the Security Council and the United Nations.

First is the security situation. There is no question
that the success of UNMIK and the full implementation
of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) depend first
on ensuring human security for all residents of Kosovo.
This is our priority task.
As the report outlines, adequate social, economic
and, most importantly, physical security is crucial to
building a functioning and pluralistic society. We can
assist efforts to stabilize the situation and progressively
improve human security in Kosovo in a number of ways:
by sending, as did the mission, clear messages to the local
communities that violence will not be tolerated by the
international community; by providing UNMIK with the
civilian police resources it requires to ensure personal
safety and social order; and by supporting locally, at the
community level, social and economic reconstruction
efforts in order to restore the fabric of normal life after
the devastation and violence that the Government of
Belgrade so brutally wrought.

Second is the question of missing and detained
persons. Those of us on the mission could not fail to note
the importance of this issue for the thousands of Kosovars
who await news each day - many of whom have been
waiting for over a year - of missing family members
who have simply disappeared from their lives. The hope
of these people is that their missing family members are
detained; the fear, however, is that they are lying in one
of the many mass graves that have yet to be exhumed.
We have to act on this issue, and we can do so in
different ways. We can support the efforts of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
in Kosovo. The need for forensic work is immense. Under
a recently signed agreement, Canada will provide 21
forensic experts over the coming months to assist in the
Tribunal's investigation of war crimes in Kosovo. They
will be part of an international effort that will examine
more than 300 suspected mass graves. Also, the Security
Council needs to consider appointing a special envoy for
detainees and missing persons, a concept supported by
both Serbian and Albanian representatives with whom we
met. Such an envoy would bring attention and political

 

will to an issue that requires both. In the view of my
delegation, this issue is an essential part of the process of
the full implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and is
crucial to the stabilization and reconciliation efforts in
Kosovo.

A third issue we would like to mention is that of the
return of refugees. Ensuring the successful return of
refugees who were forced from their homes last year
requires many of the improvements in the social, economic
and physical security we have already mentioned. But
countries of origin also have the responsibility to ensure
that UNMIK is aware of expected flows of refugees back
to Kosovo and that it is capable of handling their
reintegration into society. We must facilitate and not make
more difficult this important development. Ultimately, and
by definition, refugee returns are a positive sign that
UNMIK is building a society to which people want to
return to live. We want to arrive at a point where Kosovar
residents of all ethnicities who were expelled or left due to
physical intimidation or insecurity can return to their
homes.

Lastly, there is a more fundamental issue for which
the Security Council has absolute responsibility - the
active support of this body for the work of the United
Nations in Kosovo. The United Nations Mission in Kosovo
is not perfect; and while we have the right to offer
constructive suggestions on ways to improve it, we also
have the responsibility to ensure that it is properly staffed
and financed. Judging from what I witnessed during the
Security Council mission, UNMIK is doing excellent work
under the strong leadership of Mr. Kouchner. Everywhere
the mission went to meet with local communities, including
both Serbs and Albanians, often torn apart by hatred, pain
and fear - everywhere - Mr. Kouchner was received
warmly by the population, as a friend. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General should be
congratulated for fostering such trust and confidence with
all ethnic communities, and he should be supported by
those of us who value the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999).

Let us be absolutely clear: the success of the United
Nations Mission in Kosovo depends on the resolute
engagement of each and every member of the Council and
the Organization. We here dictate to a large extent how
well UNMIK can do its job - by the provision of financial
and personnel resources, by the moral and legal leadership
this Council provides and by sending a consistent message
that supports, rather than undermines, the efforts of
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force to bring about a society in
Kosovo that can function in accordance with the
principles of the United Nations.

