Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Haysom for his briefing on
the situation in Afghanistan. We listened with interest
to the substantive statement made by the Permanent
Representative of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan,
Mr. Mahmoud Saikal.

The developments in the military and political
situation in Afghanistan are a matter of serious
concern. There has recently been a significant increase
in militant activity by the Taliban, as well as other
terrorist groups. One very worrying subject is the
increase in the numbers and influence of Islamic
State fighters in Afghanistan and the latter's efforts to
subsume other opposition armed groups, primarily in
the north of the country. We have noted with concern
the cases of assaults and terrorist attacks on diplomatic
missions of foreign Governments in Afghanistan, which
recently have become more frequent. We are compelled
to conclude that the activities of the four-nation contact
group created a few months ago to establish direct
talks between Kabul and the Taliban unfortunately has
not produced visible results. A clear indication of this
was the Taliban's statement about its refusal to resume
peace negotiations until the Afghan Government meets
its previously announced preconditions, and in that
case there can be no possibility of starting a successful
peace process. But without full-fledged peace talks and
an end to military action, the suffering of the Afghan
people will continue.

For our part, we support the Afghan Government's
policy regarding the achievement of national
reconciliation. We are ready to help to advance the
negotiation process, including by demonstrating a
flexible approach to the issues related to the functioning
of the sanctions regime on the Taliban of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). We
are ready to build a constructive partnership with
the Afghan leadership in the interests of maintaining
the country's stability and independent path, free of
terrorism and drug trafficking. In our view, a key to
stability in Afghanistan is the combat-ready national
security forces, which must be able to independently
ensure peace and stability in their country.

In February, we shipped supplies of weapons and
munitions - 10,000 Kalashnikov assault rifles and
more than 2 million cartridges - to Afghanistan free of
charge. We will continue to help Kabul to prepare and
train Afghan security personnel in cooperation with the
relevant Russian authorities, both on a bilateral basis
and by cooperating with our international partners,
regardless of the change in position on the part of the
United States, NATO and a number ofWestern countries
regarding their implementation of joint projects with
Russia aimed at assisting Afghanistan.

We consider NATO's ongoing Resolute Support
Mission to be a direct successor to the International
Security Assistance Force, which was unable to
complete the tasks it had been set over a 12-year period
from 2002 to 2014. Nonetheless, we supported the
Security Council's adoption, in December 2014, of
resolution 2189 (2014), on the launch of the Resolute
Support Mission, on the assumption that the NATO
leaders would continue to report to the Security Council
on their Mission's activities regarding the situation
in Afghanistan. In view of the results of the NATO
Summit in Wales and Kabul's signing of agreements on
security with Washington, DC, and with NATO on the
status of forces, the Alliance and the United States, as
the main supplier of troops to NATO's Afghan mission,
now bears greater responsibility for training the Afghan
national security forces and for the development of the
security situation in Afghanistan. It is also crucial that
no security threats to third countries emanate from
Afghanistan. We are compelled to conclude that so
far the new NATO mission has not achieved its stated
goals either. Units of the Afghan national security
forces have sustained significant losses in fighting the
opposition and have shown an inability to effectively
repel their onslaught.

The drugs being produced in large quantities in
Afghanistan pose a serious threat to its own stability
and to that of the surrounding region and the world
in general. Besides the direct harm it inflicts, the
production of drugs provides terrorism with significant
financial fuel. In that regard, we believe it is essential
to intensify the international community's efforts to
combat drug-trafficking in Afghanistan. We have no
illusions about the data published in 2015 showing a
significant drop in opium production in Afghanistan,
and we attribute those numbers to a change in the
methodology for assessing the level of drug production.

We note the growing awareness around the world
of the importance of the regional context to reaching a
settlement in Afghanistan, and of increasing the number
of regional forums focused on the issue ofAfghanistan.
We also believe it is important to ensure that regional
actors play a decisive role in such activities. In that
context, we have some doubts about the Istanbul
Process, also known as the Heart of Asia. We believe
that it is merely a platform for dialogue aimed at
generating new ideas that should not be duplicating the
work of existing regional organizations.

We believe that efforts to assist Afghanistan should
chiefly consist of promoting the work of established
structures, primarily the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO), whose members, observers and
dialogue partners include almost all the countries
in the region, including Afghanistan. We welcome
Afghanistan's official application for membership
status in the SCO, submitted by President Ghani during
his meeting with President Putin on the margins of
the SCO summit in Ufa. We see excellent potential
in strengthening counter-terrorist and anti-drug
interaction between Afghanistan, the SCO and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization.

