Ms. Bertini: I would like to thank you very
much, Mr. President, and the Council for this invitation
to be here, as I complete my 10-year term, on what is
actually my last day with the World Food Programme
(WFP). It is certainly a highlighted way to end my
term, being invited to join you today to talk about this
important issue.

Over 10 years ago, at the World Summit for
Children, Governments agreed to many goals, and
agreed to work towards them for the year 2000. One of
those goals included a commitment to implement
"measures to eradicate hunger, malnutrition and
famine". I believe that the international community has
achieved a part of that goal, that is, the eradication of
famine. Hunger and malnutrition remain with us, and
sometimes there will be localized severe shortages of
food. But I absolutely believe that we have put an end
to major famines like the one that claimed so many
lives in Ethiopia in the middle 1980s.
The international community has achieved this
together despite the fact that in the last decade there
has been a rising tide of emergencies, both natural and
man-made, far more than could ever have been
anticipated - a drought in southern Africa in 1992, the
devastation wrought by hurricane Mitch in Central
America, the ethnic conflicts in Kosovo and East
Timor, severe food shortages in North Korea and the
intractable conflicts in Angola, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Sudan and West Africa, as well
as many more crises. Many of those could have
brought on famine, but I believe that we successfully
achieved the objective that they did not.

Afghanistan is the most recent example of how
the international community has successfully prevented
famine. We now have early-warning systems,
information and transport technology and political
commitment to ensure that famine never happens
again.

Food aid has become a critical part of
humanitarian interventions, starting with survival in the
case of emergencies. Food is one of the first needs in
almost every humanitarian crisis, and food aid plays a
major role in supporting people on the road to recovery
and in helping to stabilize countries and regions. Food
is often the single largest need after an emergency
strikes, and the largest resource available from donors.
Last year alone, for instance, the World Food
Programme received nearly $1.7 billion in food aid
donations for emergencies and protracted relief and
recovery operations. That is part of the $1.9 billion in
pledges WFP received last year, which really makes the
Programme the largest humanitarian agency in the
world.

First and foremost, as I said, food aid saves lives.
WFP has been involved in Afghanistan for almost four
decades. Last summer we were there fighting the
effects of civil war, persistent drought and desperate
poverty. We had 3.8 million beneficiaries. We had a
vulnerability analysis done last summer, which caused
us to raise the number of people in need to 5.5 million.
After 11 September, on the basis of United Nations
assessments, we added another 2 million people in
order to try to accommodate food assistance for a
major internal displacement and possible refugee
flows.

In that operation, through the generosity of
donors, we were able to mobilize $240 million to
deliver almost half a million metric tons of food. We
are now appealing to donors for food for the rest of the
year - also about half a million tons. We have so far
received nearly $70 million from the United States. But
we are only 22 per cent resourced and we need to
continue with a broad range of donors if we are to
continue to succeed.

Of course, the major challenge we faced in
Afghanistan - which we all saw in the press and
elsewhere - was to move food into the country in the
middle of a political and military conflict. We were
also in a race against the winter and the fact that roads
might become impassable. We won the race. After
decades of operating in the midst of the civil war, we
were able to mobilize quickly. Even at the height of the
bombing, on average we had 2,000 trucks of all sizes
and shapes on the roads every day, moving in and out
of the country. WFP not only met its target for food
deliveries into Afghanistan, but by the end of
December we had exceeded it by 36 per cent.

Great courage was displayed by our local staff in
Afghanistan, as well as by many staff members of non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) with whom we
partnered. WFP's Afghan guards stayed in the
warehouses, and we lost food from only one warehouse
in the entire country during the last four months of
2001. We also kept our women's bakeries open in
different cities throughout the country. Many NGOs
kept up the contributions locally, despite heightened
concerns about security. WFP's transport and logistics
staff were creative and hardworking. They made the
enterprise seem almost easy, even as many were
predicting the possibility of mass starvation. We
delivered the food and also set up for the United
Nations a telecommunications network, which we
shared with all United Nations partners. We also took
over and expanded airline passenger service.

We raised the question of whether we have
reached every pocket where food is needed in
Afghanistan. We probably have not, but we now have
helicopters going around to different remote locations
to try to identify areas where there may be food
shortages. But the result of our collective efforts is
clear: there was no famine in Afghanistan.

This same story of food aid preventing famine
has been repeated over and over again, although it may
not be as widely publicized as it was in Afghanistan.

I would like to share with the Council just a few
sentiments that have been shared with me by heads of
State. The former President of Honduras, Mr. Flores
Facusse, told me that, after hurricane Mitch, when his
people had no homes, no jobs, no fields and no
factories, they knew that there was one thing that they
did not have to worry about, because the World Food
Programme was there, with food, the day after the
floods. In 1994 the Prime Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina told me that food aid kept the people of
Sarajevo alive, because, even during the fighting, the
sniper fire and everything else that was happening in
Sarajevo at that time, flour and wheat went to the
bakeries that stayed open in Sarajevo and every citizen
was able to receive two loaves of bread every day. Just
recently, President Musharraf told me that, without the
massive food aid that the World Food Programme
distributed in Afghanistan last year, far more people
would have had to flee the country as refugees, with all
the destabilizing consequences.

Two years ago, when I served as the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy in the Horn of Africa, and we
mobilized food and other aid in order to try to prevent
the famine in that region, Prime Minister Meles,
President Moi and others thanked us publicly for the
success of that work.

In addition to saving lives, food aid contributes to
recovery. It has an economic value in nations
recovering from political or economic crisis. It is often
preferred to cash, because hyperinflation or lack of
markets sometimes makes local currency less than
desirable to poor, hungry families. It is no accident that
the Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Afghanistan, Mr. Brahimi, asked WFP to provide food,
on a temporary basis, to help pay the salaries of
Afghan civil servants. In Sierra Leone, food aid is
distributed to former combatants in exchange for the
return of weapons. We certainly hope that
circumstances in Angola will soon change so that
similar programmes can be put in place and so that
there can be food in exchange for weapons there.

One of the surest signs in any country that a

conflict has ended is when the schools open and where
families feel safe sending their children to school. Food
aid helps to accomplish that end as well. First, schools
are often built or rebuilt using food-for-work schemes.
Secondly, food aid is often used to provide a daily meal
at school for each child. This not only helps entice
more children to school, but it also helps them to be
able to absorb more of their education while they are
there. In Afghanistan, our goal, which we will work to
reach gradually, is to feed 1 million children at school.
The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) has
already told us that school attendance in some areas in
Afghanistan is two to three times what we all expected
before the school year started last month.

Food aid is also sometimes used as an incentive
to get more girls to attend school or to recruit pregnant
or lactating mothers to visit health centres. Food aid is
especially useful when it is given directly to women.
During and after conflicts, women usually carry the
largest social burden. They work to keep their families
together and to feed their children, often in the absence
of their husbands. Getting food to women, who in any
event will be the cooks and the people who ensure that
the children have access to food, helps to lessen their
burden and to empower them to better support their
families.

Food-for-work projects, in which we pay people
for their labour with food, are today helping to rebuild
roads, bridges and irrigation systems in Afghanistan as
well as helping with demining projects and the planting
of new crops. We use food aid in projects to train
women in literacy or basic business concepts so that
they can try to earn income to support their families.
Council members have probably read about the
women's bakeries in Afghanistan to which I referred.
These bakeries have been operating for five years; they
are the result of the efforts of brave Afghan women
who, when the edict came out that women could not
work, went to the Taliban authorities and said, "If
women can't work, widows will starve. We have a way
to keep widows alive, and that is for us to set up
bakeries which will be funded by wheat and flour from
the World Food Programme and run by women for
widows." I am proud to say that those bakeries are still
in operation today.

One thing that we try to do, as soon as
reconstruction starts in Afghanistan and elsewhere, is
to phase out the blanket distribution of free food. We
do not want to create dependency; we want to use food
aid to contribute to long-term development and
reconstruction.

There have been many success stories of food aid
being used to help rebuild after a conflict. In
Mozambique, for instance, food aid was delivered
during the crisis and was used to help create
humanitarian corridors. But food aid has also been
used, since the end of the conflict, for Mozambique's
recovery, to help with food-for-work and other
programmes, which I mentioned earlier, for the
reconstruction of the country. We have undertaken
similar programmes in Central America, Ethiopia and
Eritrea, East Timor and many other places.

Such reconstruction also helps support local
economies. For instance, almost all of the ground
transportation that we use to move food - and we
have to use a lot - is hired locally. We use trucks,
trains and even donkeys, although I have to say that
UNICEF was the first donkey-renter group in the
United Nations, in Afghanistan. Last year WFP spent
$20 million in Pakistan alone on transportation, hiring
commercial truckers. In Ethiopia in the mid-1980s, we
set up a trucking network to reach famine victims, and
then gave the trucks and their network to Ethiopia.
That same network, now in the hands of the private
sector, formed the basis of the commercial response to
the drought in the Horn of Africa in 2000.

In 1992, we helped combat drought by rebuilding
the transport infrastructure through the Beira corridor
in southern Africa - the first significant economic
cooperation across the border of South Africa - under
the old apartheid Government - and its neighbours. In
the following year, WFP rebuilt the Georgia-Armenia-
Azerbaijan railroad line, donated Russian diesel
engines and then moved food through the region. That
railroad still operates today and, of course, it is used
for commercial purposes throughout the region. With
the exception of the World Bank, WFP has also
consistently been the largest customer for goods and
services in developing countries worldwide within the
United Nations system. Our food purchases are usually
between $200 million and $300 million in developing
countries each year.

Food aid is also a stabilizing factor. It does more
than keep people alive and help with reconstruction,
even though either of those two goals would be enough
on its own. In the past 10 years, food aid has helped
stabilize countries and regions in severe crisis. I would
like to point to three cases. First, in the case of Somalia
in 1992, I remember writing to Secretary-General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali in November 1992, saying,
"Please help. We have no more options for getting food
into Mogadishu, where so many people are starving."
We could not help them. Operation Restore Hope,
which began in December of that year, helped the
World Food Programme, the International Committee
of the Red Cross and many others to reach millions of
people so as to end the famine. The operation later
changed focus, but its original purpose was to allow
people to be fed, and in that it certainly succeeded. The
insecurity caused by the famine was thus eliminated as
an element in the political turmoil.

In 1995, WFP began a small operation in North
Korea. There, too, food aid has helped to foster
stability and open new lines of communication. By
1997, the programme in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea had become the largest WFP
programme in the world, and it remains so. Today we
are feeding more than 6 million North Korean
children- every child in school in the counties to
which we have access; that is more than a quarter of
the population of the country. All the experts, including
those from the Government of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, say that 1997 was the height - or
the depth - of the famine in that country. Food aid
ended the famine, but it also helped to place the
country on a track towards better relations with United
Nations agencies and, more important, with its
neighbours in the region and with other Governments,
many of which have recognized the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea in the past two years.

Most recently, in Afghanistan, when the people
were looking at the results of years of fighting and
drought, many predicted a large famine. In September
and early October, others predicted a refugee crisis of
mammoth proportions with significant political
destabilization in the region. That did not occur, and
one main reason was that the people in Afghanistan
received food aid. They did not have to abandon their
homes to find food in the massive numbers that had
been expected.

Food aid keeps people alive, it helps communities
reconstruct after a crisis, and it helps bring regional
stability. There are still places in the world where
people are cut off from food - the UNITA-held
territories of Angola, parts of the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, 43 counties in North Korea.
However, where people can be reached, the Security
Council, the United Nations and the rest of the
international community can be proud that the world
has finally come to the point where it will not accept
the starvation of people. Because of the generosity of
donor Governments, the leadership of the Secretary-
General and - trying to be modest, but not
succeeding - the efficiency of the World Food
Programme, as the largest humanitarian agency, I dare
say that major famines are in the past.

Reaching that point has not been easy for the
staffs of any humanitarian agency in the world.
Collectively, our work is difficult and dangerous, and I
would be remiss if I were here with the Council and did
not mention the issue of security of staff. Two years
ago, the Council was kind enough to invite me to
address that issue. Since then the Office of the United
Nations Security Coordinator has been reinforced, and
the hiring of 100 field security officers was most
welcome. But I believe that more commitment is still
required. General Assembly decisions have said that
there would be more security, but that it would not be a
priority in the Secretariat budget. I believe that still
needs to be addressed.

In addition, it is absolutely clear that some
Member States have not done their part. If we look at
the issue of the perpetrators of violence against United
Nations staff and how few people have been brought to
justice, the picture is truly appalling. Member States
must do more. We cannot stand by as humanitarian
workers are murdered and no one is held accountable.
Since 1992, only 15 perpetrators of violent crimes
against United Nations staff have been apprehended,
although 204 of our colleagues have been killed -
murdered.

When I last spoke here, I recalled how an
idealistic young Dutch woman, Saskia van Meijenfeldt,
who worked for WFP in Burundi, had been shot, along
with a UNICEF colleague, execution-style. That sad
case remains unresolved, as do more than 188 others.
Think of that young woman's family and friends and of
so many of the other victims. They deserve more than
this neglect.

The tide of humanitarian crises we have seen in
the past decade unfortunately shows no sign of abating.
A major food emergency is unfolding in southern
Africa with the drought, and El Nifio is predicted for
this year, which could precipitate another destructive
cycle of floods and drought. Zimbabwe, once a major
food exporter, is now a recipient, and its needs are
growing. The needs in Angola and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will grow when we finally have
more access to people in those countries.

Food aid has saved and will save millions of
lives. Food aid has played and will play a major role in
supporting people on the road to recovery. Food aid
helps stabilize countries and regions. Ultimately, food
aid, and the humanitarian commitment of every person
in the world, has ended famine on this Earth.

