Mr. Trautwein (Germany): First of all I would
like to thank the Presidents of the two ad hoc
Tribunals - the Honourable Judge Erik Mose and the
Honourable Judge Theodor Meron - as well as the
Chief Prosecutors of both tribunals, Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow and Ms. Carla Del Ponte, for their
reports to the Council. I would also like to express my
gratitude to them and to their staff for their hard work
and dedication to the realization of international
justice. Let me also express my sincere condolences on
the passing away of Judge Richard May. We commend
his contribution to the work of the Tribunal and his
able leadership in his capacity as presiding judge in the
Milosevic case.

Germany welcomes the significant progress that
has been made during the period under review by both
Tribunals to implement their completion strategies in
accordance with the time frame and other parameters
established in Security Council resolutions 1503
(2003) and 1534 (2004).
But besides those positive developments, there
are also factors that could have significant negative
impact on the fulfilment of the completion strategies.
Above all, it is imperative that Governments cooperate
with the Tribunals, particularly the Governments of the
regions in question and those suspected of providing
haven to indicted fugitives. We again urge all States
concerned to fully cooperate with the Tribunals.

Overshadowing the progress achieved by the
Tribunals is the issue of their financial situation. The
well-known funding problems have two interrelated
components: the question as to whether the amount of
money spent on the Tribunals is proportional to the
benefits derived from them, and the poor level of
honouring assessed contributions.

As the third largest contributor to the budgets of
the Tribunals, we believe that every effort should be
made to secure their effective functioning and to avoid
any waste of money. All in all, we believe that the
combined efforts of the Tribunals and of the United
Nations budgeting and oversight mechanisms give us
the necessary guarantees that the Tribunals are
operating at acceptable levels of efficiency. That does
not mean that they are inexpensive. But we believe that
it is Virtually impossible to put a price tag on the
Tribunals' contributions to making peace and
reconciliation sustainable, their contributions towards
the reestablishment of justice and decency and their
contributions to the development of international
criminal law. Unless we prefer to pay the price of war,
we should accept the cost of justice as an intrinsic part
of the cost of peace.

Sir, allow me make a few final remarks. First,
from now to the end of the completion strategies, the
Tribunals will find themselves in a tight situation. They
will be hard pressed to meet all expectations, and they
will need all available assistance, including, and
notably, from the Security Council. This implies an
intensified dialogue, as envisaged by resolution
1534 (2004). Such a dialogue is a matter not of public
speeches but of a detailed exchange of views,
especially at the expert level. The Council should
consider holding such expert meetings not only in New
York but also at the seat of the Tribunals.

Secondly, the Council may also wish to consider
the usefulness of endowing itself with steadier
expertise on the Tribunals by agreeing to a steadier,
elected chairmanship of the Working Group instead of
a monthly rotating one.

Thirdly, I would like to assure the representatives
of the Tribunals, as well as the staff members of the
secretariats concerned, of Germany's continued and
unwavering commitment to promote the noble ideals of
peace and justice through the Tribunals, through the
International Criminal Court and through other
appropriate international or hybrid judicial or non-
judicial mechanisms. Important progress has been
achieved in this field over the last two years, and the
Secretary-General's recent report on the rule of law
and transitional justice (S/2004/616) has highlighted
and conceptualized those developments in an
extremely able manner. It has been a gratifying
experience for us to be able to contribute, to the best of
our ability, to many developments in the field of
justice. We certainly wish to continue to do so in the
future.

