Mr. Park In-Kook (Republic of Korea): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting to discuss an issue of great interest to the
entire membership, namely, enhancing the working
methods of the Security Council. We appreciate this
follow-up after the debate held last August, and believe
it will be helpful to assess the progress made thus far.
My delegation is also grateful to the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, whose work is instrumental in meeting the
expectations of the membership with regard to the
functioning of the Council.

The President's note of 2006 (see S/2006/507)
was an important starting point that laid out concrete
measures that, if implemented, would largely address
the concerns and grievances widely voiced by the
membership, while simultaneously raising overall
satisfaction with the way in which the Council
conducts its business. In that regard, we believe that
efforts have been made to enhance the overall
transparency, accountability and inclusiveness of the
Council, in spite of its ever-increasing workload.

We are particularly pleased to note that the
number of open meetings has increased steadily vis-a-
vis closed meetings and consultations. However, the
substantive nature of these open meetings could be
further improved, as they are frequently adjourned
after the introductory adoption of the agenda, and the
core discussions proceed largely in closed
consultations.

We also believe that the participation of
non-members that are parties to any dispute under
consideration in the Council's discussions should be
ensured to the maximum, as we have found from our
own experience that such interactions are immensely
helpful.

Members of the Council are also making a
commendable effort to share the work of the Council,
for example by routinely providing briefings to their
respective regional groups. Those are all steps in the
right direction that go a long way towards addressing
the frustrations felt by the wider membership.

We also appreciate the dedication of the
Secretariat in providing relevant documents, including
the reports of the Sectary-General, in a timely manner,

as they are primary sources of information for Member
States that do not sit on the Council. However,
transparency and inclusiveness could be even better
served by more substantive and analytical reports from
the Security Council. The publications and submissions
of the Council could be qualitatively improved to allow
the wider membership more insight into its work. The
Council may start out by refining its annual reports to
the General Assembly to add analytical value, rather
than stopping at simply giving descriptions of the work
of the Council in a given year.

In addition to the measures contained in the
President's note, we recognize that the Council has
utilized innovative ad hoc meeting formats on a
case-by-case basis in order to allow greater interaction
with concerned parties and to garner meaningful input
from them. It would be useful to structure and
institutionalize practices that have proved productive,
so that the Council's efficiency and effectiveness, as
well as access by interested non-members, can be
strengthened.

As a troop-contributing country (TCC) and one of
the major financial contributors to peacekeeping
operations, the Republic of Korea finds TCC meetings
to be very useful and informative. We appreciate
having more meaningful and substantive participation
in the early decision-making process for peacekeeping
missions.

Lastly, we would like to stress that improving the
working methods of the Security Council is an
important component of Council reform. That linkage
sometimes results in the tendency to put the issue of
working methods on the back burner while we wait for
a comprehensive reform to materialize. The working
methods of the Council should certainly be pursued in
tandem with overall reform, but it is by its own merit
too important to delay or neglect. In addition, we
believe that implementing feasible measures to
enhance working methods can add impetus and
much-needed energy to the broader reform.

