Viet Nam would like to thank South Africa for organizing today's debate. I also thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita, Assistant Secretary-General Zouev and Mr. Chergui for their briefings. I welcome Her Excellency Ms. Naledi Pandor, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of South Africa, to this meeting. Viet Nam appreciates and supports A frica's leading role on this subject. Africa leads by overcoming its turbulent past and being steadfast in building a peaceful and prosperous future for the African people. With examples and past experience, African countries have determined the need for, and led efforts on, security sector reform in order to better protect vulnerable populations and ensure sustainable peace. Those efforts have led the Security Council to adopt many presidential statements and resolution 2151 (2014), and a new draft resolution (S/2020/1158) will soon be adopted on this subject. They have also led to the inclusion of security sector reform in many peace agreements and United Nations missions in Africa, especially the African Union's Silencing the Guns initiative. Countries emerging from years - or even decades - of war and conflict are inevitably challenged by enormous issues in the post-conflict security environment, as well as the haunting past. Those challenges include disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former combatants, reconciliation, justice and the many shortcomings of the new security sector, which need to be effectively addressed in order to build trust and peace within each country and its population. Security sector reform can play a critical role in strengthening post-conflict peace, promoting national reconciliation and reconstruction and lowering the risks of relapse into conflict. Such efforts should address the impact of conflicts on the most vulnerable groups in society, especially women and children, as victims of, and participants in, armed conflicts. In that regard, we support nationally identified and led reforms, as they respond to the particular needs of a given situation. Such reforms can produce long-term positive impact and need to be actively supported by the United Nations and the international community. A strong sense of national ownership of current peacebuilding efforts will ensure a greater degree of success in future with regard to meeting the specific context, needs and priorities of each country. In addition, we see the merit in promoting the participation of a diverse range of relevant stakeholders in peace processes, including in the security sector, as an important factor in building a sustainable and peaceful nation and ensuring long- lasting stability. We wish to highlight the necessity of ensuring the equal representation and full involvement of women in decision-making and post-conflict peacebuilding processes, as they offer a unique perspective to peace and conflict and are the backbone of communities. We welcome the progress achieved in this field in a number of countries and regions. This has contributed to promoting dialogue between the parties and stakeholders concerned and supporting the security and stability of all relevant countries and regions. We will actively discuss this issue at the United Nations level in the review of the peacebuilding architecture, as well as at the Council level and mission level, as we continue to strengthen our participation in United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa. I wish to conclude by reiterating the important role that the international community, especially the United Nations and regional organizations, can play in the area of security sector reform to support post-conflict countries, while respecting national ownership and in accordance with their wishes and priorities. Cooperation efforts between the United Nations and regional organizations should also be encouraged to promote and share experiences on how to better support countries concerned in their efforts towards a stable, peaceful and prosperous society and country.
