Ms. Bouchamaoui (spoke in French): It is an
honour and a privilege for me to participate in this
debate for the first time, in the great forum of the
United Nations that watches over peace and security
in the world. I would like to warmly thank the Council
presidency for inviting me to contribute to this debate
on a complex theme of obvious timeliness, namely,
"Security, development and the root causes of conflict".

My thoughts go out to all those who perished in the
recent attacks in the Sinai, Beirut and Paris.

As members are aware, I come from Tunisia, a
country that in 2010 initiated what came to be known
as the Arab Spring. Five years later, unfortunately, it
is clear that Arab States live in dread of the increased
radicalism plaguing the region and threatening
peace and security in the world. My contribution to
this debate will be informed by my country's past
and current experience, as well as by a tragic and
marked environment of the outbreak of violent armed
conflicts in our region. I will try to emphasize what the
international community can do to help alleviate the
situation.

In recent years, we have experienced situations of
transition characterized by profound crises in society
and a challenge to existing models of development.
While the scenario has improved with regard to
freedoms, in particular of expression and association,
people have also experienced a deterioration in their
purchasing power, while unemployment among young
graduates is higher than ever. The countries of our
region are undergoing an unprecedented social and
economic crisis. The decades-long marginalization
of the peoples of our region and the humiliation they
experience because of the inconsistency of policies,
particularly with regard to the Palestinian cause, have
produced in our youth a sense of mistrust vis-a-vis the
West. Hence a segment of society turns its back on
universal values and attempts to draw our countries
into identity controversies, leading to perverse effects
such as extremism and terrorism.

The reasons for the emergence of terrorism and
the growing insecurity in Tunisia do not lie strictly
in Tunisian-Tunisian considerations; they are, among
others, the result of a disastrous management of the
Libyan conflict. Today, recent developments on the
south-east border of our country and the collapse of any
form of State institution in neighbouring Libya pose an
increasing risk of destabilization in Tunisia. Should
that happen, the consequences would not be limitedjust
to small Tunisia. Immediately, Europe and the rest of
the world would be affected.

Security threats are more interconnected than ever.
In our region, terrorism, wars, intra-State and cross-
border trafficking of all kinds, and mass migrations
make our security indivisible. Therefore, a proactive
and coordinated commitment and the implementation
of enhanced security strategies are needed to
implement quick and effective actions and to provide
common solutions to threats that endanger life, peace
and development.

If we want to move things along in order to
establish democracy, we have to develop substantial
programmes in support of affected countries and help
them throughout the entire process of putting in place
the rule of law, development, institution-building and
raising awareness among the people so that they act as
responsible citizens. To do that, a culture of democracy
and citizenship must first be further strengthened. And
there must be aprocess to establish a new social contract,
through which the challenges of democracy and civic
duties are clearly spelled out to avoid backsliding.

Although it is impacted by the same ills that affect
neighbouring countries, Tunisia is considered as an
exception because we have been able to avoid conflict
through dialogue and compromise before it was too
late. What we have achieved is so exceptional that the
Nobel Committee qualified our action as exemplary
and awarded us the Nobel Peace Prize this year.

With globalization occurring at breakneck
speed and changes now occurring on the planetary
level, the deep-seated crises in the countries of our
region increasingly push people to the margins of the
development process brought about by globalization.
The longer that situation persists, the longer solutions
to the crises will be compromised in the short- and
medium-terms. The risks that could loom on the security
and stability of those countries and their impacts on the
region will be increasingly significant.

At a time where instability and insecurity in our
region can rapidly deteriorate further and have negative
repercussions on the whole region, Tunisia nevertheless
still holds a specific position, which can give hope that
a democratic transition, a successful and enduring one,
is possible. The stakes are high because that could be an
example for other Arab societies in turmoil and change
and seeking to make their transition to modernity.
It behooves the entire free world sharing universal
values, with its commitment to democracy and respect
for human rights, to see the Tunisian model succeed.
That would demonstrate that Islam and democracy are
indeed compatible, and that the troubles afflicting our
societies are not inevitable.

Tunisia is a small country. Its problems are
commensurate. It would suffice for the world to commit
to that vision so that we could save the last hope of the
Arab Spring. Alone, we might not succeed. We have
limited resources, but have chosen to share the values
of freedom, dignity, openness and global citizenship,
and we certainly shall not renounce such values.

To all our friends, we launch this appeal for
solidarity and joint mobilization. Together, we will
reinstate peace and security, stem the sources of
despair and give our peoples, our youth, a strong signal
that the world of tomorrow could be more fair, act with
more solidarity and respectful of such values. Let us
therefore rise to the occasion of history.

