The Secretary-General: I commend the United
States for convening this follow-up meeting to the
Security Council summit presided over by President
Obama in September 2009 (see S/PV.6191). Many
welcome developments have occurred since then. The
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons adopted a
64-p0int action plan for nuclear disarmament,
non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. I look forward to constructive discussions at
the first session of the Preparatory Committee for the
2015 Review Conference, which will start at the end of
this month.

The Russian Federation and the United States are
reducing their deployed nuclear arsenals under the
New START agreement - and, together with other
2

nuclear-weapon States, they are holding consultations
on implementing disarmament commitments and
increasing transparency around their nuclear arsenals.
For the first time, NATO has put the goal of a nuclear-
weapon-free world on its agenda. The upcoming NATO
Summit in Chicago will be an important opportunity to
develop a common approach.

There have also been innovative efforts by
non-nuclear-weapon States. They include efforts to
conclude a nuclear-weapon convention backed by
strong verification; the 10-nation Non-Proliferation and
Disarmament Initiative; the establishment of the
African Commission on Nuclear Energy; and further
progress towards a Southeast Asia nuclear-weapon-free
zone treaty. We are also preparing for a conference in
Finland later this year on establishing a zone free of
nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East.

The 2010 Nuclear Security Summit in
Washington, DC, agreed on a detailed work plan
aimed at improving nuclear security, securing nuclear
materials and preventing nuclear terrorism. I welcome
the new commitments made at the 2012 Seoul Nuclear
Security Summit, as well as the focused discussion on
increasing the synergy between nuclear safety and
security. I thank President Lee Myung-bak of the
Republic of Korea for his leadership. At that Summit, I
highlighted the need for us to strengthen our efforts to
prevent the financing of proliferation and terrorism-
related financing. I am therefore encouraged that
today's draft presidential statement recognizes the
importance of proliferation financing.

The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) is enhancing
international cooperation aimed at preventing terrorists
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction. I
commend the decision of the Council to extend the
Committee's mandate until April 2021. In order to help
strengthen the legal framework for preventing nuclear
terrorism, I will convene a high-level event this fall to
promote universal adherence to, and the full
implementation of, the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.

In spite of such progress, much work remains to
be done. Tens of thousands of nuclear weapons
continue to threaten humankind. Billions of dollars are
being spent to modernize them, despite pressing social
needs and growing global expectations for progress on
12-29927
disarmament. Sixteen years after its adoption by the
General Assembly, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty has not yet entered into force. I warmly
welcome its ratification by Indonesia and call on all
other annex 2 States to follow suit.

Meanwhile, the Conference on Disarmament
(CD) remains deadlocked. Let me repeat, the current
stalemate is unacceptable. If the Conference cannot
begin work this year, then the General Assembly must
exercise its primary responsibility in carrying forward
the disarmament process. To facilitate negotiations in
the CD, the five nuclear-weapon States may consider
elaborating elements on a fissile material cut-off treaty.
As Secretary-General, I am willing to consider
establishing a group of eminent persons to help in that
task.

The tragic nuclear accident at Fukushima
underscored the urgent need to enhance nuclear safety
and the international emergency response framework. I
commend the International Atomic Energy Agency for
its work. At the Seoul Nuclear Security Summit, I set
out five areas for strengthening the global nuclear
safety regime and promoting synergy between nuclear
safety and nuclear security. The Final Document of the
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons recognized
the importance of addressing those challenges and
sharing best practices. The first session of the
Preparatory Committee for the 2015 Review
Conference should devote specific time to those issues.

Let me also stress the importance of full
compliance with Security Council resolutions. I
welcome the Council's presidential statement of
16 April (S/PRST/2012/ 13), which strongly condemned
the launch of a so-called application satellite by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The Council
has sent a firm and unified message. I urge the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to immediately
comply fully with its obligations under resolutions
1718 (2006) and 1874 (2009). As demanded by the
Council, it should not conduct any further launches that
use ballistic missile technology, any further nuclear
tests or any further provocation. I renew my call on the
authorities of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to build confidence with neighbouring countries
and improve the lives of its people, who face serious
food and nutrition needs. I also reaffirm my
commitment to working for peace and stability on the
Korean peninsula.
12-29927

On Iran, the only acceptable outcome is a
peaceful settlement that restores international
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's
nuclear programme, in conformity with the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. In that
regard, I welcome the initial round of talks held in
Istanbul between Iran and the E3+3. I hope that the
parties will build upon that at their next meeting, in
Baghdad. It is important to agree on concrete and
reciprocal steps towards a comprehensive negotiated
solution.

I once again commend the focus of this meeting. I
hope that the Security Council will continue to
highlight that the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery constitute a
threat to international peace and security, as
highlighted in relevant resolutions, including resolution
1887 (2009). These discussions should be sustained at
the highest levels.

As I have often said, the 2009 Security Council
summit presided over by President Obama (see S/PV.6l91) should not be a one-time event. I invite
Council members to seriously consider follow-up at the
opening of this year's session of the General Assembly.
The international community looks to the Security
Council to continue its leadership in generating the
political momentum needed to achieve the peace and
security of a world free from nuclear weapons.

