Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank today's briefers, in
particular His Excellency Foreign Minister Barry, for
allowing us to put the situation in the Sahel into context.
At the same time, we commend the progress made with
respect to the operationalization of the Joint Force.

Taking into account the information provided by
the briefers on the security situation, as well as the need
for the creation of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to combat the shared conflicts
in the region, the Security Council is called upon to
support those African countries that are still striving
to combat terrorism and transnational organized crime
at the regional and subregional levels with a View to
restoring peace and security in the Sahel region. We are
concerned about the deteriorating levels of security in
the region, which are reflected in the current escalation
of violence, mostly directed against civilians, as well
as the unprecedented levels of intercommunity violence
aggravated by the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons.

In that regard, we encourage the authorities to
take the necessary actions to address this scourge by
strengthening control measures, including the Plan of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its Aspects.
Furthermore, we encourage States that manufacture
and import arms, ammunition and related materials to
strengthen transfer and control mechanisms in order
to prevent the final destination of those weapons from
becoming conflict zones, and thereby save lives.

The insecurity in the Sahel has resulted in the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation throughout
the area, as well as the internal displacement of large
population groups, and has triggered a food crisis that
will require the treatment of approximately 274,000
children for severe acute malnutrition, an increase
of more than 60 per cent as compared with original
estimates. In Mali and Burkina Faso alone, more than
5 million people need humanitarian assistance. Of
those, over half are children who, in addition to facing
food shortages, are condemned to the misfortune of not
having access to education. Owing to the closure of
schools, they do not have the necessary tools to develop
their abilities or prepare them to be agents for change
in society.
The Dominican Republic is a country that firmly
believes in young people as transformers of society and
supports the recommendations of the fourth report of the
African Union Peace and Security Council with regard
to the implementation of the road map. We therefore
would like to reaffirm that the inclusion of investment
in, and cooperation with, young people in the Sahel is
a possible avenue for them to achieve greater potential.
That also addresses high youth unemployment and
contributes to peace and security in the region.

With regard to the role of women, we see that
the rights of women in the Sahel are systematically
violated by terrorist groups. That is compounded
by their extremely difficult survival in the midst of
poverty, armed conflict, Violent extremism, gender
discrimination and sexual violence. All of that is
unacceptable. Therefore, while we have a refocused
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, it is
important to further align that strategy with the 2018-
2022 United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel, the
2017-2020 action plan of the Economic Community of
West African States for women and peace and security,
and the road map for the implementation of the activities
of the G-5 Sahel Women's Platform. In that regard,
we acknowledge the training and capacity-building
measures for the staff of the G-5 Joint Force and the
signing ofa new operational procedure applicable to all
those arrested and held by the Joint Force, with specific
and differentiated treatment for women and children,
with a View to protecting civilians caught up in
violence. We welcome the support of the international
community to that end.

Moreover, given the continued threats resulting
from climate change, it is crucial to continue to
strengthen the cooperation mechanisms of the Force
with other regional and subregional initiatives so as
to promote sustainable development in the region. In
that regard, we welcome the efforts to step up the fight
against climate change, in line with the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, included in the United
Nations Support Plan for the Sahel.

We must continue to strengthen the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations
Support Plan for the Sahel and hasten the creation of the
G-5 Joint Force trust fund, which will help the Force
to overcome the many difficulties it faces in terms of
equipment, training and infrastructure, among other
challenges. That will allow it to improve its operations
in combating terrorism, illegal migration, trafficking
in human beings and other forms of cross-border crime.
That financing would also provide it with predictable
funds and timely disbursements so that it can fulfil
its mandates.

We commend the European Union, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, Operation Barkhane and the Malian
Armed Forces on the creation of the Mali coordination
body with a View to improving the exchange of
information and coordination among the various
military and security forces present in the country.
We also commend the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime on the assistance it provides to the G-5
Sahel countries to address terrorism and organized
transnational crime. We urge the continued disbursement
of pledged contributions to the mechanism for peace in
Africa with a view to amassing the necessary resources
for the stabilization of the region.

In conclusion, the Dominican Republic agrees
with the Secretary-General that security initiatives,
although clearly necessary, will not be a panacea for
the Sahel's problems. In order to combat terrorism
and cross-border crime in the Sahel, in addition to
providing the G-5 Joint Force with the necessary
funding in a predictable manner to increase the capacity,
effectiveness and efficiency of its operations, we must
also do more to solve the underlying problems fuelling
the conflict with a View to building capacities that
contribute to sustainable socioeconomic development
in the Sahel region. Otherwise, the Sahel region will
continue in its spiral of instability and foreign troops
will in all likelihood be there for longer than any of us
can imagine. Statistics tell us that the various factions
of armed groups are expanding their reach in the
Sahel and in neighbouring countries, and violence is
therefore spilling over borders, threatening to weaken
States and fragment populations. Like the Secretary-
General, we believe that more must be done to avoid
further deterioration in the security situation. The
United Nations and the Security Council are called
upon to seek both national and regional joint solutions
in order to achieve peace and security in the region
and therefore improve the well-being and rights of the
inhabitants of the Sahel.

