The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Lebanon, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Salam
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council stresses its deep
concern at the repeated postponements of the
presidential election in Lebanon.

"It emphasizes that the ongoing political
impasse does not serve the interest of the
Lebanese people and may lead to further
deterioration of the situation in Lebanon.
the

"The Security Council reiterates its call for
the holding, without delay, of a free and fair
presidential election in conformity with Lebanese
constitutional rules, without any foreign
interference or influence, and with full respect for
democratic institutions.

"It emphasizes the importance of Lebanese
constitutional institutions, including the
Government of Lebanon, as well as the
importance of the unity of the Lebanese people,
in particular on the basis of reconciliation and
political dialogue.

"It calls upon all Lebanese political parties
to continue to exercise restraint and to show
responsibility with a view to preventing, through
dialogue, further deterioration of the situation in
Lebanon.

"The Security Council therefore commends
the course adopted by the democratically-elected
Government of Lebanon and the Lebanese Armed
Forces in carrying out their respective
responsibilities in the period until the presidential
election occurs.

"The Security Council reiterates its call for
the full implementation of all its resolutions on
Lebanon."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/46.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 7.15pm.
07-63890

