Mr. Dunn (United States of America): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's sessions. I also
thank Ambassadors Drobnjak and Patriota for their
briefings. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Mission of Croatia for its work in chairing the seventh
session of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
Organizational Committee.

Peacebuilding is a critical task, but it is not an
easy one. As Ambassador Patriota reminded us, recent
events in South Sudan and the Central African Republic
are stark examples of how quickly countries can slide
back into conflict. But in other places, some with the
PBC's engagement, we have seen progress.

We share the Secretary-General's View that the
PBC should focus on its three core functions: advocacy
and sustained attention, resource mobilization and
forging coherence. The PBC can play a vital role in
identifying risks and gaps in peacebuilding in countries
on its agenda, marshalling resources and coordinating
among donors, actively integrating civil society and
women as equal partners and ensuring that countries
at risk of sliding back into conflict remain on the
international community's agenda. 1 would like to raise
a few specific points that highlight the impact of the
PBC over the past year.
First, we are very glad to see a strengthened
relationship between the PBC and the Security Council.
Briefings from the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations, including on Liberia, Burundi, Guinea-
Bissau and Sierra Leone, provided valuable insight and
served to sustain international attention to the ongoing
political and socioeconomic challenges facing each of
those countries. We know that keeping a careful focus
on countries recovering from conflict but no longer
in the headlines is essential for peace to take hold
and bear fruit. That remains a critical function of the
Commission.

Secondly, we see a clear link between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. The Security Council
affirmed the need for coherence among peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts with resolution 2086 (2013),
which recognized peacekeepers as early peacebuilders.
In the past year, we put that concept into operation with
the creation of two multidimensional peacekeeping
operations, in Mali and the Central African Republic.
Both are mandated to support peacebuilding tasks,
including strengthening the security sector and the
rule of law. Similarly, other missions have major
peacebuilding roles, such as those in Haiti, Liberia
and Cote d'Ivoire. Their efforts will gain increased
attention as they continue to draw down their role and
make sure that the transition to host-country ownership
is effective and successful.

Thirdly, ofcourse, is the role ofthe PBC as a platform
to help international efforts for sustained peace. In
Burundi, the PBC has promoted mutual accountability
between donors and the Government of Burundi. It has
maintained a strong focus on the political environment
in the lead-up to national elections - for example, by
convening regular meetings to discuss a united strategy
on the way forward. The United States counts on the
PBC to continue its engagement in Burundi as the
United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi winds
down. We welcome the PBC's close cooperation with
the Council-mandated election observation mission.

In the Central African Republic, the PBC's
reengagement can help identify gaps in the international
community's response to the situation, helping to
provide critical support for the beleaguered national
Government.

Of course, none of that works without a national
commitment to peacebuilding. The PBC can be most
effective in supporting the implementation of nationally
owned peacebuilding and development plans. The post-
election transition plan for Guinea-Bissau is a case in
point.
That emphasis on national buy-in and control
over peacebuilding initiatives must bring with it the
good-faith efforts of national Governments. Last
month's first annual session of the PBC focused on
resource mobilization. As the international community
works to identify innovative ways to broaden the tax
base and build the post-conflict capacity of national
Governments, it is critical that those Governments be
transparent in how they spend funds and that such funds
be directed towards national peace and State-building
priorities.

We are also glad to see that the PBC continues
reform efforts such as building stronger partnerships
within financial institutions and the Peacebuilding
Fund, which has proved to be a flexible and catalytic
instrument to address the immediate needs of countries
in crisis.

Finally, the United States shares the view that we
should make the most of the upcoming 2015 review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. We should
be clear and candid about how to make it as effective
as possible. The United States is enthusiastically
participating in that review process and looks forward
to the views of those most involved in its efforts to
date, including this morning's briefers and some of the
members of the Council.

