Mr. Mulet: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to introduce the seventh report of the Leadership Panel
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(S/2017/904, annex). I am joined by Ms. Judy Cheng-
Hopkins and Mr. Stefan Mogl. Together, the three of us
form the Leadership Panel.

Members will recall that the mandate of the
Mechanism, as established by the Security Council, is
to identify, to the greatest extent feasible, individuals,
entities, groups or Governments that were perpetrators,
organizers, sponsors or otherwise involved in the use
of chemicals as weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The Mechanism is not a judicial body; rather, it
is an investigative mechanism that reports to the
Security Council. Despite the very real challenges of
investigating complex cases in the midst of an ongoing
armed conflict, the Mechanism has taken great care to
ensure that its methodology and findings are technically
and scientifically sound.

The report contains the findings in respect of, first,
the use of sulfur mustard at Umm Hawsh on 15 and
16 September 2016 and, secondly, the use of sarin at
Khan Shaykhun on 4 April 2017. The findings of the
Leadership Panel have been drawn on the basis of the
sum total of information and evidence obtained by the
Mechanism, as set out in the report and its annexes.

The Leadership Panel has identified the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant as responsible for the use
of sulfur mustard at Umm Hawsh and the Syrian Arab
Republic as responsible for the use of sarin at Khan
Shaykhun. Before I go into detail about these findings,
I will spend a few minutes outlining the methodology
of the Mechanism.

In collecting, analysing and assessing information,
the Mechanism was guided by the terms of reference,
as approved by the Security Council, and the methods
ofwork, as outlined in its previous reports. It conducted
its work in an independent, impartial and professional
manner. In making its findings on responsibility,
the Leadership Panel was guided by the evidentiary
standards, as set forth in its first report (S/2016/142, annex). In the cases at hand, the Leadership Panel
determined that there was sufficient evidence of
a credible and reliable nature to make its findings
regarding the parties involved in the use of chemical
weapons in each incident.

In accordance with its mandate, the Mechanism
took the findings of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Fact-finding Mission
(FFM) thatachemicalweaponhadbeenused asastarting
point for each case and actively gathered additional
information regarding each incident. It applied the same
methodology with respect to both cases and pursued a
rigorous and independent examination of the available
information. In doing so, it examined possible scenarios
as to how the incidents may have happened, including
those put forward by Member States. For the incident
at Khan Shaykhun, the Mechanism examined eight
scenarios; for Umm Hawsh, it examined four scenarios.
That methodology ensured that the Mechanism covered
all possibilities and conducted a thorough, impartial
and objective investigation.

In conducting its investigations into the incidents
at Umm Hawsh and at Khan Shaykhun, the Mechanism
collected information from a wide range of sources.
In response to requests for information, 12 Member
States, including the Syrian Arab Republic, provided
case-specific information. The Mechanism interviewed
over 30 witnesses in addition to those interviewed by the
FFM, and collected and reviewed 2,247 photographs,
1,284 files of video footage, 120 audio files and 639
documents, most of which required translation. I
visited Damascus in August. Technical teams visited
Damascus in September and the Al-Shayrat airbase in
October. Technical teams also visited a neighbouring
country on two occasions to interview witnesses and to
collect materials.

I wish to mention that the Syrian Arab Republic
engaged constructively with the Mechanism. The Syrian
Arab Republic provided full cooperation and facilitated
the Mechanism's requests for access to information and
witnesses. The Syrian Arab Republic also provided
the reports of its own technical investigations into
the incidents, which were carefully reviewed by
the Mechanism.

For its visit to the Al-Shayrat airbase, the
Mechanism had a number of objectives, including
to verify the authenticity of the logbooks and flight
operations records from 4 April 2017; to review entry
and exit records and to interview responsible personnel;
to photograph the types of munitions flown on 4 April
2017, in accordance with the records received; and to
photograph the means for attaching such munitions
onto Sukhoi SU-22 aircraft.

Collecting samples at the airbase was not an
objective. The Mechanism considered that if a single
chemical munition had been flown from the airbase,
there was little chance of finding any trace of sarin or
its degradation products without specific information as
to where to collect samples. The size of the Al-Shayrat
airbase is approximately 10 square kilometres,
equivalent to more than 900 football fields,

The Mechanism did not visit the sites of the
incidents at Umm Hawsh and Khan Shaykhun. While a
visit to those sites, in particular Khan Shaykhun, may
have been of value it was too dangerous to visit Khan
Shaykhun, which is in a situation of armed conflict and
under the control of the Al-Nusrah Front, a terrorist
organization. In response to a request for a security
assessment in respect of a possible site visit to Khan
Shaykhun, the United Nations Department of Safety
and Security highlighted challenges, such as indirect
artillery fire and recurrent air strikes. Moreover, the
Department of Safety and Security advised that any

possible access arrangements negotiated with the
armed groups controlling the area would not be without
residual security risks. Notwithstanding the possible
benefits of site visits, the Leadership Panel considered
that the Mechanism had gathered sufficient information
to come to a solid conclusion in both cases.

Witnesses were a very important source of
information. Regarding Umm Hawsh, witnesses
interviewed by the Mechanism included victims of the
attack, journalists present in the period immediately
following the attack, doctors who treated victims and
commanders of non-State armed groups. Regarding
the incident at Khan Shaykhun, witnesses included
residents, personnel from the Al-Shayrat airbase,
Government officials, doctors who treated victims,
rescue personnel and commanders of non-State
armed groups.

The Mechanism also obtained independent
expert analysis and assessments. It engaged several
internationally recognized forensic and specialist
defence institutes, as well as OPCW-designated
laboratories, to provide forensic and expert support to
the investigation. All of those bodies were selected on
the basis of their independence, established expertise
and record of outstanding performance. The forensic
institutes and OPCW-designated laboratories are
accredited according to international standards. They
were engaged by the Mechanism to authenticate
photographs and video footage to verify the times
and places where they were taken and to provide
independent expert assessments and simulations
with respect to items depicted, as well as chemical
synthesis and analysis. The Mechanism also consulted
with several internationally recognized experts on
energetic materials and the medical effects of chemical
warfare agents.

With regard to Umm Hawsh, expert analysis
was provided with respect to the impact location,
the munition, the trajectory of the munition and its
likely delivery method, as well as the medical effects
on victims. With regard to Khan Shaykhun, expert
analysis was provided with respect to the nature of the
plumes resulting from explosions and their effects, the
characteristics of the crater and their likely cause, the
remnants of the munitions, the dispersion of sarin, the
amount of explosives used and the medical effects.

The Mechanism commissioned an in-depth
laboratory study with respect to the chemistry of sarin.
The objective of the study was to test whether the sarin
found in Khan Shaykhun could be linked to chemicals
from the original stockpile of the Syrian Arab Republic.
The Mechanism sent samples that were collected by the
OPCW in 2014 from the stockpile of the Syrian Arab
Republic to OPCW-designated laboratories. The study
showed that the samples from Khan Shaykhun match
a particular chemical from the Syrian Arab Republic
stockpile that is required to make sarin. That chemical
is the precursor chemical for sarin and is called DF.

As I mentioned earlier, the Mechanism operates in a
non-traditional setting. It does not have judicial powers
and cannot compel the submission of information
or documents to it. It relies instead on the voluntary
cooperation of witnesses and those in possession of
relevant information. The Mechanism cross-checks
witness statements and works to ensure that the
information gathered is credible and reliable, through
means of verification and corroboration, as well as
other measures of quality control. When assessing
information, the Mechanism systematically and
thoroughly examined the source of the information and
whether there were factors that may affect its reliability,
such as whether information was based on first-hand
experience of the events or hearsay, or whether there
were concerns as to the chain of custody.

When corroborating information considered
important to its investigation, the Mechanism paid
particular attention to the possibility of circular
reporting so as to ensure that corroboration was based
on independent sources ofinformation. Questions have
been asked about the possible motives for the use of
chemical weapons in each case. The Leadership Panel
noted that it was not helpful for the investigation to
speculate, and focused on technical issues instead.

Let me now turn to the findings of the Leadership
Panel in the two cases. On 15 and 16 September 2016,
two women were found to have been exposed to sulphur
mustard at Umm Hawsh. A mortar shell containing
sulphur mustard hit the house of one of the victims,
who, together with her neighbour, was exposed when
cleaning a black substance from the wall of her house.
A second mortar shell containing sulphur mustard
was recovered lodged in the pavement. The damage to
the victim's house indicated that the trajectory of the
mortar shell that caused such damage came from the
south-east. The trajectory of the second mortar shell
found in the pavement was determined to have come
from east or south-east of the impact location.

The Mechanism determined that the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) was fighting against
groups belonging to the Syrian defence forces from the
outskirts ofUmm Hawsh on 15 and 16 September 2016.
It also determined that ISIL was positioned along three
sides ofUmm Hawsh, specifically to the east and south-
east of the village, which was the assessed origin of the
chemical mortar shells. Based on the positioning ofISIL
and the forensic assessment that the mortar shell came
from the direction of ISIL-held areas, the Leadership
Panel is confident that ISIL is responsible for the use of
the mortar shells containing sulphur mustard.

With regard to Khan Shaykhun, on the morning
of 4 April 2017 an incident involving sarin killed
approximately 100 people in Khan Shaykhun, and
affected another 200 people who survived acute
exposure. In the course of conducting its investigation
to identify those responsible, the Mechanism examined
eight possible scenarios, including that the incident may
have been staged in an attempt to place responsibility
on the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. The
mechanism rigorously investigated possible indicators
for all scenarios. In doing so, it gathered and closely
examined information from a wide range of sources.
While expert examination of the crater did not rule
out that it could have been caused by means other
than an aerial bomb, the Mechanism found nothing to
prove that the incident had been staged f and when
I say nothing, I mean nothing. Certain irregularities
and inconsistencies emerged in the course of the
investigation, and they were scrutinized and are
described in detail in the annex to the report. However,
they were not of the nature to change the assessment of
the Leadership Panel.

Mindful of the complexities of the case and

the polarized political environment surrounding
the investigation, the Mechanism actively pursued
unbiased sources of evidence ofwhat happened in Khan
Shaykhun on 4 April. They included video footage from
two separate sources taken that morning, which showed
a series of explosions across Khan Shaykhun, was
authenticated by forensic institutes as not having been
manipulated, and verified to have been filmed between
6.42 am. and 6.52 am. on 4 April in Khan Shaykhun;
satellite imagery of the crater and its surroundings
before and after the incident; video footage and
photographs of the crater assessed by a forensic institute
to have been recorded between 8.04 am. and 9.17 a.m.,
and the chemical analysis of the sarin samples that had
been collected by the OPCW Fact-finding Mission from
both the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and
non-governmental organizations.

The Mechanism carefully put together pieces of a
complex puzzle of which some parts are still missing.
For example, it could not establish with certainty that
the aircraft that delivered the chemical bomb took off
from the Al-Shayrat air base, or the type of aircraft
involved. Yet, the parts of that puzzle that have been
established and put together are clear with respect to
certain critical elements.

Aircraft dropped munitions on Khan Shaykhun
between 6.30 am. and 7 am. that day. Witnesses saw
and heard aircraft at that time and two of them even
recorded video footage showing a series of explosive
plumes across Khan Shaykhun at that very time that
morning. Forensic analysis confirmed that aircraft and
explosion sounds can be heard in the background of those
videos. Aircraft of the Syrian Arab Republic were in
the immediate vicinity of Khan Shaykhun between 6.30
am. and 7 am. That was established via information
provided by the Syrian Arab Republic itself, as well as
via information provided by several other sources. The
crater from which the sarin emanated was created on
4 April. That was established by satellite imagery.

The crater was determined by expert analysis to
have been most likely caused by the impact of an aerial
bomb travelling at high velocity. That was the outcome
of analysis by several independent, internationally
recognized institutes with specialization in areas of
forensics, defence and security, as well as two individual
experts on energetic materials. While they did not rule
out completely that it could have been caused by other
means, they said it was very unlikely in the light of the
nature of the damage around the crater.

Experts examined whether an improvised explosive
device (IED) could have caused the crater. They assessed
that a crater of that size would require an equivalent
of 10 kilograms of TNT, but generally ruled out that
possibility on account that such an explosion would
cause much more damage than what was observed in
the area. Moreover, experts observed that the metal
object protruding from the crater, which was assessed
to be consistent with a thin-walled chemical aerial
bomb, was too big and too deeply embedded for the
IED scenario to be likely. The large number of persons
affected by the release of sarin on 4 April, and the fact
that sarin reportedly continued to be present at the site
of the crater 10 days after the incident, indicate that a
large amount of sarin was released, consistent with its
having been dispersed via a chemical aerial bomb.

Finally, the in-depth laboratory study into the
chemistry of sarin revealed that the sarin used in
Khan Shaykhun was very likely to have been made
from the same precursor that came from the original
stockpile of the Syrian Arab Republic. That precursor,
known as DF, is a key component of binary sarin,
the kind used at Khan Shaykhun. That conclusion is
based on the presence of unique marker chemicals that
were identified by OPCW laboratories in the samples
from Khan Shaykhun, as provided to the Fact-finding
Mission by both the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and non-governmental organizations. The
same marker chemicals were found in the DF samples
from the original stockpile of the Syrian Arab Republic
and in sarin made with that same DF. Binary sarin with
the same composition of marker chemicals would be
very difficult to replicate, even if the exact composition
were known. The in-depth laboratory study further
revealed the production process used to make the
DF precursor. That process requires a high degree of
competence and sophistication, and points towards a
chemical plant production.

The Leadership Panel is confident that when taken
together, all these elements constitute clear evidence
that the Syrian Arab Republic is responsible for the use
of sarin at Khan Shaykhun on 4 April. Aircraft is in the
air at the relevant time; the crater is caused; the crater
was most likely caused by a high-velocity aerial bomb;
a large number of persons are affected by sarin that
morning; sarin is found in and around the crater; and
samples of the sarin taken from the crater are found to
contain unique markers that match those of the precursor
from the stockpile of the Syrian Arab Republic.

With respect to the responsibility of the Syrian
Arab Republic, the Mechanism did not identify specific
actors within the Government and institutions of the
Syrian Arab Republic. The nature and logistics of
the operation would involve a range of actors from
different areas.

The international community achieved a major
milestone when it prohibited chemical weapons in their
entirety. When chemical weapons were used despite
such prohibition, the Mechanism was established by the
Council to identify those responsible. The Mechanism
has carried out its mandate in respect of the incidents
at Umm Hawsh and Khan Shaykhun. It is now for the
Security Council to consider next steps. In doing so, I
ask the Council to also consider the victims of those
insidious acts.

Attaining a world without chemical weapons is
an imperative requiring concrete and unified action.
The Security Council has a unique responsibility in
that regard, including to deter all those who continue
to believe that there is something to be gained from
their use. I understand the political issues surrounding
the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. However,
this is not a political issue, but an issue about the
lives of innocent civilians. Impunity must not prevail.
The international community must ensure that it has
effective ways to respond rapidly to any future use of
chemical weapons, including acts of chemical terrorism.

The international community, including the
Security Council, has forcefully condemned any use of
chemical weapons by anyone under any circumstances.
And yet, as I brief the Council today, we have received
another determination by the OPCW of the use of sarin
in Ltamenah in the Syrian Arab Republic.

As I stated to this organ in July, I have hope that
together we can end the use of such weapons forever.
We must let the gains of the international community
be lost. Let us move forward with humanity and
renewed collective commitment to end the use of
chemical weapons.

