Mr. Arancibia Fernandez (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of Bolivia thanks
the Ukrainian presidency for its initiative to hold this
open debate today in order to address the issue of
international peace and security in Europe. Similarly,
we would like to thank for their statements the
Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres; Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, Secretary General of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe; and Ms. Helga
Schmid, Secretary General of the European Union's
European External Action Service.

For Bolivia, conflicts between or within States
must be handled in strict compliance with the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, which
all States Members of the United Nations have agreed
to comply with faithfully, in particular the principle of
the peaceful settlement of disputes.

With regard to conflicts between States, Bolivia
stresses the importance of the obligation of all States
to observe, respect, implement and comply with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
Given that requirement, it is necessary to encourage
and support States and regional and subregional
organizations, and all parties involved in any type of
conflict, to reach peaceful solutions to conflicts through
dialogue, consultation, good offices, mediation and
negotiation. It is also important to respect the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of States, as
well as the principle of the non-threat and non-use of
force in resolving conflicts.

With respect to internal conflicts within States,
Bolivia believes that if they do not constitute a threat
to or a breach of international peace and security, the
Security Council should strictly apply what is established
in Article 2, paragraphs 4 and 7, of the United Nations
Charter on the principle of non-interference, and
act in accordance with General Assembly resolution
2131 (XX) of 1965, entitled "Declaration on the
Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs
of States and the Protection of their Independence and
Sovereignty", which prohibits both armed aggression
and direct and indirect intervention or interference in
the sovereign character and political independence of
States, as well as with General Assembly resolution
2625 (XXV) of 1970 and many others that we do not
need to point out now.

In that connection, Bolivia wishes to recall that
those principles serve as the indispensable conditions
for the fulfilment of the purposes and principles of
the Charter. In Bolivia's view, legitimate regional and
subregional organizations are crucial to the stability
and security of the regions. Those organizations
become natural mediators for possible conflicts owing
to their proximity and familiarity with the surrounding
environment, and because they share culture and
history and sometimes even the language of the parties.
Those characteristics afford them the ability to address
conflicts and create conditions conducive to the
achievement of lasting solutions to regional problems
on the basis of the mutual benefit of States and the
principles of international law.

In that regard, we commend the work carried out
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. We believe it to be an inclusive and important
platform for building mutual trust in the region and
that it is contributing to the exchange of knowledge,
offering assistance for the creation of new institutions
and acting as an important channel that contributes to
resolving security issues in Europe.

Furthermore, we believe that the measures and
mechanisms of preventive diplomacy, both of the
United Nations and of the regional organizations,
must be coordinated and directed towards the early
identification of possible crises and the exchange of
impartial information without any political agendas or
interference from other countries based on geopolitical
interests, which must be carried out with the ultimate
purpose of protecting, first of all, peace in the regions,
looking out for the well-being of future generations
and preventing what the Organization was created to
address, namely, the scourge of war.

Similarly, we must also discuss the role that has
been played by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) in generating conflicts in Europe and in the
world. That collective military defence alliance, which
was originally created in 1949, is today an anachronistic
organization that met the needs of other periods and
not the problems of our times. That organization has
sought to play a role in safeguarding international
peace and security, a role that is not appropriate to it, as
it has received no such mandate from the international
community and thereby acts to undermine the authority
of the Security Council. Finally, it is important to
remember that many of the underlying conflicts in
Europe have been the result of the continued expansion
of NATO, an expansion that endangers regional and
global peace.

