Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Prosecutor Bensouda
for her briefing and for her eighth report to the Council.

We have carefully studied the report and taken
due note of the main issues contained therein. On the
issue of cooperation, it is an obligation on the part of
States parties to the Rome Statute to cooperate with
the International Criminal Court (ICC). In addition,
resolution 1970 (2011) calls on States to cooperate
with the Court, and resolution 2174 (2014) reiterates
this point. In that regard, we urge Libya to continue to
cooperate fully with the Court.

We take special note of the meeting between the
Prosecutor and the Libyan Minister of Justice held
on 18 July. This should send a clear message that
the Court and the Government of Libya will work
together to investigate and prosecute those committing
grave violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in Libya.

We look forward to the technical meeting both
parties are planning to organize on the issue of burden-
sharing. It is our expectation that the meeting will help
to strengthen cooperation between the Court and the
Government of Libya.

Concerning the case of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi,
the decision of the Pretrial Chamber and the Appeals
Chamber is that the case is admissible. Therefore,
Libya has an obligation to surrender Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi to the Court. Libya should also return the
materials seized from the former defence counsel of
Mr. Al-Qadhafi and cooperate in facilitating a visit by
the defence counsel of Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi.
The report of the Prosecutor indicates that resource
constraints and security considerations have hampered
the ability of her Office to fully prosecute crimes that
may have been committed by different parties since
February 2011. We are concerned that if the situation
persists, it may negatively affect the credibility of the
Court and encourage impunity. Therefore in order to
send a strong message that impunity will not be tolerated,
it is essential for the Government of Libya, with the
support of the international community, to investigate
the alleged crimes. We acknowledge that this would
be difficult in the current security situation in Libya.
We therefore call for an immediate and unconditional
ceasefire across the country. Libyan militias should
refrain from targeting civilians. They should lay down
their arms and participate in the ongoing national
dialogue to restore peace, law and order in the country.

Finally, we urge the Office of the Prosecutor, the
Government of Libya and the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya to continue to work together with a
view to ending impunity in Libya.

