Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina thanks the Indian presidency of the Security
Council for having convened this open debate on the
maintenance of international peace and security and on the
sensitive issue of piracy in particular. We also appreciate
the submission of the concept note (S/2012/814, annex).

Piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of
Somalia are the serious symptoms of a situation that
threatens international peace and security and that have
called for the attention of the international community
and of the Security Council for several years. Recently,
piracy and armed robbery at sea off the Gulf of Guinea
have aroused concern. The Council has issued various
calls for cooperation with countries of the region.

Piracy is a serious illegal act that affects the safety
of navigation. The United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea codified customary international law
regarding the repression of piracy. Articles 100 to 107
of the Convention contain the relevant international law
on the repression of piracy. "Armed robbery at sea" is
not an expression found in the Convention. It consists of
acts of violence against ships at sea within the territorial
sea of a State. It is therefore a crime not subject to the
laws applicable to piracy, but to the exclusive criminal
jurisdiction of the coastal State in its territorial sea.

Piracy is an illegal act where the basis for
repressive action against it stems from the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. But it is
not a matter that should, as such, be addressed by the
Security Council. That does not mean that the Council
cannot, in a specific situation such as Somalia, take
measures. In the Somali case, the Council has adopted
measures on piracy and armed robbery at sea off the
coast of that country because they are simply one of
several symptoms of a complex situation that has been
characterized by the Security Council as a threat to
international peace and security.

Therefore, actions authorized by the Security
Council have a clear legal framework. The Council
has reiterated in all its resolutions on the subject
the provision from resolution 1816 (2008) that the
authorization granted by the Council is applicable
only to the situation in Somalia and applies to the
repression of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the
coast of Somalia. Such authorization shall not affect the
rights and obligations of States under international law,
including the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea, in other situations and shall not constitute
a precedent for international customary law. The
authorization was granted only after the consent of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia.

In the case of the Gulf of Guinea, the Security
Council has addressed piracy and armed robbery at
sea from the standpoint of the involvement of regional
organizations, such as the Economic Community of
West African States, the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Commission of the Gulf
of Guinea, without qualifying the situation as a threat
to international peace and security.

It is undeniable that acts of piracy and armed robbery
at sea constitute a threat to the safety of navigation.
But that does not mean that, as such, they constitute
threats to international peace and security under the
terms of Article 39 of the Charter, nor are they a global
phenomenon with the same reach and seriousness in all
regions. Unless the Council adopts specific measures
under Chapter VII, action by States that participate in
the repression of piracy and by specialized agencies
of the United Nations and regional organizations must
conform to international law in force, including the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.

In the case of Somalia, it being a Chapter VII
situation, States must respect the terms of the
authorization granted by the Security Council. One
aspect of that requirement to respect the terms of the
Council's authorization is that such authorization is
granted to States. An incipient trend, which is partly
inspired by the shipping industry and which is of great
concern, consists of favouring the carrying of weapons
on board private ships. Another aspect is that although
one of the shared concerns is the way in which the
prevailing situation off the coast of Somalia affects the
sustainability of marine living resources, in particular
fisheries, the authorization given by the Council does
not include the repression of illicit acts different from
piracy and armed robbery at sea.

The situation in Somalia goes well beyond piracy
and armed robbery at sea, and even though it is a
serious phenomenon, action by the United Nations
should not be limited to it. We commend the efforts
by countries in the region, by other countries and by
the United Nations to cooperate with Somalia in the
prosecution of responsible parties. But the underlying
causes of piracy and armed robbery at sea in Somalia
have to be addressed with the support and cooperation
of the international community. Capacity-building is
crucial, including for allowing Somalia to benefit from
the exploitation of the natural resources of its maritime
areas.
With regard to the Gulf of Guinea, we commend
the involvement of the relevant regional organizations
and we urge the United Nations to continue to support
those efforts.

In conclusion, Argentina supports cooperation
by the United Nations with States affected by piracy
and armed robbery at sea. However, we would like
to underscore that unless a situation is qualified as
a threat to international peace and security under
Article 39 of the Charter and the Council decides to
take action under Chapter VII, a situation of piracy and
armed robbery at sea is not a matter that falls within
the primary competence of the Security Council. All
actions and any cooperative initiative must conform to
the rules of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea.

