Mr. Powles (New Zealand): I welcome this
opportunity to address the Council on this important

subject.

New Zealanders have been appalled at the tragedy
that has unfolded in East Timor since the historic ballot
conducted by the United Nations on 30 August. Despite
the fact that the United Nations Mission in East Timor
(UNAMET) has been forced to withdraw to Dili, that
church and non-governmental organizations have been
forced to abandon their activities, and that international
media have been threatened and forced to leave, there is
no hiding the widespread destruction and killings, the
forced transportation of thousands, and the displacement
of tens of thousands of East Timorese who just days ago

 

voted freely on their future for the first time in their
history.

Unquestionably, we have seen deliberate and
systematic attempts to sabotage the 5 May Agreements and
the outcome of the 30 August ballot, with evidence of
complicity on the part of Indonesian military and police
authorities. The New Zealand Prime Minister announced
yesterday that close military cooperation with Indonesia was
inappropriate under the circumstances that the Indonesian
armed forces had allowed to develop in East Timor.
Bilateral defence exercises and military training
programmes have accordingly been suspended and are
under review.

The Secretary-General's statement yesterday recorded
Indonesia's failure to meet its responsibility to maintain
order and security in East Timor during and after the ballot,
even with the introduction of martial law. Its repeated
assurances that it will do so have proved hollow. It has thus
far declined the offers of its friends to help.

The world knows, as a result of the 30 August ballot,
the true aspirations and democratically expressed wishes of
the people of East Timor. That fact can never be disguised
or ignored. Those trying to subvert the ballot outcome by
abhorrent and Violent means and to deny the right of self-
determination must be held accountable. On this too we
agree entirely with the Secretary-General.

New Zealand has been a consistent supporter of
United Nations efforts to resolve the situation in East
Timor. We welcomed the Tripartite Agreements of 5 May
and readily provided contributions of finance and personnel
to the United Nations Mission in East Timor. A small
number of brave New Zealanders remain at UNAMET
headquarters in Dili. We are greatly concerned for them and
for the others at UNAMET headquarters, for all of whose
safety the Indonesian authorities are responsible. We have
backed the purpose of the Security Council mission that is
Visiting Indonesia and East Timor and pledge support for a
continuing and future United Nations presence in the
territory.
The Secretary-General has urged the Indonesian
Government to accept the offer a number of Governments
have made to contribute to a collective effort to help
Indonesia restore order in East Timor and care for the
welfare of the East Timorese people. On behalf of the New
Zealand Government, I reaffirm our willingness to assist in
this way. We join the Secretary-General in appealing to
Indonesia to respond positively to the international
community's concern.

In particular, we urge Indonesia to permit, protect
and support international relief agencies - both United
Nations and non-governmental - that are ready to return
to East Timor to deal with the humanitarian crisis
looming for the many tens of thousands of internally
displaced East Timorese.

At this time of crisis immediate attention must be
given to their welfare, but none of us must be deflected
from a continuing commitment to the realization of the
outcome of the 30 August ballot and of the aspirations the
people of East Timor so clearly and incontrovertibly
expressed in it.

