Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like first of all to welcome Mr. Tadic, President
of Serbia, to the Council, and to thank him for his
statement. I would also like to welcome the presence of
Mr. Jessen-Petersen and to thank him for his very
comprehensive briefing on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.

I welcome the role played by the Mission in
transferring more competencies to the Provisional
Institutions in the rule of law sector.

Last month, Mr. Ibrahim Rugova, a very
important person in relation to the events that have
occurred in the territory, passed away. We would like
to convey our condolences to the people of Kosovo for
that loss. We hope that his death will not have a
negative impact on the stability of Kosovo or on its
future status.

I would like to congratulate Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu,
who has been elected President of Kosovo. We have
every hope that he will continue his predecessor's
endeavours to strengthen the stability of the territory
and to serve the best interests of the people of Kosovo.

We welcome the efforts made by Mr. Martti
Ahtisaari, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. We
hope that his approach will lead to dialogue through
which a lasting solution can be found for the province
of Kosovo.

The future status of Kosovo will depend on the
efforts of the Kosovo Serbs, which we hope will help
to improve the situation. We call upon all parties to
participate in the dialogue in an atmosphere of
complete independence. We should continue to support
that process.

I would like to commend the Contact Group for
its efforts, which have led to the establishment of
favourable conditions. There has been an improvement
in the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, but it
needs to be continued with the assistance of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General. At the same time, it
will be important in future to strengthen the rule of law
and to ensure the proper administration of public
affairs. The rights of minorities must be respected.

The security situation in Kosovo continues to be
perilous. Statistics have shown that, because of security
problems, refugee returns are not taking place as they
should. We were struck in particular by the project
developed by the Ministry of Education with regard to
mixed classes, bringing together Albanians and Serbs.
We believe that that approach might make it possible to
resolve the problem in a comprehensive manner. That
might make it possible to define the future status of
Kosovo.
