Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like to express our
appreciation for the work Japan has performed as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions, particularly the
measures to enhance the Security Council's efficiency,
transparency and interactivity. The comprehensive
presidential note S/2010/507 has contributed to making
the work of the Security Council more effective
and transparent.

As preceding speakers have done, and as requested
in the concept note (S/2016/585, annex) prepared for
this open debate, I will streamline my intervention to
cover three topics related to the working methods of the
Security Council.

First, with regard to transparency, the Security
Council is responsible for its methods of work, and
it is up to the Council to modify them. At the same
time, the entire United Nations membership has
conferred upon the Council the primary responsibility
for preserving international peace and security. The
Council acts on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations, and its decisions must be implemented
by 193 countries. That is why the Council's working
methods represent an issue that concerns the entire
United Nations membership.

Significant progress has been achieved in the past
couple of years in adapting the methods of work to
the new global realities, and the Council has proved
to be both creative and flexible when a new tool for
handling a particular situation was necessary. Although
that positive evolution was driven by specific needs,
and not by a thematic reform, I think that using
ad hoc innovations in specific cases seems to be a
realistic approach. In that respect, improvements have
been made on the issue of communication with full
membership - through open debates and briefings,
wrap-up sessions, the announcement of various types
of meetings in The Journal of the United Nations, the
early circulation of draft resolutions and notifications
about the Council's emergency meetings.

Yet we need more time to hear from people on
the ground, including through informal formats such
as Arria Formula meetings, which provide a tool for
the Council to get views beyond those of Member
States. Greater transparency is also necessary in
the functioning of the Security Council's subsidiary
organs, which should be encouraged to further interact
with the United Nations membership on topics related
to peacekeeping, conflict prevention and sanctions.

Secondly, with regard to the use of working methods
in conflict prevention, there is broad consensus on
the need to enhance our efforts on prevention, given
the recognition that, in conflicts like in medicine,
preventing is more efficient and less expensive than
healing. As the Security Council's activity is not only
about ending conflicts, but also about avoiding future
ones, it is important to connect the Council's work on
peace and security to the development agenda, because,

as we know, there is no peace without development and
there is no development without lasting peace.
Consolidating the Security Council's role
in prevention by strengthening early-warning
mechanisms - such as horizon-scanning
briefings - briefings on threats and informal
interactive dialogues can play an essential role in
detecting emerging threats to peace and security. More
interaction with regional organizations, troop- and
police-contributing countries, Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General and High Commissioners, the
International Criminal Court and the International Court
of Justice would also contribute to conflict prevention.

Thirdly, discussions about the working methods
must be placed within the broader context of Security
Council reform. We may have different views on
this topic, but the reality is that, without identifying
a common denominator to channel the debate on
Council reform, dissatisfaction and even frustration
among Member States could divert the process into a
less positive direction, with the risk of affecting the
credibility of the United Nations.

We all need a strong Council that continues to
play a decisive role in preserving peace and security
around the globe. In 1946, when the United Nations
was created, there were 50 founding countries, while
today the Organization includes 193 Member States.
In 1946, the world population was 2.5 billion; today
we are 7.3 billion people on Earth. The Council's
composition should reflect that new geopolitical and
demographic reality.

Therefore, we believe that must continue to search
for a constructive solution on Security Council reform,
while fully respecting the Charter of the United
Nations. At important moments, the Council has shown
inspiration and flexibility. We have to rediscover
those ingredients.

