The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to draw
Council members' attention to document S/2012/732,
which contains the report of the Secretary-General
on women and peace and security, and to document
S/2012/774, which contains a letter dated 2 October
2012 from the Permanent Representative of Guatemala
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitments to the full and effective
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009), and 1960 (2010),
and recalls all statements of its President on women
and peace and security as reiterating the Council's
commitments.

"The Security Council urges all parties to fully
comply with their obligations under the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women of 1979 and the Optional Protocol
thereto of 1999 and strongly encourages States that
have not ratified or acceded to the Convention and
Optional Protocol to consider doing so.

"The Security Council underlines the primary
role of national Governments affected by armed
conflict to enhance the participation of women in
the prevention and resolution of conflict and in
peacebuilding within the framework of the women,
peace and security agenda. The Council further
stresses that United Nations entities should continue

to support and supplement, as appropriate, efforts
of national Governments in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

"The Security Council takes note of the
report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (8/2012/732) for the purpose
of implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
and particularly welcomes its call for enhanced
participation, representation and involvement of
women in the prevention and resolution of armed
conflict and in peacebuilding, as well as a stronger
commitment to addressing challenges to such
engagement of women at all levels.

"The Security Council welcomes the role of
UN Women in contributing to the implementation
of resolutions on women and peace and security.
The Council welcomes briefings by the Under-
Secretary-General/Executive Director of UN
Women. The Council notes with satisfaction the
increased coordination and coherence in policy
and programming for women and girls within the
United Nations system, welcoming efforts to avoid
duplication and overlap since the creation of UN
Women.

"The Security Council recognizes the
contributions of civil society, including women's
organizations, through informal interactions with
members of the Council at Headquarters and during
Council field missions.

"The Security Council recognizes the need for
more systematic attention to the implementation
of women peace and security commitments in its
own work to ensure the enhancement of women's
engagement in conflict prevention, resolution
and peacebuilding and to continue to integrate
appropriate gender perspectives into the mandates
of relevant United Nations peacekeeping missions,
as well as in other relevant thematic areas of peace
and security.

"The Security Council welcomes the
contribution of Gender Advisers to the
implementation of resolutions on women and peace
and security by providing training and awareness-
raising to United Nations peacekeepers and
assisting in capacity-building activities of national
Governments, as well as those of civil society.
In this regard, the Security Council underlines

the need for continued, appropriate and regular
training for Gender Advisers.

"The Security Council reiterates its call to
deploy Women Protection Advisers to peacekeeping
missions. The Council stresses the need to ensure
that gains made in the protection and promotion of
women's and girls' rights and empowerment are
sustained during United Nations mission drawdown
and transitions.

"The Security Council takes note of the
important role that civil society, including
women's organizations, can play in the prevention
and resolution of armed conflict, peacebuilding
and post-conflict situations, and encourages the
international community, regional organizations
and concerned Member States to promote their
active engagement and effective participation in a
variety of roles, as appropriate, with a view to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

"The Council welcomes the efforts of Member
States to implement resolution 1325 (2000) at the
national level, including the development of national
action plans or other national-level strategies, and
encourages Member States to continue to pursue
such implementation.

"The Security Council recognizes the important
engagement of men and boys as partners in
promoting women's participation in the prevention
and resolution of armed conflict, peacebuilding
and post-conflict situations.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Secretary-General's call upon his Special Envoys
and mediators, as well his senior representatives
in United Nations mission context, to regularly
consult with civil society, including women's
organizations, as well as with women and girls from
affected communities, enabling them to actively
engage in all stages of peace processes.

"The Security Council stresses the importance
of promoting and protecting the human rights
of women and girls in the context of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and other
relevant Security Council resolutions. The Security
Council acknowledges that the human rights of
women and girls are at particular risk during armed
conflict and post-conflict situations, and notes that
civil society members working on women's human

rights issues may be targeted in a number of these
situations. The Council urges concerned Member
States to pay special attention to addressing these
risks.

"The Security Council stresses the importance
of assisting Member States in promoting women's
full and equal participation in post-conflict
electoral processes and constitutional reform. The
Council encourages concerned Member States
conducting these electoral processes to continue
their efforts, with support from United Nations
entities, to address the gender dimension in all
phases of electoral processes, noting that specific
attention must be paid to women's safety prior to,
and during, elections.

"The Security Council underscores the need
for Member States in post-conflict situations,
in consultation with, inter alia, civil society,
including women's organizations, to address the
specific requirements and priorities of women
and girls in their national strategies to improve
their socioeconomic conditions, participation in
income-generating activities, and their access to
education and basic services.

"The Security Council stresses the need for
continued efforts to address obstacles to women's
access to justice in conflict and post-conflict
settings, including through gender-responsive
legal, judicial and security sector reform and other
mechanisms.

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
condemnation of all violations of applicable
international law committed against women and
girls, including sexual and gender-based violence
and killing and maiming, in armed conflict and
post-conflict situations and urges the complete
cessation by all parties of such acts with immediate
effect. The Security Council also urges Member
States to bring to justice those responsible for
crimes of this nature.

"The Security Council notes that the fight
against impunity for the most serious crimes of
international concern committed against women
and girls has been strengthened through the work
of the International Criminal Court, ad hoc and
mixed tribunals, as well as specialized chambers
in national tribunals. The Council reiterates its
intention to continue forcefully to fight impunity
and uphold accountability with appropriate means.

"The Security Council draws attention to
the importance of a comprehensive approach to
transitional justice in armed conflict and post-
conflict situations, encompassing the full range of
judicial and non-judicial measures, as appropriate.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General in his next annual report to give an update
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
to include, inter alia, achievements, gaps and
challenges to the implementation of the resolution,
as well as this statement of its President."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/23.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose 6113.35 pm.
