Mr. Cardenas (Argentina): More than a year ago,
New Zealand and Argentina sent a letter to the President
of the Security Council, supported by a considerable
number of Member States that shared our ideas related to
the issue of consultations between members of the
Security Council and troop-contributing countries.

As a result, a presidential statement was issued on
4 November, based on some of the ideas reflected in that
letter. A mechanism was then implemented to allow
consultations among Security Council members, troop
contributors and the Secretariat. These consultations were
intended as a first step, to be reviewed in the light of
experience.

During the current General Assembly session, many
delegations have expressed their views on this subject.
While the usefulness of the mechanism is recognized,
there is a feeling that it should be reviewed, in order to
improve the efficiency, effectiveness and representativity
of these consultations.

A number of Member States from different
geographical regions have been meeting informally
recently to discuss the existing mechanism of

 

consultations between troop-contributing countries and the
members of the Security Council. I should now like to
share some of our ideas and views on this important
question.

Those Member States are: Algeria, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Egypt, Finland, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Spain,
Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay and Argentina.

It is our intention to review the existing system of
consultations, with the aim of creating the broadest possible
support among Member States for peace-keeping operations
of the United Nations.

The Member States I have previously mentioned are
of the opinion that there is a need for a more formal and
institutionalized mechanism of consultations between troop
contributors and the Security Council. This could certainly
be achieved in different ways. We have considered, among
others, proposals to establish a subsidiary organ, as is
foreseen in Article 29 of the United Nations Charter.

This mechanism should include, in our view, the
following features, which reflect the common views of
Member States I have referred to.

Each consultation meeting should be held between the
members of the Security Council and the contributors of
troops to the peace-keeping operation in question, assisted
by the Secretariat.

When the Security Council considers establishing a
new operation it should consult potential troop contributors
already approached by the Secretariat.

The existing practice of inviting to these meetings
Member States which make special contributions to peace-
keeping operations other than troops - that is, trust funds,
logistics and equipment - should be continued.

The mechanism of consultations should be chaired by
a member of the Security Council specially appointed every
year. The chairman could be assisted by one or more
additional members of the Security Council, as appropriate.

It is our View that the meetings should be held in good
time before the Council takes decisions on the extension,
modification or termination of the mandate of a particular
peace-keeping operation. Such meetings should also be
convened in the event of unforeseen developments in a
particular peace-keeping operation which could require
action by the Council.

In those operations Where the mandate is routinely
renewed, the chairman of the mechanism may decide,
after consulting with the troop contributors, whether or
not to hold a meeting.

Meetings should be included in the monthly tentative
forecast of work of the Council and should be duly
announced in the Journal of the United Nations.

These meetings will be in addition to those convened
and chaired solely by the Secretariat for troop contributors
to meet with Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General or Force Commanders, or to discuss operational
matters concerning particular peace-keeping operations.
Members of the Security Council will also be invited to
these meetings.

Background documentation and a clear agenda, as
well as any substantive information available, should be
provided by the Secretariat and/or the presidency or the
chairman of such meetings to all participants well in
advance.

The chairman of the mechanism should report to the
Council the views expressed by participants at each
meeting with troop contributors.

The Security Council should periodically report to
the General Assembly on the work of the mechanism.

We hope that the Security Council will take into
account these ideas as a demonstration of the willingness
of our countries to improve the relationship and
cooperation between troop-contributing countries and the
Security Council itself.

