Mr. Nakayama (Federated States of Micronesia):
We have gathered here in the wake of the terrible
events unfolding in Iraq. Only one week ago a war
started that nobody wanted - neither the coalition
fighting in Iraq nor the Iraqi people, nor certainly my
own country. But the Iraqi regime missed the chance
given by Security Council resolution 1441 (2002) and
continued to ignore the will of the international
community at the expense of its own people. We have
joined the coalition, under the authority of a number of
Security Council resolutions, most notably resolutions
678 (1990) and 1441 (2002), because it was the only
way left to disarm the Iraqi regime and fully rid Iraq of
weapons of mass destruction. Unhappy that it had to
come to military action, we believe that the present
course of action will result in a safer and better world
for all humankind, especially for the people of the
region itself.

We are greatly concerned with the humanitarian
situation in Iraq, for which the Iraqi regime is fully
responsible. It is imperative that supplies be able to
enter in a safe manner and be distributed unimpeded.
While supplies will be brought in initially by coalition
forces, we hope that the various United Nations
programmes will be able to resume their respective
roles as soon as possible. Furthermore, the United
Nations has to play a key role in rebuilding Iraq, not
just from the current war but also from the suffering of
the last 20-some years. We urge all Governments that
can to contribute to this effort.

My Government is appalled by news of prisoners
of war being mistreated, and it calls on the Iraqi regime
to adhere to the Geneva Convention relative to the
Treatment of Prisoners of War and to honour all
obligations therein, especially that of giving the
International Committee of the Red Cross immediate
and unconditional access and refraining from any
inhumane or degrading treatment.

Addressing the situation in Iraq, my Government,
in a recent declaration, stated:

"The United Nations Organization must be and
must remain the keystone of international
cooperation as we proceed into the century of
globalization. It would amount to a tragedy for
mankind if that Organization were to fail now to
be worthy of the challenge so clearly before it."

Clearly, the Security Council must not fail to address
the issue of rebuilding Iraq.

