Mr. Hunter (United States of America): The support
of the United States for Ukraine's sovereignty and
territorial integrity is unwavering. We are committed
to working with the Ukrainian people to promote
democracy and prosperity and root out corruption.
President Trump underscored that message to President
Zelenskyi following peaceful competitive elections that
reflected Ukraine's vibrant democracy.

Russia's actions in Ukraine since 2014 have led to
approximately 13,000 conflict-related deaths, including
more than 300 Ukrainian soldiers killed or wounded
this year in the conflict in eastern Ukraine, which was
stirred up by Russia. In the face of Russia's aggression
and efforts to undermine the country, Ukraine instead
continues to grow more united, more cohesive, more
resilient and stronger.

We welcome the opportunity today to discuss
issues that Ukraine's minority groups face. Since
2014, Russian occupation forces have carried out a
campaign of violence, including dozens of extrajudicial
killings and forcible disappearances, imprisonment and
torture, against Crimean Tatars, ethnic Ukrainians and
others. We call on Russia to end its systematic abuse
of Ukraine's Crimean Tatar community and Ukrainian
nationals in Crimea and the Donbas region.

We note with concern Russia's suppression of
education in the languages of national minorities in
Crimea. Only 249 schoolchildren are being educated in
the Ukrainian language this year, down from 12,694
children in the school year before Russia's occupation
began, according to data gathered by the United Nations
Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine.

In contrast, we commend President Zelenskyi's
support for the promotion of Ukrainian language efforts
to promote national unity. While President Zelenskyi has
promised to take steps to strengthen relations between
Kyiv and Ukrainians living in eastern Ukraine, Russia
perpetually undermines unity, as exemplified recently
by its decision to issue passports to Ukrainians residing
in conflict areas.

Sombrely, we note that, five years ago tomorrow,
298 innocent civilians were killed in the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7. The United States
again extends its deepest sympathies to the families
and friends ofthe victims and calls forjustice on behalf
of those who lost their lives.

As the findings of the Joint Investigation Team
made clear, the BUK missile launcher used to bring
down the passenger aircraft was owned by Russia and
was assigned to Russia's 53rd Anti-aircraft Brigade.
The launcher was brought into sovereign Ukrainian
territory, fired from territory controlled by Russia and
Russian-led forces in eastern Ukraine and then returned
to Russian territory. We recall the Security Council's
demand that those responsible be held to account and
that all States cooperate fully with efforts to establish
accountability. We call upon Russia to respect and
adhere to resolution 2166 (2014) and ensure that any
indicted individuals currently in Russia face justice.

More recently, Russia escalated its aggressive
activities when it blocked the lawful passage of
Ukrainian naval vessels and attacked them near the
Kerch Strait in November. The United States calls on
Russia to respect Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders,
including its territorial waters, and we reiterate our
call to Russia to immediately release the detained
Ukrainian crew members and naval vessels. That would
be an important demonstration of Russia's readiness to
engage more constructively with Ukraine.

Russia must end its occupation okaraine's Crimean
peninsula. Our Crimea-related sanctions will remain
in place until Russia returns control of the peninsula
to Ukraine, and our sanctions against Russia for its
aggression in eastern Ukraine will remain in place until
Russia fully implements the Minsk agreements. As
Secretary Pompeo stated in our declaration on Crimea
last year, the United States rejects Russia's attempted
annexation of Crimea and pledges to maintain that
policy until Ukraine's territorial integrity is restored.

