Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important debate
on a subject that concerns us all.

The best way to attack the links between
transnational crime and terrorism is through
prevention. States must strengthen the institutions that
combat crime and work hard to reduce impunity and
to respect the rule of law and human rights. To prevent
the radicalization of young people and close spaces to
crime, efforts must also be redoubled to extend such
basic services as education, health and security to areas
where the Government's presence is weak or scarce.

Costa Rica stresses in this regard the importance
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the four pillars that underpin it, including
addressing the conditions that help to spread terrorism,
preventing and combating terrorism, and strengthening
the capacity of States and the role of the United Nations.
Another way to prevent the interaction of organized
crime and terrorism is by strengthening borders, both
maritime and land. Porous borders lend themselves
to such illicit activities as drug trafficking, the
movement of people and weapons and the smuggling of
prohibited goods.

While preventing and combating these evils are the
responsibility of each State and are matters of national
security, when illicit activities are carried out in a
coordinated manner in several territories, transcending
the borders of one country, this requires international
attention. That is why it is good that we are having this
discussion today.

We are dealing with a phenomenon in which
criminals provide such services to terrorists as money-
laundering, the provision ofdocuments, arms trafficking
and human trafficking. There are also situations where
terrorists engage in such organized-crime activities as
kidnapping or the illegal extraction of metals, in order
to obtain financing. This represents a great challenge
for crime prevention and for the administration of
justice, because it changes the traditional schemes for
which our law-enforcement officers and administrators
of justice have been trained and the situations they are
accustomed to facing.

Costa Rica has recently made changes to its
domestic legislation in order to strengthen the tools
against money-laundering and terrorist financing.
Although preventive activity is sometimes naively
concentrated only on this aspect, it is, as you yourself
have said, Mr. President, not everything.

The Supreme Court of Justice of Costa Rica is
working on training judges, prosecutors and judicial
police in cybercrime, in the participation of companies
in organized crime and the money-laundering, human
trafficking and smuggling, among others, as ways of
detecting organized crime. Work is also being carried
out to improve the processing and study of information,
analysis and the establishment of relationships among
the various networks made up of such organizations.

Cooperation is fundamental to be able to fight these
organized groups, which operate at the international
level and differ in their motives. While the criminals are
in search of profits, generally terrorists seek to impose
ideologies or religions. However, they use common
methods and resources - illicit activities such as the
transfer of arms, human trafficking, money-laundering,
kidnapping, bank robbery, among others - to achieve
their ends.

Apart from the assistance that countries can
provide through bilateral agreements, Costa Rica is of
the View that regional and subregional organizations,
which have knowledge about the areas in which they
are based, play a key role in cooperation, as well as
in coordinating joint efforts. National needs and crime
patterns vary by region. As we heard in the special
meeting held in April, Latin America is the most violent
region in the world, with the highest rate of homicide
and kidnapping for ransom and the largest diaspora.
That is an example of very peculiar characteristics of
a geographical space, where the link between terrorism
and organized crime is probably different from that
which occurs in other regions that do not have such a
predominance of violence. Examples of that have been
heard here in the Chamber throughout the day.

Cooperation should include training and technology
transfer, both when it comes to States as well as between
the United Nations and regional bodies. Computing
tools, used mainly for tracking foreign fighters, should
be available to all countries, and that should be a joint
effort. The standardization of contents in databases
that facilitate the exchange of information should
be a common objective to improve the fight against
terrorism. With regard to the latter - to the extent that
domestic regulations permit - countries must make
an effort to establish public-private partnerships that
facilitate access to technological advances to serve
both in the prevention of terrorism and in the gathering
of evidence.

All of that should take place while respecting
the rule of law, human rights and the fundamental
freedoms of individuals. We must bear in mind that
criminal and terrorist organizations, whether acting
in tandem or not, have shown that they have access to
all kinds of resources. To cooperate in an orderly and
equitable manner and achieve an effective exchange
of information, Member States must subscribe to the
relevant United Nations instruments, such as the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime and its three Protocols.

Costa Rica believes it is urgent to bolster our
ability to be able to identify new trends in preparations
for sophisticated events. To that end, it is important
to raise awareness not just among officials but among
society at large. Prosecution and the establishment of
norms are important, but it is just as important to seek
mechanisms and guidelines that allow for the timely
identification of indicators in order to avoid large-scale
events and actual crisis situations. To achieve that, it
is vital that States cooperate with one another in the
exchange of information. That is why we support the
draft resolution being advanced by Peru.

