Mr. Perez-Otermin (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
The matter before us today is, in the view of my country,
one of the most important for this Organization and for
the human race as a whole. What has been happening in
East Timor, mainly after an exemplary popular
consultation carried out with the support of this
Organization, fills us with anguish and dread, for it shows
clearly that there is a regression, a backward movement
away from the civilization which we believed we had
achieved. The facts are well known to everybody, and
pictures have been transmitted to the whole world by the
press. For this reason there is no need for me here to list
all the facts. Let me just say that we are utterly disgusted
and outraged at what is happening.

This Organization, the United Nations, and
particularly the Secretary-General, have been doing very
courageous work in support of self-determination for the
people of East Timor. But the Organization per se will
not be the party responsible if we fail to bring peace to
the area. This Organization is no more than what its
Members want it to be; its will is the will of its Members.
So if there is failure, it is not the Organization that is
failing; it is its Members. We all have the responsibility
to ensure that the Organization is successful here; some
of us have more possibilities for ensuring success than
others.

The eyes of the world are on us. The Mission I
represent is receiving hundreds of messages every day on
this matter, coming from organizations and citizens from
all parts of the world. This is an unprecedented
phenomenon for us; it has never happened with any
similar situation before.

My country, Uruguay, is contributing the maximum
possible. We have provided military officers and civilian
police, and we are willing to send more troops to the
area. Moreover, the two military officers and the four
civilian police still remaining in Dili are there because
they volunteered to remain until the end of the
evacuation. As they themselves said when they requested
authorization to stay, they were convinced that the only

 

way to protect the life of those directly under the protection
of the United Nations was for the peace force to remain
present in Dili.

Without prejudice to what I have just set out, given
the developments, my Government believes that now the
matter is no longer a task for the civilian police; rather,
restoring order requires a purely military action ordered by
the Organization.

We believe that this is no longer the time for lengthy
discourse; now is the time for action. Each and every one
of us is ready to do what he can to bring peace to a people
which only wishes to exercise its legitimate right to
determine its own future in an democratic manner.

My country, whose people and Government have a
very deeply rooted feeling for democracy, have supported
this process from the beginning, and we will continue to do
so as best we can, in accordance with the traditions of our
foreign policy.

Uruguay has always been present in peacekeeping
operations, pursuant to mandates set forth in Chapter VII of
the Charter. So we join in what was said by the Secretary-
General, to the effect that the Indonesian authorities should
immediately lend their consent to the presence of a
multinational peacekeeping force mandated by the United
Nations.

We have no doubt that all of us here, and the
Governments we represent, will be able to respond to this
appeal for the maintenance of peace.

