Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We express our appreciation
to the Kazakh presidency for organzing this high-level
briefing on a very important issue, which has been
at the top of the Security Council agenda for the past
year. We were very pleased to see the President of
Kazakhstan presiding over this meeting as the leader of
a country that decided not to have nuclear weapons on
its territory. He made a wise decision in that regard, and
we appreciate his vision and wisdom on that important
issue. We are always appreciative of the Secretary-
General for his briefings. We are also very pleased
to see the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan
presiding over the meeting at this point.

Since the end of the Cold War, the threat posed by
the proliferation of nuclear weapons has never been
as deeply worrying as it is today. We all know the
unimaginable potential danger that humankind would
face should the non-proliferation regime be further
weakened. That is why a world free of nuclear weapons
is an important objective, which we in Ethiopia fully
support and subscribe to, as do many States Members
of the United Nations. We are also party to the African
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty, the Pelindaba Treaty.

Moreover, we recognize the challenge that the
world faces today with regard to the proliferation of
nuclear weapons and the fact that the international norm
set by the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons is being seriously tested. The question before
us today, therefore, is what can be done to respond to
the current challenges and to preserve that important
international norm. We believe that the issues raised
in the concept note (S/2018/4, annex) in terms of
prevention and confidence-building measures are very
timely and relevant.

Let me stress that we deeply appreciate the proposals
made by the President of Kazkahstan in that regard. In
our View, it is important to comprehensively address
risks of proliferation through political and diplomatic
means aimed at finding a negotiated solution. For
example, we believe that the manner in which the States
participating in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) managed to address the Iranian nuclear issue
is a significant achievement for multilateralism. Of
course, we recognize that much more needs to be done to
resolve misunderstandings and to prevent any possible
obstacles to the full implementation of the JCPOA.

We believe, as the Secretary-General stated, that
issues not directly related to the JCPOA should be
addressed without prejudice to the provisions of the
Agreement and its accomplishments. We therefore
hope that the participating countries will continue to
uphold their commitment to that important deal, which
has enormous significance to international peace and
security within the international non-proliferation
regime. We believe that it is essential to adopt
confidence-building measures in order to build trust
among the participating States, and we hope that the
President will take steps in that direction.

Based on the lessons learned from the Iranian
nuclear deal, it is important to explore ways and means
of addressing the serious threat posed by the nuclear
and ballistic missile programme of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. It is increasingly apparent
that there is no other option but a peaceful and
diplomatic path to resolving the crisis in the Korean
peninsula. It is for that reason that priority should be
given to easing heightened tensions and avoiding the
risk of miscalculation. In that regard, we welcome the
recent high-level intra-Korean talks and the agreement
reached to ease military tensions, hold military-to-
military talks and reopen the inter-Korean military
hotline, which we hope will help to reduce tensions on
the Korean peninsula. We also welcome the agreement
reached between the United States and the Republic of
Korea to postpone theirjoint military exercises.

Undeniably, such developments are encouraging
and should facilitate the resumption of serious
dialogue. At this stage, it is important to create an
atmosphere conducive to the holding of such dialogue.
We hope that the Winter Olympic Games will be
instrumental in promoting that kind of atmosphere and
in building confidence. We welcome the decision of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to send its
delegation to the Winter Olympic Games, and we also
appreciate the Secretary-General's decision to attend
the opening ceremony of the Games. On the other
hand, we are under no illusion that resolving the issue
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea will be
easy. It is absolutely important that all sides start to
take small but meaningful steps to build the necessary
trust and confidence that could help pave the way for
the resumption of dialogue and negotiation towards
finding a comprehensive and lasting solution to the
issue surrounding the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and denuclearizing the Korean peninsula. We
must take serious note of the proposal by the President
on this matter.

That brings me to my third point on the broader
threat to international peace and security and to
humankind posed by the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, including by non-State actors.
Multilateral agreements, such as the Biological Weapons
Convention, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
continue to contribute immensely to the prevention
and elimination of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, including into the hands ofnon-State actors
and terrorist groups. Nonetheless, much remains to be
done to ensure the universal accession to and the full
implementation of such agreements. Regional nuclear-
weapon-free zones, such as the African Nuclear-
Weapon-Free Zone, also remain central to the global
and regional non-proliferation regimes in the creation
of a world free of nuclear weapons.

The Security Council plays a critical role in
addressing the serious threat posed by the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by using all the
available tools at its disposal, including sanctions. As
we have seen over the past year, the unity of the Council
is absolutely critical to addressing non-proliferation
issues, and everything must be done to preserve it. It is
also important to ensure that the various decisions and
measures taken by the Council are adhered to by all
Member States. With regard to advocacy and follow-up,
the role of the relevant subsidiary bodies of the Council
remains Vital.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming
Ethiopia's commitment to upholding the international
non-proliferation regime and fulfilling its obligations in
implementing the relevant Security Council resolutions
without fail.

