Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): First, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Council for the month of July. I wish to also thank
you for inviting the Economic and Social Council Ad
Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau to participate
in this meeting to discuss the report of the Security
Council mission to West Africa.

Without the support of the Security Council, and
in particular of Ambassador Emyr Jones Parry of the
United Kingdom, who led the Security Council
mission, our participation in the mission might not
have been possible. We thank Ambassador Jones Parry
for making it possible. We are also thankful to this
Council for its support and its growing and meaningful
working relationship with the Economic and Social
Council.

There have been very significant and meaningful
changes that have taken place in Guinea-Bissau. On 28
March 2004, Guinea-Bissau held legislative elections
that were deemed free, fair and transparent by a team
of international observers. Nonetheless, the optimism
we have about the future of Guinea-Bissau is not based
simply on the holding of a successful election. Our
joint visit confirmed that there is reason to describe
what is happening in Guinea-Bissau as a breakthrough.

The newly elected National Popular Assembly is
committed to completing the review of the Constitution
during its current session that will lay the groundwork
for the holding of presidential elections in 2005. The
new Government is also intent on strengthening its
partnership and dialogue with its international
development partners, in the spirit of the partnership
approach endorsed by the Economic and Social
Council in 2003. This approach should help restore
international economic and financial confidence in
Guinea-Bissau.

During our visit, we saw a Government that is
committed to improved governance and is in the
process of strengthening mechanisms that will deepen
democracy in that country. The Council may recall
frequent changes and dismissals of senior officials,
including in the Office of the Prime Minister and the
Ministry of Economy and Finance, that contributed to
the institutional instability of the past and threatened
peace and security in Guinea-Bissau. The new
Government, however, has begun practising greater
transparency and accountability in public
administration by selecting senior public officials
based on merit and technical experience. This approach
by the Government is already contributing to overall
stability.

A Treasury Committee that includes the United
Nations Development Programme scrutinizes both
revenue collection and expenditures within the
Ministry of Economy and Finance. As a result, there
are already visible gains in revenue collection that have
made it possible for the Government to be able, after
only 45 days in office, to pay three months of salaries
to its public servants from its own resources.

However, Guinea-Bissau remains in need of
official development assistance to rebuild its social and
economic infrastructure and private investment to
relaunch the economy. Our Group is convinced that a
modest investment in the short- to medium-term in the
economy would help Guinea-Bissau to consolidate the
progress that the Government has made so far.

The Group is very encouraged by the positive
approach that the Bretton Woods institutions continue
to pursue in regard to Guinea-Bissau. The International
Monetary Fund (IMF) has played a critical and
constructive role in supporting the Government of
Guinea-Bissau by providing technical assistance in
many areas, including in revenue administration,
customs, expenditure management and real and fiscal
sector statistics. The IMF Executive Board is expected
to meet in mid-September 2004 to consider the report
of article IV consultations with the Government of
Guinea-Bissau. It is expected that the Board may
consider a programme that could lead to the resumption
of the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
programme for Guinea-Bissau. Our Group would hope
that the Security Council will urge the IMF to
positively consider the resumption of a programme for
Guinea-Bissau.

The World Bank's new medium-term strategy,
expected to begin in September 2004, is also a
welcome sign of the Bank's confidence in Guinea-
Bissau. The new programme will support the
restoration of macroeconomic stability and provide
support for social services, particularly health and
education, the reinforcement of governance and the
rehabilitation of economic infrastructure, namely, in
water, energy, transport and telecommunications. Both
the Fund and the Bank, however, have made it clear
that the implementation of their own programmes will
not be successful without the strong and active
engagement of the donor community.

In conclusion, in the area of peace and security,
the Group is concerned about the restructuring of the
security sector. Working and living conditions for the
military are extremely poor. In the context of the recent
history of Guinea-Bissau, the transformation of the
armed forces into a professional force is absolutely
critical to minimizing the risk of the country's
relapsing into conflict. This is important because the
security situation in Guinea-Bissau remains fragile in a
subregion that is itself fragile.

The joint mission has concluded that it is
essential to continue to monitor and support political,
economic and social developments in Guinea-Bissau.
Indeed, our Group concurs and believes that sustained
support is absolutely essential to ensuring that Guinea-
Bissau does not lose the recent gains achieved.

