Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): When the thirty-ninth
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Ordinary Summit of the Authority of
Heads of State and Government called upon the
Security Council to revisit the situation in Cote
d'Ivoire, it did so in response to the rapidly
2
deteriorating political security and humanitarian
situation in that country.

The reports that we have received from numerous
sources, including those from the Office of the
Coordinator for Humanitarian Affairs, indicate that the
unthinkable is taking place before our very eyes. The
fragile peace established by the Ouagadougou accord a
mere four years ago is quickly unravelling through
patterns of killing, rape and the destruction of property.
Angry militias and young people are being
indoctrinated, trained, armed and deployed to seek out
and harm civilian targets, increasingly through the use
of heavy weaponry and explosives.

Those hardest hit are the most vulnerable -
women and children who have committed no greater
crime than trying to lead a normal life. Not only are
civilians suffering from indiscriminate attacks, there is
mounting evidence that they are also being specifically
targeted. Such heinous acts violate international
humanitarian law. The fact that the violence is
beginning to take on ethnic and sectarian overtones is
an indication of the risk of a relapse into the recent
state of civil war in Cote d'Ivoire.

As stakeholders in the future of Cote d'Ivoire, the
United Nations, ECOWAS and the African Union have
a moral and legal obligation. Therefore, we cannot be a
party to this inexorable degeneration. The inevitable
consequence of such a relapse would imperil the West
African subregion. This is already happening, as
civilians have begun to seek refuge in Liberia, Ghana
and other neighbouring countries. The added strain on
those societies should not be underestimated, and the
risk of conflict spillover is all too real.

Further, there is evidence of attacks on foreign
nationals, including targeted attacks on those from
ECOWAS States. Let there be no doubt that this
situation is a collective global responsibility. We must
act now.

The current situation is without a doubt a direct
consequence of the refusal of Mr. Laurent Gbagbo to
cede power to President Alassane Ouattara. This is
unacceptable. Mr. Gbagbo's intransigence threatens to
plunge his country, once the beacon of the subregion,
into a bloody and protracted civil war. It is indeed time
to translate the words of the Security Council's press
statements of 10 January, 3 March and 11 March 2011
into concrete action.
11-28400
In response to the rapidly developing
circumstances, this resolution reinforces those
sanctions already in place, as part of an incremental
approach, to which we have all agreed, to resolving the
conflict. Nigeria is confident that the resolution
strengthens the mandate of the United Nations
Operation in cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) to protect
Ivorians and provides the necessary space for UNOCI
and other international actors to work without
hindrance.

The targeted measures against Mr. Gbagbo and
his close associates will complement and strengthen
the international actions that have curtailed his access
to Cote d'Ivoire's accounts and resources. Moreover,
our support for the political efforts of the African
Union and other interlocutors has already been
expressed in the Council. These preventive diplomacy
strategies can create space for a peaceful transition of
power.

The collective action that we have taken today by
adopting this resolution is a significant step towards
protecting the defenceless civilians, including women
and children, in Cote d'Ivoire, who bear the brunt of
the brutal attacks.

The political stalemate in Cote d'Ivoire has led to
an absence of effective governance, and, indeed, the
unrest is spiralling out of control. This resolution
provides an opportunity to stem the tide of conflict in
Cote d'Ivoire. In this defining moment for
Cote d'Ivoire, it is imperative that we all ensure that
the valid aspirations of the Ivorian people are
ultimately fulfilled.

