Mr. Pedersen: It is a pleasure to see so many old
friends around the table. I am also looking forward to
developing new friendships. It is a real honour for me
to be here.

It is also an honour for me to brief the Security
Council for the first time in my capacity as the Special
Envoy for Syria some eight weeks into my mandate. I
have taken up this task with all humility, conscious of
the profound grief and suffering of the Syrian people
everywhere. I am also aware of the need to end this
conflict for the sake of Syria, the region and the world.

I know Council members all understand the scale
and difficulty of my task. It is not for lack of talent that
my predecessors did not achieve more, and it will, of
course, not be possible to satisfy every party on every
issue. But I can promise the Security Council that I
will work impartially and diligently to discharge the
mandate given in resolution 2254 (2015) to facilitate the
political process. To achieve that end, the cooperation of
all Syrian and international parties will be required. It
will require the readiness of everyone to deal seriously
with the realities of the conflict and work together to
move things step by step in a positive direction.

In my initial engagements, I have reminded
all parties that resolution 2254 (2015) contains all
the elements required for a political solution. The
resolution begins by respecting the sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria and
provides a road map for a truly Syrian-led and Syrian-
owned political process, which is key, because I am
convinced that a real peace process in Syria needs
to be owned by the Syrians, including over half the
population - Syrian women - for it to be sustainable.

Resolution 2254 (2015) demands compliance
with international law, stresses protection of civilians
and unfettered humanitarian access, cessation of
hostilities, addressing terrorism, implementing
confidence-building measures, and releasing detainees
and abductees. All of these are vital if we are to see
Syrians moving out of conflict. It further addresses
the issues of governance, a constitutional process and
United Nations-supervised elections. These are the
means by which the Syrians, and no one else, should
determine their future. It speaks of safe and voluntary
refugee returns and of reconstruction, which are issues
that present themselves on a major scale and require
serious discussion. In short, resolution 2254 (2015)
takes a comprehensive View of the issues that need to
be addressed to end the conflict and bring stability and
genuine peace.

My first and most important priority has been to
engage with the Syrian Government and the Syrian
Negotiation Commission and seek their views and
cooperation. In Damascus, I was received very well by
Foreign Minister Al-Moualem. He responded positively
to my core message, expressed interest in the success
of my mission and welcomed my intention to return.
Last week, Deputy Special Envoy Ramzy returned
to Damascus and held good discussions with Deputy
Foreign Minister Mekdad, reaffirming an agreement to
keep up a sustained dialogue on peace in Syria, on the
basis ofresolution 2254 (2015), with the aim ofbuilding
confidence and a view towards a Syrian-led and Syrian-
owned and United Nations-facilitated political process.

I visited the Syrian Negotiation Commission, led
by Coordinator Naser Al-Hariri, at its office in Riyadh
and met with all components. I greatly appreciated their
positive response to my message and their commitment
to engaging and seeking dialogue and negotiations
towards implementing resolution 2254 (2015). My
senior advisers had follow-up discussions with them
a few days ago. They affirmed their readiness for a
sustained dialogue on the basis of resolution 2254
(2015) towards a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political
process under United Nations facilitation.

I have also appreciated the frank, practical and
constructive engagements with all international
stakeholders, including visits to Moscow, Cairo, Ankara,
Tehran, Paris, Berlin and Brussels, and meetings with
senior officials of key countries in Geneva, at Davos,
and recently in Munich. I will be in Washington, DC,
on Tuesday, and other capitals in due course, including
London, Beirut, Amman and Beijing.

I have recalled to all my interlocutors - and I
remind you, Mr. President, we are not starting from
scratch - that we have 12 living principles developed
by the Syrians in Geneva and affirmed in Sochi,
and baskets that have formed an agreed agenda of
intra-Syrian talks under United Nations facilitation.
But beyond that, let me share five core thoughts with
Council members on the way ahead.

First, it is essential for me as a United Nations
mediator and facilitator to have a direct and effective
engagement with the Government of Syria, and,
of course, the opposition. This is needed to build
confidence and trust and to develop sustained dialogue
with the parties. It is needed to bring the Syrians to a
real negotiation under United Nations auspices to end
the devastating conflict in the country and to make a
new beginning so that Syrians can together win the
peace - a peace for all Syrians. I welcome the readiness
of the parties to engage with me in this regard. And I
look forward to returning to Damascus in a few weeks
and to seeing the Syrian Negotiation Commission again
after that.

It is not for me here to prejudge what can be built
in a deeper dialogue. But I believe that there is a shared
sense that battlefield developments might be Winding
down. Nevertheless, the conflict is far from over. And
the challenges of winning the peace are staggering in
scale and complexity. Large tracts of territory remain
outside of Government hands. The Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant is nearly defeated territorially but
experience suggests that it can re-emerge. Syrians yearn
to see the issue of detainees, abductees and missing
persons meaningfully addressed. Around half of
Syria's pre-war population has been displaced. Council
members know the figures: 5.6 million refugees,
6.6 million internally displaced persons, 80 per cent
of Syrians living below the poverty line, and half of
the population unemployed. Some 11.7 million Syrians
need humanitarian assistance. I was pleased that,
with the engagement of the United States and Russian
Chairs of the International Syria Support Group and the
facilitation of the Syrian Government, we recently saw
the largest, single humanitarian convoy of the conflict
reach 40,000 internally displaced persons in Rukban.
Let me emphasize that the United Nations stands
ready to support a durable solution for the people of
Rukban - one that abides by core protection standards
and that must be coordinated with all relevant partners.
Socioeconomic challenges are acute, with major
challenges in service delivery, including gas shortages.

After eight years of war, Syrian society has
undergone a profound transformation that has
also dramatically impacted Syrian women. Many
have assumed new responsibilities as the primary
breadwinners of their families. Others have faced
increased forms of violence specifically targeting
women. Syrians - men, women and children - are
suffering enormously. Part of my mandate is to try to
find ways to address that issue. Syria remains volatile
for those who remain in the country and for those who
wish to return.

Secondly, I was encouraged by the recent release
of 42 detainees/abductees. This was the second release
operation conducted by the Russian Federation and
Turkey within the framework of the Working Group on
the release of detainees/abductees and handover of the
bodies as well as the identification of missing persons.
At the same time, we need to scale up and prioritize
action on that issue, which is of immense humanitarian
importance and is also an essential part of building
confidence. We are intensively engaging on that issue
with the parties and in key capitals. We are eager to
see more meaningful progress unlocked in the period
ahead, and we are in concrete discussions on how to
do so.

Thirdly, the full spectrum of the Syrianpeople -not
just the formal parties - needs to be engaged and
involved in the effort to build confidence and trust,
and search for peace. Engaging Syrians from different
walks oflife reminds me ofwhat is at stake for civilians
in this conflict. It reminds me of Syrians' resilience in
responding to the overwhelming needs generated by
this conflict and of their stake in the political process.
Over the past two months, my team has consulted with
more than 200 Syrian civil society actors inside Syria
and in the diaspora. I have been carefully studying the
insights and reflections of those Syrians to inform my
thinking, and I remain committed to ensuring that a
broad spectrum of Syrian civic actors are heard and
included in our efforts to promote sustainable peace.

Next week, the Syrian Women's Advisory Board
will be in Geneva. Its members have already been in
touch to convey that there will be no sustainable peace

in Syria unless all Syrians are included in shaping the
future of their country. I look forward to hearing their
views on how to advance the women's rights agenda
and strengthen the meaningful participation of women
in the political process.

That brings me to my fourth point. As I have
deepened the dialogue with the parties, I have sensed
broad acceptance of the notion that convening a
credible, balanced, inclusive and viable Syrian-led
and -owned constitutional committee, under United
Nations auspices in Geneva, can be important for
revitalizing the political process. It can open doors
to deeper dialogue and genuine negotiations. I also
believe that it is now well understood that a package
of understandings is needed to ensure that the Syrian
Government and opposition are on board on essential
principles of procedure to guide the work of the
constitutional committee. It is my hope we will be able
to finalize the rules of procedure and the composition
of the committee in the near future. I will do everything
possible to facilitate its credible composition, including
a minimum 30 per cent female representation.

As we focus on developing a real Syrian-led process,
we must all acknowledge that external intervention has
been a significant factor in the conflict. Five national
armies operate across Syria's land and airspace, in
tension or even conflict, generating daily risks of
international escalation. That involvement, of course,
clearly extends beyond the military sphere to a range of
other spheres as well.

That brings me to my fifth point - the need to focus
on improving international dialogue and cooperation.
Some challenges must be addressed urgently. Otherwise,
Syria will be engulfed in renewed escalations that
would have immense human costs, derail any progress
on the political front and risk regional spillover.
Intensive diplomacy is under way, but even more is
needed regarding the situation in the north-east. The
way forward must - to paraphrase the Secretary-
General - ensure the unity and territorial integrity
of Syria and take into account the security concerns
of neighbouring States, while recognizing and giving
voice to different components of Syria's population.

Likewise, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham's advances in
Idlib and escalations in the area underscore the need
to uphold the fragile ceasefire arrangements for Idlib,
protect its civilians and counter the Council-listed
terrorist groups and foreign fighters that have been
such a scourge on Syria, while also addressing the root
causes and conditions in which they thrive. I welcome
the fresh impetus of the recent Sochi Congress to fully
implement the Russian-Turkish memorandum and I
urge for it to be a continued focus in the lead-up to the
next Astana meeting.
Meanwhile, the international community must
ensure that international norms against the use of
chemical weapons are respected and enforced. On
another note, I would add that the growing risk of
further confrontations between Israel and Iran in Syria
should not be overlooked.

Beyond crisis management, I note well that key
international players express emphatic support for
a political settlement for Syria under United Nations
auspices and affirm resolution 2254 (2015). They agree
on the need to counter Security Council-listed terrorist
groups and the need for peace and stability. They
support a political settlement that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people and preserves Syria's
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
They share an appreciation of the realities of 2019 and
understand that real diplomacy is needed to address
them. At present, different discussion formats are
contributing, and the United Nations has engaged
judiciously with all who seek to help, but I believe
that there are real possibilities for strengthening
international support and that we need to be creative
in that regard. I will work diligently to that end. If we
are to see how issues can be unblocked and how to help
the parties move forward in a Syrian-led and-owned
process, we may need a common forum where key
States engage seriously on those issues.

In conclusion, my engagements with all parties,
without exception, have been positive and forward-
looking, but of course, as we get deeper into the issues,
the parties' willingness to move from good words to
real talks will be put to the test. I will engage all, in
good faith, with five goals in the period ahead: first,
to begin and deepen a sustained dialogue with the
Syrian Government and the opposition on building
trust and confidence towards a safe, calm and neutral
environment; secondly, to see more concrete action
on detainees, abductees and missing persons through
engagement with the Astana players, the Syrian parties
and all concerned; thirdly, to engage a wide range of
Syrians as I proceed and involve them in the process;
fourthly, to convene a credible, balanced and inclusive
constitutional committee as soon as possible; fifthly,
to help the international parties deepen their own
dialogue towards the common purpose of a credible and
sustainable political settlement of the Syrian conflict
that can enjoy international legitimacy.

I have one final thought - Syrians have every
capacity to live together in peace, and a political
settlement is plainly needed if we are to see real and
genuine reconciliation. There is no military solution
and the true victors will be those who can move beyond
slogans and paint a hopeful picture of what Syria
could look like in 10 years - a picture that all Syrians
can support, even if the road towards it will be long
and hard.

I have spent much of my career working with
problems that seemed totally intractable and dynamics
that seemed eternally frozen. But I know, first hand, that
history can bend in directions that nobody anticipated.

