Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
are all agreed that it is vital for the Security Council to
decide to keep the United Nations humanitarian
programme operating in Iraq for a further phase. The
programme is doing immensely important and valuable
work and is making a real difference in improving the
lives of ordinary Iraqis. We take this opportunity to
applaud the work of the Executive Director and his
staff in New York and in the field, and to give them our
wholehearted support in the face of difficulties which
we can all too readily appreciate.

The United Kingdom regrets that the Security
Council has been unable to agree on a new set of
arrangements to make substantial further improvements
in the humanitarian programme, in particular by
freeing up dramatically the flow of goods into Iraq. We
recall that the principles of our new approach were
unanimously approved by Council members in
resolution 1352 (2001). Following the adoption of that
resolution, the details of our proposals have been
intensively discussed and improved, and four
permanent members of the Council have now agreed on
the goods-review list.

As demonstrated in last week's formal meeting,
there is now a wide sense across the United Nations
membership that it is the right time for new
arrangements, such as those we have proposed, to be
implemented. There is no good reason for delay.

That approach of ours is not a substitute for
progress on the wider questions. We remain ready to
engage in discussion of the implementation of
resolution 1284 (1999). But there is as yet no sign of a
willingness by Iraq even to begin to cooperate in
meeting its obligations under that resolution or, indeed,
under other resolutions. Iraq consistently refuses to
contemplate the return of United Nations disarmament
inspectors. Why, then, delay the adoption of
improvements in the humanitarian programme?

I would like at this point also to record our
continuing deep concern over Iraq's unforgivable
failure to cooperate further to address the issue of
missing Kuwaiti prisoners and stolen property.

Put simply, our proposed new measures would
help the Iraqi people. They would provide an
immediate benefit that now has to be postponed. So the
United Kingdom will continue to try to resolve
outstanding issues with Council members in the hope
of introducing our new approach as soon as possible.
Any further delay to the prospect of real improvements
in Iraq's civilian economy would, in the circumstances,
be unjustifiable.

