The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.

I would like to thank the briefers for their insightful
information and recommendations for the Council's
consideration. It is always beneficial and valuable for
the Council to be briefed by young people who are
passionate and determined about the future of their
countries, societies and neighbourhoods.

It is an honour for South Africa to preside over
the Security Council under the theme "Continuing
the legacy: working for a just and peaceful world",
which embodies the legacy of Nelson Mandela. The
principles he stood and fought for remain relevant to
ongoing conflict situations and further the objective of
silencing the guns on the African continent by 2020.
Conflict affects young people negatively in many
ways. It violates their basic human rights - the right
to life, liberty and security. They are at increased risk
of being killed, injured, internally displaced, abducted
or raped in conflict. They are sometimes forced into
activities that make them more vulnerable, such as
sexual exploitation, combat as child soldiers, violent
extremism, arms smuggling and the illicit trade in
mineral resources, to name a few.

Our remarks will focus on the following key
points. First, young people have an important role to
play as agents of peace. The African continent has the
fastest-growing population in the world, and it will be
important to ensure that the continent takes advantage
of the demographic dividend from its youth bulge.
South Africa believes that we should all double our
efforts at the global, regional and national levels to
harness the potential of youth. As the Security Council
has already recognized in resolutions 2250 (2015) and
2457 (2019), Member States have the responsibility to
create an enabling environment for young people to
participate fully and substantively in the development
of their respective countries and in peace processes.

At this juncture, I want to emphasize that issues of
inclusion remain critical. As important stakeholders in
peace processes, we cannot continue to talk about peace
without the full involvement of youth and women. Young
people should be represented in political negotiations,
peace processes, transitional justice and reconstruction
efforts because they have knowledge and ideas and
can harness intergenerational interaction on the entire
peace continuum. Including youth in peacebuilding
processes as stakeholders and decision-makers allows
them to gain ownership of the policies that affect them
as much as the rest of us. Political will and leadership
are therefore needed to enable young people to engage in
a meaningful way in conflict prevention, peacemaking
and peacebuilding.

My second point is on the implementation by
the African Union (AU) of the youth, peace and
security agenda. The African Youth Charter serves
as a strategic framework for youth empowerment and
development at the continental, regional and national
levels in addressing issues that affect young people.
The AU Commission is in the process of appointing
African ambassadors for peace, one from each of
the five regions in Africa. They will promote the
actualization of the five priorities of the Continental
Framework on Youth, Peace and Security. A stronger
AU-United Nations partnership for peace, security
and development remains critical to silencing the guns
on the African continent. South Africa is encouraged
by the resolve of the United Nations and the AU to
mainstream youth participation in peace and security,
which places young people at the core of initiatives for
preventing or stopping activities that lead to war.

My third point is about recommendations on how we
should advance youth, peace and security. It is important
to provide young people with training opportunities so
that they can take an active part in peacebuilding. With
their youthful energy and capabilities, and their ability
to adapt to new technological trends such as the fourth
industrial revolution, young people should be seen as
equal partners in mediation, conflict prevention and
resolution. As we heard from the briefers earlier, youth
are mediators, community mobilizers, humanitarian
workers and peace brokers. Activating young African
peacebuilders cannot be the responsibility of any one
organization. African Governments, non-governmental
organizations and corporations all have a role to play.
In order to achieve sustainable conflict prevention
and resolution, the Security Council, regional and
subregional organizations and other relevant actors
should institute mechanisms to involve young people
in the promotion of a culture of peace, tolerance and
intercultural and interreligious dialogue and to develop,
as appropriate, an understanding of respect for human
dignity, pluralism and diversity.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore the
importance of bringing about a pragmatic shift in
the concept of the role of youth in conflict, which
transforms them from being victims or agents of
violence to being agents of change and peacebuilding.
They need to be seen as the valuable human capital
that they are, because that will help the continent to
collectively achieve sustainable peace and silence the
guns. As we implement many peace agreements on the
African continent, from the Central African Republic,
South Sudan, the Sudan and elsewhere, young people
should be given the space to participate.

As Ms. Aya Chebbi said, youth should be mobilized
to reimagine their environment without violence or
displacement, unravaged, without situations where
they are forced to flee their homes and driven into
desperation in faraway lands. And as all the briefers
said, young people should be mobilized to use their
abundant energy, talent, creativity and social media
to compose songs and write poetry and books about
embracing diversity, non-discrimination and religious
and ethnic tolerance in order to give birth to the future
with hope, peace and prosperity.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the observer of the Economic
Community of Central African States.

