Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I apologize for taking the floor once again. I
shall be very brief, for I have already made a lengthy
statement.

Perhaps had the Council met its responsibilities
in the course of the decades of the history of the Arab-
Israeli conflict, we would not be at a point at which a
Member State is requesting that this item be removed
from the agenda, or one at which some people would
feel uncomfortable listening to the representative of a
country asking for an end to the occupation of its
territory that has existed since 1967.

My country is a founding Member State of this
international Organization. We consider ourselves to be
among the victors in the war against Nazism and
fascism. While there are fortunately many things that
set us apart from the Israelis, a relevant distinguishing
feature in the context of our discussion today is the fact
that a permanent member of the Council has not had to
use the veto 44 times to protect our efforts because of
evasion of responsibilities under international law and
the principles and objectives of the Charter. However,
the State to which I am referring did use the veto 44
times to protect Israel as it evaded its commitments
under the Charter and international law. It is for that
reason that the representative of Israel been able to
criticize various States, for he knows in advance that
there is some one to protect him in the Council, even if
it means using what is referred to as the privilege of
the veto.

I shall summarize the mentality of the
representative of Israel by recalling a story told by an
Israeli dove. Speaking about Israel's disregard for the
rights of others, that Israeli advocate of peace gave the
following account, which has something to do with
your country, Mr. President. The story goes as follows.
At one point in the war between czarist Russia and
Ottoman Turkey, a Russian citizen of the Jewish faith
was conscripted into the army. He was sent to the
Ottoman Turkish front, where the war was then taking
place between czarist Russia and the Ottoman Empire.
As he was preparing to join the forces at the front, his
mother said to him, "My son, each time you kill a Turk
you must rest for a few minutes". The boy was
surprised by her statement and said to her, "But
mother, what if a Turkish soldier were to kill me?" His
mother replied, "God damn that Turkish soldier, my
son! Why would he want to kill you? What could you
have done to him to cause him to want to kill you?"

That is the Israeli mentality, one that allows for
the killing and accusing of others while proclaiming its
own innocence. However, it is all of us in the region
who suffer from Israel's occupation, aggression,
inhumanity and evasion of its commitments and the
terms of reference for peace.

