Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We welcome the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, and thank him for the sobering
briefing. We also welcome the statement made by the
representative of Somalia.

Clearly, the situation in Somalia is not getting
any better. It is still characterized by a grave
humanitarian crisis, major political divisions, including
within the Transitional Federal Government, and
general insecurity in the country. We have been told
that some 200,000 people have fled their homes
recently as a result of increasing fighting, with the
country being plunged into an unfolding disaster. The
humanitarian situation remains fragile precisely
because of insecurity and political divisions.
We acknowledge the necessity of humanitarian
assistance so as to alleviate the suffering of the people
of Somalia. However, as the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs warned in his briefing earlier
this month, "a robust humanitarian response cannot
make up for the absence of desperately needed political
and security progress" (S/PV.5792, p. 6). It is important
that we continue to promote an inclusive political
process and reconciliation in Somalia and seriously
look into a contingency plan for possible deployment
of a peacekeeping force in Somalia.

Despite the often-cited admirable work that the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has
been doing, we all know that this has gone beyond
sustainability and effectiveness. The problem is not
just that of resources, but also the nature of the
mandate. AMISOM. was deployed as a stop-gap until
the United Nations can deploy.

Once again South Africa expresses the hope that
the Security Council will revisit the request of the
African Union for an expedited deployment to
Somalia. Unfortunately, there seems to be a subtle
reluctance, if not resistance, to this request. The reality
is that the international community has the
responsibility not to abandon the people of Somali
again. The way forward, it seems to us, if we are to
stop Somalia from being a constant threat to
international peace and security, is to encourage and
support the political process as well as to deploy a
peacekeeping operation. A conducive security
environment has to be created to allow the political
process to proceed. We hope that the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations will accelerate
the deployment of an assessment mission to Somalia so
as to facilitate further United Nations engagement.

Given the seriousness of the situation,
maintaining the status quo and withdrawal are not
options. There can be only one option - a more
focused United Nations approach to bring about
security in Somalia.

