Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): During the open debate on
the situation in Lebanon held in this Chamber last Monday,
the Polish delegation expressed its position with regard to
the armed hostilities in southern Lebanon and their broader
ramifications. What we are faced with today is an even
more complex situation which could have far-reaching
consequences for the parties involved, for stability in the
region and for international peace and security.

Like other members of the Security Council, the
Polish delegation was shocked by the news that arrived this
morning, of the tragic death of some 100 civilians who had
taken shelter in the compound of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and of the casualties
among UNIFIL troops. Let me take this opportunity to
convey to the Permanent Representative of Lebanon the
condolences of the Polish delegation on that tragic event. I
would also like to ask the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Force Commander of UNIFIL the assurances of our
sympathy and our support.

Today's developments are yet further deadly
consequences of the use of violence in international
relations. The events sparked by the artillery assaults on
northern Israel have brought death and suffering to a great
many people, have caused the destruction of property,
including historic landmarks, and have threatened the
peaceful future of the Middle East. The time has come to
break this vicious escalation of the conflict.

We sincerely believe that the resolution we have just
adopted offers an appropriate solution to the current phase
of the crisis. First, it calls for an immediate cease-fire.
This is indeed a conditio sine qua non for creating an
atmosphere conducive to further steps towards
normalization.

Secondly, it expresses the Security Council's support
for ongoing diplomatic efforts aimed at a peaceful
solution of the conflict. The Polish delegation attaches
great importance to the forthcoming talks of the United
States Secretary of State in the region. We also hope that
the action undertaken by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of France and by the Italian Foreign Minister, in her
capacity as President of the Council of Ministers of the
European Union, will bear fruit.

Thirdly, the resolution calls for strict respect for the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence
of Lebanon within its internationally recognized
boundaries and for the security of all States in the region.
This provision of the resolution reflects the position of the
Polish Government, for which the rigorous observance of
these principles constitutes the cornerstone of modern
international relations.

Fourthly, the resolution places the humanitarian
situation in an appropriate perspective. This is an issue of
great significance for the Polish delegation.

Lastly, the resolution confirms the Council' s concern
about the security, safety and freedom of movement of
United Nations peace-keeping operations, in this case
UNIFIL. The Polish delegation has particular reason for
stressing this point, since more than 500 Polish soldiers
serve under the United Nations banner in Lebanon, and
since the operation is under the command of a Polish general.

The Polish delegation's vote in favour of draft
resolution S/1996/304 reaffirms its support for the
peaceful coexistence of all States in the region and for the
continuation of the peace process in the Middle East.

