Mrs. Haley (United States of America): We
congratulate you, Madam President, on your country's
accession to the presidency of the Security Council this
month. We also congratulate the Swedish delegation on
its work with such a busy schedule in July.

We are glad to see Mr. Griffiths in the Chamber
again. Yesterday, I said to him, and I really believe, that
the Council is fully united in its support for him. We
truly and strongly stand with him. Both parties need to
understand that there is no gap in the Security Council
when it comes to supporting him and to making sure
that both parties understand that they need to work with
him. We therefore absolutely welcome the invitation to
both sides to participate in Geneva. We look forward to
the outcome and to their positive response.

I think that we must look at the situation. We have
long been truly lucky because, if members look at What
is happening now, we were already upset and wanted
to condemn the Houthi attack on the Saudi oil tanker.
That was already considered an issue. The ballistic
missile strikes were already considered a problem. We
always said that if something did not let up, someone
would get hurt.

We have continued to say that the Panel of Experts
on Yemen have affirmed that Iran is supplying the
Houthis. They are just as much to blame as the Houthis.
However, today there was another attack. The idea
that a Saudi-led coalition carried out air strikes today
against a fish market and a hospital in Al-Hudaydah
that may have caused dozens of casualties now brings
us to a new day in Yemen. We have reached a new sense
of urgency in Yemen that - if that is what is starting to
happen - civilians and infrastructure are at risk.

As the international community, we have to demand
that the two parties come together and understand the
seriousness of the situation. I think that, as we face
that, we will be very anxious to hear how the talks go.
However, I think that we as the Council and as members
need to remind both of them that civilian casualties,
civilian infrastructure and anything that relates to that
is a concern. The idea that strikes almost hit some ofthe
water tanks, given the cholera outbreak, and all such
things are starting to show a disregard for the people on
the ground at a time where they are already suffering
so much. We once again emphasize that Al-Hudaydah
port must stay open. There must be access so that
humanitarian aid can come in. However, we strongly
support the talks in Geneva. In fact, we think that they
cannot take place soon enough in view of what has been
happening in the past few days.

