Mr. Skraeie (Croatia): I would like to thank
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg for his briefing, as
well as Foreign Minister Bangura and Ambassador
McNee for their useful insights.

At the outset, allow me to express the deep
concern of my delegation with regard to the political
disturbances in Sierra Leone during the month of
March this year. Croatia strongly condemns any
attempt to resolve political divergences by resorting to
force and violence. At the same time, and as stated in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/267), the
recent disturbances, although having the potential to
evolve into full-blown conflict, were swiftly and
determinedly terminated. That fact undoubtedly
testifies to the political wisdom and personal courage
of the leaders and people of Sierra Leone, as well as to
their strong determination to avert potential disaster
and continue along the path of peace and stability.

In that context, we welcome the signing of the
joint communique on 2 April by the two main political
parties in the presence of all relevant political
stakeholders, and the role played by the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone in
helping bring it together, cementing Sierra Leone's
return to the track of democracy and peace. We also
welcome the anticipated intention of the third largest
political party to adhere to the agreements contained in
the communique, as well as the joint pronouncement
made by youth groups affiliated with major political
parties of their intention to work towards political
stabilization and lasting peace.

Croatia finds particularly important the
agreements reached between the major political parties
regarding bipartisan consensus on important national
institutions and policies, such as the police and the
judiciary, the reintegration of ex-combatants by the
National Electoral Commission and other important
issues. We also welcome the first signs of national
reconciliation and political rapprochement as direct
consequences of the aforementioned agreements.

We also commend the concrete steps taken by the
Government of Sierra Leone to combat the trafficking
of illicit drugs, in particular the formation of the Joint
Drug Interdiction Task Force. In the same vein, we
encourage the Government to continue its fight against
corruption, as announced in the national Agenda for
Change. We commend the Government for economic
and structural reforms undertaken, as attested to by the
International Monetary Fund during its most recent
visit to the country. We hope that the Government will
continue to seriously tackle the many burning
economic and social issues before it, including youth
unemployment and underemployment and corruption.

Croatia condemns the practice of genital
mutilation to which, according to the World Health
Organization, nearly 94 per cent of girls in Sierra
Leone are subjected, and expresses its concern
regarding ongoing sexual violence. We note with
satisfaction the fact that the Government has finally put
into place the machinery for implementing the
reparations programme, as recommended by the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission.

Croatia welcomes the completion of political and
development benchmarks for each of the five priority
areas within the peacebuilding efforts of the United
Nations system contained in the Joint Vision. We also
welcome the further implementation of the Joint Vision
strategy through the opening of two regional offices, as
well as the announcement of the forthcoming creation
of another six regional field offices, aimed at achieving
more substantial outreach and at enhancing the work of
development partners.

Finally, Croatia looks forward to the special
session of the Peacebuilding Commission to be held on
10 June, at which the Agenda for Change and the
peacebuilding strategy of the United Nations should be
fully endorsed and supported.
