Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the holding of today's
meeting on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, and thanks the Secretary-
General and the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for the
quality of their comments and briefings on the subject
under consideration. We also welcome the presence
among us at this morning's debate ofthe President ofthe
Palestinian Authority, His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas, as well as the Permanent Representative of the
State of Israel to the United Nations.

Twenty-five years after the signing of the Oslo
Accords, hopes for a peaceful settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict have dwindled, and the
compromise solution of two States living side by side
in peace and security seems increasingly to recede.
This lack of political prospects has contributed to a
serious deterioration of the humanitarian situation for
the Palestinian communities in the West Bank.

Given this alarming situation, my delegation is
worried about a renewed outbreak of violence and
confrontation, which would put at even greater risk
the possibility of a peaceful settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian crisis. After the clashes of recent days that
caused the deaths of two Palestinians and wounded
Israeli soldiers, we therefore call on the Israeli and
Palestinian parties to exercise the utmost restraint.

My delegation continues to believe that peace
between Palestinians and Israelis is still possible,
despite the current impasse. My country remains
convinced that there is no alternative to peace, which
is why we call on the parties to the conflict to engage
in constructive dialogue in order to overcome the
obstacles. In that context, Cote d'Ivoire calls on the
parties - for both sides - to renounce any unilateral
initiative that could only jeopardize the chances of a
political and peaceful settlement of the crisis.

We would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm
our principled position in favour ofa two-State solution
as the only viable option to enable the Palestinian and
Israeli peoples to live and coexist in peace and security.
Cote d'Ivoire also believes that the final status of
the City of Jerusalem must be negotiated as part of a
mutually agreed solution between the two parties, as
provided for in the relevant United Nations resolutions.

The consequences of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, it should be recalled, are disastrous for the
people living in the Gaza Strip, who have been faced
with an unprecedented humanitarian crisis, a high youth
unemployment rate of up to 47 per cent, and shortages
of water and electricity. My delegation therefore calls
for the resumption of negotiations between Israel and
the Palestinian Authority. Furthermore, on the basis of
enhanced cooperation, we encourage the Palestinian
parties to continue to pursue dialogue with a view
to achieving an effective return of the Palestinian
Authority to Gaza, which would allow for a better
handling of current humanitarian issues.

