Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
The United States welcomes today's discussion, and
we thank Ambassador Moraes Cabral for his diligent
work as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

Under the United Nations Charter, the Security
Council has the primary responsibility in the United
Nations to maintain international peace and security. To
fulfil this most critical of mandates, the Council must
continually strive to improve its working methods, with
a focus on enhancing its effectiveness and optimizing
transparency. The Council must be able to act quickly
and with a high level of flexibility, and we have already
taken some notable steps in that direction, such as our
quick turnaround meetings this month to discuss the
situations in Gaza and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We should build on this, while remaining
mindful that Article 30 of the Charter mandates the
Council to adopt its own rules of procedure.

The Council has also increased the accessibility of
its work to Member States and the public. Last year,
less than 10 per cent of the Council's meetings were
private, compared with almost 30 per cent in 2002 - a
very good trend. The monthly assessments produced by
Council Presidents provide the broader United Nations
membership with a regular snapshot of the Council's
work. In addition, we intend to propose that the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions hold open meetings, similar to
those we already hold for the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning Counter-
Terrorism, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and the sanctions Committees.
Such meetings would allow the Chairman to explain
the Group's mandate to Member States and to provide
another forum to hear views on working methods.

In July, the Council President traditionally meets
with Member States to solicit Views on the annual report
of the Security Council to the General Assembly. The
United States, as Council President for July 2013, looks
forward to continuing that practice and to receiving
suggestions on ways to enhance the report.

The United States values the participation of all
Member States in the Council's open debates, such as the
one today, and in the our various informal discussions,
as well as in country - or region-specific meetings and
informal processes such as groups offriends. In the past,
we have also welcomed the chairs of country-specific
configurations of the Peacebuilding Commission,
subsidiary bodies and sanctions committees to briefthe
Council or participate in discussions. Such important
interaction helps the Council mitigate, or, hopefully,
prevent, the recurrence of the conflicts on our agenda,
and also consider new threats. Arria Formula meetings,
such as the Council's session with the independent
international commission of inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic, are an important tool for us to hear the
views of interested Member States and of civil society.
We should look for ways to discuss more issues in this
manner.

While the Council's formal meetings make
headlines, much of our work occurs outside the
Chamber, especially in negotiations on the Council's
resolutions and statements. On these, Council members
should consider carefully the views of other Member
States, including those expressed in letters to the
Council, and consult with concerned States about the
content of Council products.

Beyond greater transparency and interactivity, we
must keep working to make the Council more effective.
Increased use of video teleconferencing has provided
the Council with better, more timely information
on existing and emerging conflicts, enabling the
Council to maintain its vital role in early warning
and conflict prevention. In 2009, the Council held one
video teleconference; in 2011, we held 26. In addition,
comprehensive mandates designed by the Council, such
as those supporting the safety and security of women
and children, have proven valuable in resolving conflict
and assisting stability and recovery in post-conflict
situations.

Indeed, a more effective Security Council must
remain our collective goal. Increased transparency on
the participation of the Council and its engagement with
the broader United Nations membership can support
that goal, but proposals must be carefully assessed to
ensure that transparency and effectiveness are mutually
reinforcing, and not at cross-purposes.

