Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): 1 thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
such a crucial and important issue. We recognize the
important work done by the German delegation on the
delicate matter of children and armed conflict.

Chile aligns itself with the statements made by the
representatives of Switzerland on behalf of the Human
Security Network and of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.

Chile attaches great priority to the work of
the Organization to combat and eradicate the use,
involvement or recruitment of children in armed
conflicts. Our own region has, unfortunately, not been
spared this scourge. In this regard, we believe that the
annual report presented by the Secretary- General to the
Security Council on this matter, the most recent of which
was published in April (S/2012/261), their annexes and
the recommendations issued by the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict on how better to tackle
the scourge are of the greatest interest and importance.

In the same vein, we would like to express our
gratitude for the effective management of the former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, and for the progress that she achieved
in terms of new action plans, which point the way
towards reducing and putting an end to these violations.
In addition, we offer our best wishes to the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, in this crucial work and express my country's
support for the efforts undertaken to combat these illicit
acts and the impunity of their perpetrators.

As stated by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General herself, the global picture on this
matter is mixed. We certainly welcome the delisting of
countries and parties from the so-called list of shame
and the fact that others have designed action plans
in order to channel their resolve to end these grave
violations through verifiable procedures, all of which
is reflected in the report of the Secretary-General.

The listing of new parties who commit such
atrocities, however, shows that this situation is far from
resolved. In this regard, the series of reports of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Syria and other
countries where many children have been the Victims of
Violence as a result ofmilitary operations only confirms
the unacceptable violence afflicting that country, which
must end. Moreover, we must also be concerned by the
list, contained in annex 1 of the Secretary-General's
report, of parties to conflict responsible for attacks
against schools and hospitals, the particular gravity of
such acts and the sanctions that these acts should entail.

In this regard, for Chile, the list drawn up
by the Secretary-General on so-called persistent
perpetrators - that is, parties that have been listed
for more than five years as the perpetrators of various
violations against children in armed conflict - should
encourage Council action on how to effectively
communicate to these parties that their actions will lead
to their repudiation by the international community and

will strengthen the international community's resolve
in ensuring that their acts will not go unpunished and
that such sanctions become a reality. The Council must
consider, on an urgent basis, specific measures tailored
to those perpetrators and the expansion of the sanctions
committees' criteria that would be triggered by acts of
violence perpetrated against children in situations of
armed conflict.

In conclusion, my country reiterates its call for the
ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict.

