Mr. Jagne (Gambia): My delegation would like to
thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting in this format.
We are also grateful to Mr. Annabi for his important and
useful briefing.

Since the announcement of the results of the popular
consultation, the United Nations, together with the
Governments concerned, has made enormous progress in
seeing to it that the wish of the East Timorese people for
an independent East Timor is being implemented. My
delegation would therefore pay tribute, in particular, to
the Government of Indonesia for its vital cooperation
throughout this period, without which we would not have
reached the point where we are today.

We would also like to pay a special tribute to
Australia and the countries which have contributed troops
to the International Force, East Timor (INTERFET).
Without their timely intervention, the situation in East
Timor would have been something else altogether.

My delegation is glad to note that the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) has
now been established and its military observers deployed.
We note with satisfaction that international staff of the
United Nations are arriving in East Timor and starting
their work. My delegation welcomes the appointment of
Sergio Vieira de Mello as the Secretary-General's Special
Representative and transitional administrator for East
Timor. There could not have been a better choice.

 

We were heartened to learn that relations between
UNTAET and the East Timorese are very good. This
augured well for the donor conference, reported to have
been very successful. We join others in thanking the
Government of Japan for its preponderant role, as both host
and donor, in making it a resounding success.

It is also pleasing to note that UNTAET has
established a skeleton administration. The Government of
the Gambia has contributed a sizable number of civilian
police and is ready to contribute more. We are also willing
to provide civil servants to work with UNTAET.

My delegation also notes with satisfaction the laudable
efforts being made by President Wahid and Mr. Gusmao to
place East Timorese-Indonesian relations on a firm footing.
We hope that the international community will continue to
support these commendable initiatives.

Finally, we have every reason to believe that, apart
from the problems associated with the lack of infrastructure
and the fate of the large number of refugees still in West
Timor, the future of East Timor is very promising indeed.
The Ambassador of France made reference to the
generosity of the donor community regarding East Timor
and wished that the same degree of generosity was
extended to other regions. My delegation cannot agree more
with him that by demonstrating the same zeal, the same
resolve, the same degree of enthusiasm and the same degree
of generosity we would succeed as a community of nations
in making this small planet that we all share a much better
place for present and future generations and would assure
all our children and their children's children a bright, bright
future.

