The President: I thank the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of South Africa for coming here and representing
President Mbeki. I thank her for her kind words addressed
to the American presidency and I thank her for her
country's contribution to peace.

I have been asked to read out a message addressed
to me from the President of Nigeria:

"On behalf of the Government and the people
of Nigeria, I congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council during the
first month of the new millennium and for the high
profile and attention which you have given to
African issues in our Organization. To this end, I am
delighted to send this message of goodwill to
members of the Council and participants in this
historic open meeting on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, including my brother heads of State who
have travelled all the way from our continent, for a
very successful deliberation. Their presence
demonstrates the commitment which the
Organization of African Unity and all African
leaders have towards the peaceful resolution of the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

"It is gratifying that the United Nations
Security Council, under the presidency of the United
States, at the very beginning of the new millennium
is devoting a substantial portion of its work and time
to the issues of peace and security in Africa. It is
appropriate and fitting that the United Nations is
taking an early lead in the new millennium in
focusing on issues of peace and security on the
African continent.

"The impressive turnout of a large number of
African leaders in the Council today to participate in
the efforts at resolving the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a solid show of the
commitment of African leaders to truly turn 2000
into a year of peace, security and solidarity.
Certainly, their presence should convince the
international community that we are committed to
ending conflicts afflicting some States on our
continent.

"The early resolution of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will certainly

 

have a positive effect on the security of the entire
subregion and give substance to the decision of
African leaders at their 1999 Algiers summit to make
2000 truly the year of peace, security and solidarity.
It is important, therefore, that all efforts be made at
this meeting to reaffirm the collective commitment of
all parties to the Lusaka Agreement. The United
Nations should also give concrete support to
complement the regional and continental arrangement
aimed at peacemaking and peacekeeping in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

"With best wishes for a successful deliberation,

"Olusegun Obasanjo, President of the Federal
Republic of Nigeria."

I would like to invite the Vice Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium, Mr. Louis Michel,
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement. We thank him for making the trip to join us
today.

