Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to convey our congratulations to you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I also commend you on your
initiative to organize this important debate. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his excellent briefing
this morning on the issue under consideration.

Insightful statements have been made today on
the question of the maintenance of our collective
security, which is indeed the basis for the existence of
the Security Council. My delegation associates itself
with the statements made on behalf of those groups
of which my country is a member, in particular that
made on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement by the
representative of Egypt. My statement will therefore be
brief. Allow me first to address various aspects of the
issue of peacekeeping in the light of the development,
many years after the establishment of the United
Nations, of crisis situations that threaten international
peace and security.

Today we cannot talk about durable peacekeeping
without the mobilization of international resources
aimed at dealing with problems of good governance,
internal security and terrorism. Young democracies are
often destabilized by terrorist movements masquerading
as political or armed opposition. Beyond its traditional
mission, the United Nations is called on to support
democratically elected Powers and to strengthen
States' capacity to avoid the pitfalls that can lead to
the collapse of a fragile peace in those countries. It is
those collapses that may pose threats to regional and
international peace and security. It is clear that such
authorities, often transitional ones, must demonstrate
the political will to settle their internal political and
social crises.

Yes to zero tolerance, but, realistically, we must
recognize that it is no less true that it is essential that
the international community show leniency to those
authorities so as not to complicate even further the often
complex and difficult task in which they are dealing
with opponents more interested in grabbing power in
their country than in peacebuilding and economic and
social development.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are also
often very slow to get going, which clashes with the
need in countries and regions dealing with a threat to
peace and security to act effectively and quickly and
to prevent serious developments, and highlights the
importance of regional and subregional organizations
in preventing conflict and keeping the peace. That was
why, at the beginning of December 2012, faced with
the Central African crisis, President Idriss Deby Itno of
Chad, as Acting President of the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS), acted promptly
in starting a fundamental and vital dialogue in those
circumstances. It was essential to prevent the fighting
from spreading to the capital, by sending Chadian
forces to intervene between the belligerents and create
the conditions necessary for political dialogue. Still
as a matter of urgency, on 21 December, the President
held an emergency session of the Summit Conference
of Heads of State and Government of ECCAS, which
approved his initiatives and took important decisions
paving the way for a process of peaceful settlement of
the crisis.

On the question of the crisis in Mali, Chad was
granted emergency authorization by the National
Assembly to send to Mali a significant force of some
2,000 men in the context of resolution 2085 (2012),
which authorized deployment of an African-led
International Support Mission in Mali.

Given the time constraints, my delegation will
refrain from expatiating on Chad's multifaceted
contributions to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Nevertheless, we wish to recall that Chad
has a wealth of experience in lessons learned, due to
the internal crises that we have had to overcome and the
external aggressions we have had to deal with, not to
mention the contributions it has made to peacekeeping
operations in the Central African Republic, Haiti, C6te
d'Ivoire, Syria and Darfur.

Finally, we hope that the international community
will help us to bear the burden of providing protection
for refugees in Chad, whom we have hosted with the
United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic
and Chad, as well as, in addition, the costs of deploying
our forces in the Central African Republic and Mali.

