Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I
welcome Mr. Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim to New York and I
thank him for rescheduling his trip for an earlier date in
order to be with us today.

Bulgaria fully endorses the statement to be
delivered shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Spain on behalf of the European Union. I shall
therefore confine myself to a few brief comments.

The delegation of Bulgaria would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting open to
all Members of the United Nations. It gives us an
opportunity to consider the complex and alarming
problems in Somalia.

The Secretary-General's report sheds light on the
overall situation in the country, which remains very
fragile. Somalia has lacked effective national
institutions for more than a decade. It is still divided by
the various factions, their mutual recriminations and
the violent confrontations among their militias, which
continue to occur. The Arta peace and national
reconciliation process finds itself at a virtual standstill.

Over the last 10 months, there have been new
developments and positive signs from the Somalia
peace process. Bulgaria welcomes the decision taken
on 14 February by the Committee of Foreign Ministers
of the lntergovernmental Authority on Development
(lGAD) to convene in Kenya, without the imposition of
prior conditions, a national reconciliation conference
with the participation of the Transitional National
Government and all other Somali parties.

We are convinced that the solution to Somalia's
problems lies in the hands of the Somalis themselves.
The Arta process can succeed only with the
participation of all the factions. It is thus particularly
important for the Security Council to give this
initiative the necessary support so that all parties will
take the path of dialogue and so that the national
transition mechanism will be expanded. We hope that
the Transitional National Government, the leaders of
the political parties, the traditional chiefs and the
Somali factions will put aside their differences and act
together to advance the peace process.

Bulgaria supports lGAD's efforts for national
reconciliation in Somalia. We would particularly like to
stress the importance of consensus among the countries
of that organization and the need for a unified approach
to the peace process in Somalia. The resolution on
Somalia adopted at the 9th lGAD Summit is therefore
encouraging. lt deserves the vigorous support of the
international community, particularly that of the United
Nations. We are therefore pleased that this meeting of
the Security Council is sending to Somali society a

signal of strong support for pursuing the Arta peace
process.

Bulgaria encourages discussion of the Secretary-
General's proposal to create committees of friends of
Somali in Nairobi and in New York. This idea is worth
studying with the aim of consolidating the uniformity
of the various initiatives for peace in Somalia.

In the context of the events of 11 September, the
Council must attentively follow the situation in
Somalia to prevent the country from becoming a refuge
for members of terrorist organizations. All countries
must scrupulously respect the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The Transitional National
Government and all other parties concerned must
demonstrate their readiness to cooperate with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.

Bulgaria is deeply concerned by the spread of
small arms in the region. One of the essential tasks of
the consolidation process is to put an end to the supply
of arms to Somalia.

We particularly want to stress the need for a
constructive contribution from neighbouring countries.
In that regard, the international community must
consider means to enhance the effectiveness of the
sanctions. As Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 751
(1992) concerning Somalia, Bulgaria sees the need to
ensure full compliance with those sanctions.

We are greatly alarmed by the grave humanitarian
situation in Somalia. We encourage donors to respond
generously to the Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal,
and we congratulate the competent United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations that are
working in difficult circumstances to alleviate the
suffering of the Somali people. At the same time, we
urge the Somali parties to make an active contribution
to the work of United Nations personnel by
guaranteeing the safety of humanitarian workers and
the necessary access to strategic sites.

Bulgaria agrees with the report's conclusions on
security issues and stresses that the safety of personnel,
especially peacekeeping personnel, is a prerequisite for
effective work on the ground by the United Nations.

