Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate, Sir, on the Russian Federation's
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for

the month of October and to convey my delegation's
high esteem for the skilled steering of our deliberations
since the beginning of the month. I would also like
to take this opportunity to convey my appreciation
to your predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Gerard Van
Bohemen, Permanent Representative of New Zealand,
for the manner in which he presided over the work
of the Council in September. Finally, I would like
pay heartfelt tribute once again to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, who has made enormous efforts and
sacrifices throughout his mandate to bring peace and
security to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
to the Great Lakes region in Africa.

My delegation has very closely followed the final
report (see S/20l6/466) of the Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Secretary-
General's report (S/20l6/833) on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which were touched on in the
brifings by Mr. Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta, President of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and Mr. Maman Sambo Sidikou,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. While we welcome
the successes set forth in both reports, allow me to
mention several points that require clarification from
us. Primarily, they relate to events that occurred on
19 and 20 September in Kinshasa, the electoral process
and the national political dialogue under way - and,
more broadly, the security in the east of my country.

As the Council has monitored, a faction of the
opposition that does not participate in the national
political dialogue under way in my country decided to
organize a peaceful march in Kinshasa on 19 September
to protest the holding of elections and to submit a
petition to that effect to the Independent National
Electoral Commission at its headquarters. After having
requested authorization and in accordance with the law
on meetings and demonstrations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the itinerary to be followed and
starting time of the demonstration were agreed with the
Governor of the city of Kinshasa, who authorized its
organization.

While, according to organizers, the march was
supposed to begin at noon, it was noted that in the very
early morning and the evening before, in certain sections
of the city, barricades were raised and tires burned along

several thoroughfares that were not supposed to be part
of the demonstration's itinerary. Moreover, calls to loot
and pillage the houses belonging to politicians of both
the majority and the opposition, who were participating
in the dialogue, were launched on social networks by
supporters of the march's organizers.

The municipal authorities' efforts to reach out to
the organizers and ask them to calm the demonstrators
were in vain. Against that backdrop, the situation
degenerated and the march become a genuine
insurrection. Demonstrators armed with stones attacked
the police. They targeted a 12-year-old girl in uniform
on her way to school, raping and then killing her. They
burned alive a policeman stationed outside a political
party's headquarters after stripping him of his weapon,
and then proceeded to kill three other policemen who
were trying to restore order.

The demonstrators subsequently looted private and
public property, maliciously destroyed schools and gas
stations, set ablaze the headquarters of the political
parties of the majority and the opposition taking part in
the national dialogue, and set fire to police stations and
the district court of Matete. The violence continued on
20 September with the destruction and burning of other
property, including the headquarters of opposition
parties not participating in the national dialogue.

The situation was finally brought under control
thanks to the efforts of the police who managed to
disperse the demonstrators using tear gas and not by
firing live ammunition, as stated in the Secretary-
General's report. Those events led to the deaths of 32
people, including four policemen. More than a 100
perpetrators of criminal acts during the demonstrations
were arrested. They were apprehended in the act,
and approximately 100 of them were sentenced to
terms ranging from 45 days to 25 years in prison.
Approximately 30 were acquitted.

With regard to the national political dialogue, it
seems important to reaffirm to the Council that the
dialogue process was initiated by the President of
the Republic to allow all active forces of the country,
including a variety of politicians and actors from civil
society and religious and traditional authorities, to
agree on the means to overcome the obstacles standing
in the way of peaceful elections and establishing a
consensus in connection with the ongoing process. In
that regard, my Government wishes to see all actors
participate in the dialogue. Unfortunately, a fringe
group of the opposition, united under what is known
as the Rassemblement des forces politiques et sociales
acquises au changement is boycotting the dialogue,
which at one time was supported by some ofthe political
parties within the Rassemblement.

For its part, my Government has responded
favourably to a number of demands made by the
opposition in order to defuse political tensions and
promote broad inclusiveness in the dialogue. Those
demands were mainly focused on the appointment of
an international Facilitator and an international support
group for the Facilitator, as well as the release of so-
called political prisoners and the reopening of media
outlets belonging to the opposition. In addition to the
Government's efforts, the Facilitator has also striven to
establish contacts with all the constructive forces within
and outside the country to achieve this inclusiveness.

The segment of the opposition that rejects dialogue
and makes ever-new demands, undoubtedly to more
effectively delay the process, went so far as to reject
the Facilitator, demanding that the African Union
appoint another one. With the help of the international
support group - comprising the Special Envoy and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
representatives of the European Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the International
Organization of la Francophonie, and the Southern
African Development Community 4 the Facilitator
has been working on the dialogue since 1 September.
Although the work of the dialogue remains unfinished,
it would truly be in bad faith not to acknowledge the
largely positive results that have been recorded thus far.
Indeed, the participants in the dialogue have agreed on
a number of points, in particular the electoral register.

Having considered the reports of the Group of
Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the International Organization of la Francophonie
and the Independent National Electoral Commission,
the participants agreed to draw up a completely new
register to ensure the holding of credible elections
and to avoid the challenging of results. The update of
the register will take 16 months and end in July 2017.
Meanwhile, the voter registration process has already
begun in Gbadolite, North Ubangi province.

With regard to the sequence of elections, the
participants in the dialogue agreed to combine the
presidential, national legislative and provincial elections
so that they could be organized on the the same date,
while municipal and local elections will be able to take
place later. In terms of the transition, in accordance
with article 70 of the Constitution, they agreed that the
current Head of State should remain in office until his
successor assumes his functions and a Government of
broad national unity, composed of representatives of the
majority, the political opposition and civil society, is set
up to allow for the collegial and transparent governance
of the transition. They also agreed that no members of
this Government would be able to run as a candidate in
the presidential election.

With regard to the electoral calendar, as the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General just
mentioned, a draft electoral calendar was proposed by
the National Independent Electoral Commission. The
participants will discuss that in order to agree on the
date for the presidential election combined with the
national legislative and provincial elections.

On the issue of the political agreement, at the end
of the dialogue the parties agreed to sign an agreement
that will reprise all the points on which they will have
agreed, along with the dates of the elections.

Some countries criticize the Government of
my country for not having called for elections on
19 September and demand a broadening of political
dialogue and other confidence-building measures, such
as the release ofotherpolitical prisoners and the inclusion
of certain figures, whose presence they have judged
important in the dialogue. My delegation recalls that
the dialogue concerns first and foremost the Congolese
people who, through international facilitation, are
debating, in the context of their country's best interest,
issues on the agenda and on which they have previously
agreed in order to allow for the electoral process - as
we have always stressed - to take place in a peaceful
environment. Partners of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, wishing to contribute to finding solutions
to the situation in my country, are called upon to do
so with the consideration and respect that we owe each
other. Everyone can agree that although, in this context,
recommendations or suggestions are welcome, neither
invective nor demands of any kind are acceptable.

To return to the point of not having called for
the holding of elections, the Council will recall the
explanation provided here by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of my country,
as well as by me, on the topic of the opposition, which
once rejected the partial electoral calendar and rejected
the comprehensive electoral calendar twice. It will also
recall the electoral register that was not updated after
the 2006 elections and the need - following the audit
of the International Organization of la Francophonie,
the Group of Experts and the Independent National
Electoral Commission - to update it to include those
Congolese who had recently reached voting age and
those who were abroad. The Independent National
Electoral Commission therefore could not convene
elections with a non-existant electoral register.

Finally, with regard to broadening the dialogue, I
must once again recall that it is intended to be inclusive,
in accordance with the decree of our Head of State. It
is with this mind, as we have said, that the Government
has responded favourably to several demands of the
opposition. It is also to that end that the facilitator has
reached out broadly to convince all political actors in
the country from all political leanings to engage in
dialogue. Only those political actors of the opposition
who are absent from today's dialogue freely chose
not to participate in it; it was not the Facilitator who
excluded them, much less my Government, which from
the outset of the dialogue requested the support of the
Council by way of a letter from our Permanent Mission
in September.

In another confidence-building measure, my
Government has amply demonstrated its good faith by
taking appropriate steps, as I have already mentioned,
with a view to easing the situation. While there may
be political actors who are prosecuted for reasons other
than political ones, the rule of law requires all citizens
of the country to enjoy equal rights before the law. It
would be wrong for the Government to intervene in
the interest of certain people in purely private affairs,
pitting individuals against each other.

As the Council is surely aware and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has noted, that
opposition group-in reaction to the dialogue being held
with the support of the international community - held
a closed meeting during which it adopted positions
that are in breach of the Constitution. The opposition's
threats to wreak havoc and call for an uprising and
violence must be condemned unequivocally. We called
the attention of the Council on 23 June (see S/PV.7724)
with the intention of forewarning it of the situation
when we stated that the Council is the United Nations
organ responsible for maintaining international peace
and security. It has the weighty responsibility to work
towards peace and prevent the outbreak of all conflict.
Thus, any discourse emerging from the Council that does
not promote an atmosphere of trust or that aggravates
tensions could have very serious consequences on the
ground for Member States.

As we said yesterday, the tensions in my country
today are in part due to resolution 2277 (2016), the
provisions of which have been interpreted in various
manners. Given the way the situation has evolved in
my country, what we expect from the international
community in general and the Security Council in
particular, as the Representatives of Uruguay and
Venezuela have just said, is its continued support to the
facilitator and the political agreement resulting from
the dialogue under way.

We welcome the resumption of cooperation between
the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo (FARDC) and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO). We hope that such cooperation
will produce rapid results in order to allow the people
in the east of our country to live in peace and freely
go about their daily lives. That is why my Government
prioritizes the joint mission that has been tasked to
FARDC and MONUSCO to neutralize all armed groups
in the country by December.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2016/833) also
notes the presence of several hundred armed groups
and a number of civilians from South Sudan in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Minister for
Foreign Affairs of my country met on this issue with the
leaders of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
during his trip to New York. My delegation maintains the
position held by the Head of the Congolese diplomatic
corps on that occasion. The United Nations knows the
precise conditions under which these people arrived in
our country. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
does not intend on reliving the its past experiences with
the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda. We
therefore believe that the United Nations will take all
necessary measures to relocate the South Sudanese
nationals.

We cannot reiterate often enough the fact that the
people of eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
have known no peace peace and for several years have
lived under the reule of foreign and national armed
groups. The humanitarian disaster resulting from this
situation should drive us to find immediate solutions
so that the people of the Great Lakes region of Africa
can live at home and in peace, and enjoy Goal 16 of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In
that context, my country thanks the Governments of
the Netherlands, Norway and the United Kingdom for
financing the Peacebuilding Fund, which has allowed
us to implement plans and strategies to stabilize the
provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I cannot conclude without extending my
Government's gratitude to the United Nations, and
especially to the Special Representative of Secretary-
General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for their commitment and devotion to the cause of my
country and the Great Lakes region. I also express my
country's thanks and gratitude to all members of the
Council.

