Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): It gives me pleasure to express our satisfaction
at the convening of this meeting, which is being held
within the framework of our collective follow-up on
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

I would like to thank Ambassador Arias,
Permanent Representative of Spain and Chairman of
the Committee, and the other members of the
Committee for the efforts they have been making to
muster the efforts of all States Members of the United
Nations, in particular, and of the international
community in general, in combating terrorism.

This is our first statement on the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) since the end of
our term as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council. I mention that only to recall that Syria has
participated effectively in the work of that important
Committee. It worked with other Council members to
crystallize various proposals and ideas concerning the
revitalization of the Committee. It gives us pleasure to
note that the 19 February report on the revitalization of
the work of the Committee (S/2004/124, annex)
reflects a number of the opinions we had expressed.
Here, I would like to reaffirm that Syria supports the
role of the United Nations in combating international
terrorism, based on the purposes and principles of the
Charter - which become even more important when
the world faces new challenges and dangers.

The report on the revitalization of the work of the
CTC notes that revitalization is justified by the need to
safeguard and strengthen the relevant legal framework.
The report's proposals should be viewed as a means to
support what has already been accomplished, and to
reinforce the work of the Committee and the Security
Council in that respect.

My delegation agrees with that principle, and we
affirm that it is necessary to abide by it. International
consensus on Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)
and the work that has been done are a matter of prime
importance that should not be neglected, regardless of
any wish to do so. We also agree with paragraph 3 of
the report, which relates to the objectives of
revitalization. We hope that Council members will
discuss that paragraph with all the necessary scrutiny
and care.

The Committee proposes the establishment of
new structures, and there are also references to sound
financial accountability. We are confident that the
proposals to revitalize the Committee are, in every
respect, consistent with the Charter, the financial and
administrative rules and regulations of the United
Nations and with the priorities contained in the
medium-term plan.

Syria condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, and calls for serious discussion of its
roots and causes. Such treatment should not be
superficial or limited by time. In order to achieve this,
Syria, which has fully cooperated with other countries
in combating terrorism, thus thwarting many terrorist
acts, renews it principled readiness to strengthen that
cooperation, which serves our common interest and the
interest of international peace and security. We believe
that any party that kills innocent people, destroys
houses upon the heads of women and children, creates
faits accomplis in occupied territories and builds
settlements is practising terrorism, regardless of the
nomenclature. In fact that is more than terrorism.

Syria reaffirms the linkage between terrorism and
weapons of mass destruction. We call upon the
international community to combat both terrorism and
weapons of mass destruction in tandem.

As an expression of our sound intentions, we
submitted last year a draft Security Council resolution,
on behalf of the Arab Group, in which we called for the
Middle East region to be made an area free of weapons
of mass destruction, including nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons. No country would be exempt from
implementing such a resolution: it would be
implemented in accordance with the rules of
international legitimacy and without double standards.
Our draft resolution is still before the Council, and we
hope it will be adopted by consensus as soon as
possible.

