Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): At the outset, on
behalf of the African Union Commission, allow me
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I also commend you on your initiative
to convene this timely open debate a day after the
tenth annual consultative meeting between the African
Union Peace and Security Council and the Security
Council of the United Nations, as well as on the eve
of the fifty-third anniversary of the establishment of
the Organization of the African Unity, forerunner of
the African Union. I also welcome the presence in
New York of the members of the Peace and Security
Council, a delegation led by its Chair, Ambassador
Mmamosadinyana Molefe, Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Botswana to the African Union.

The increasingly important role of regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security is a major feature of
the post-Cold War international security landscape.
Regional organizations now have a central place in
the international security architecture and are viewed
as key elements of security in their respective regions.
That reality is nowhere more evident that in Africa. The
transition from the Organization of African Unity to the
African Union (AU) was certainly the most remarkable
development in Africa, given its major implications
it has had at the international level. In that context,
the development of the African Peace and Security
Architecture has made it possible for the African Union
and its regional mechanisms to become major players
in international peace support missions. They are the
first responders to security crises and armed conflicts
and the initiators of political processes that have made
it possible to provide those operations with mandates.
They are also the largest troop contributors. That
recasting has been based on the significant changes
that have occurred in the African security landscape,
the evolution of which has been difficult to predict or
to control.
Those developments have had a positive impact on
the African Union-United Nations partnership over the
past ten years. The strategic relationship between the
African Union and the United Nations has continued
to grow with a view to building a more coherent and
effective partnership within the framework of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and article
17 of the Protocol Relating to the Establishment of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union.

This strategic partnership has in particular allowed
our two organizations to maintain regular consultations
on issues of concern and of mutual interest in the area
of peace and security, where collaboration has been
the most extensive. Regular consultations between the
AU Peace and Security Council (PSC) and the United
Nations Security Council, along with the ever closer
coordination between the AU Commission and the
United Nations Secretariat, well illustrate the shared
will to foster greater synergy between the African Union
and the United Nations. In that regard, the convening
yesterday of the tenth annual consultative meeting
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the United Nations Security Council produced a
joint assessment of the state of the partnership between
the two Councils, 10 years after its establishment. It
highlighted the need for a profound reorganization
of this mechanism with a view to its readjustment,
readaptation and strengthening to ensure its viability
and its effectiveness.

Particular emphasis was placed on the founding
elements of a true strategic partnership that the PSC
wishes to build with the United Nations Security
Council, based on the following: the principle of
mutual respect, the taking into account of comparative
advantages of the two Councils, the need to adopt
methods of work that are clearly set out, orientation
towards action and results, and an approach having
a strategic and comprehensive character that truly
integrates all issues of peace and security in Africa.
There should be a spirit of shared responsibility,
cooperation and close coordination.

The peace operations review process conducted
by the United Nations last year also provided an
opportunity to review our relationship with a view to
ensuring greater flexibility and predictability and so
that we could guarantee sustainable financing for the
peace operations carried out jointly by the African
Union and the regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms in Africa. That undertaking was
all the more necessary because the African Union
and its regional mechanisms continue to play an
increasingly dominant role in the promotion of peace,
security and stability on the continent, notably through
the deployment of peacekeeping operations.

Indeed, if the peacekeeping operations of the
African Union are deployed effectively, they will be
able to better pave the way for the deployment of United
Nations operations, which in their turn could support
long-term stabilization activities in the countries
concerned. However, African Union operations still
suffer the lack of predictable, flexible and sustainable
financing and depend to a significant extent on the
voluntary support of international partners.

While it is true that the African Union very much
appreciates the support it receives from its partners, it
is also true that the lack of predictability, flexibility
and, increasingly, sustainability of financing has had
negative consequences forthe effectiveness ofoperations
carried out by the African Union. In that regard, the
financial, operational and logistical difficulties of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
if appropriate responses are not found - to cite one
example - will certainly have negative implications
on the eve of decisive political and security schedules
for the future of the country. We are of the view that
AMISOM. has added value as the first African Union
mission to combat terrorism, an experience that the rest
of the world could share.

The African Union believes that using assessed
contributions from the United Nations budget should
be considered a viable option in the spirit of burden-
sharing between the two organizations. Concurrently,
we are aware that it will also be necessary for Africa
to mobilize increased resources on the continent so
that it can finance its own peace operations. The Heads
of State and Government of the African Union have
made a commitment to finance about 25 per cent of
the peacekeeping operations conducted by the African
Union. That decision will be gradually implemented
so that it reaches an optimal operational level by
2020. This will therefore mean that 75 per cent of the
budgets of missions carried out with Security Council
authorization will be supported by the United Nations
through assessed contributions. As Mr. Ladsous has
already said, Mr. Kaberuka, the special envoy of the
chair of the commission on the issue, will work towards
that objective.

It is appropriate to highlight once again that the
strategic partnership between the African Union and
the United Nations in the area of peace is in constant
evolution. We should ensure the optimal use of
opportunities and available resources, thanks to the
intervention of actors who can act with better advantage
on the ground in the search for solutions. The ultimate
objective is the prevention or the resolution of conflicts,
no matter how or when they emerge.

