Mr. Sharma (India): Mr. President, allow me to
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council. We would also like to congratulate
Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul of Mauritius for his
successful stewardship of the Council last month.

We associate ourselves with the statement made
by South Africa on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. As we are deeply concerned at the recent
developments, we thought it necessary also to share our
sentiments with the Security Council.

The tragic cycle of violence that has engulfed the
Middle East region since September 2000 has been
very damaging to peace and stability. It is a source of
deep concern to all. This violence has led to the most
tragic loss of hundreds of lives and grievous injuries to
thousands. It has derailed the Middle East peace
process and severely dented trust and confidence
between the parties, without which there cannot be
forward movement on negotiated agreements about
interim and final status issues. The longer the violence
continues, the greater the danger that extremist and
radical tendencies will be strengthened to the detriment
of prospects for a peaceful resolution. That is why it is
essential to exercise the utmost restraint, to eschew
violence and to shun all kinds of acts that could
destabilize the peace process.

The unfortunate situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, exacerbated by the incidents of
provocation and excessive use of force, underlines the
urgent need to restore calm and peace there. India has
consistently stood by the Palestinian people. It has
actively supported peace initiatives in the Middle East.
India is committed to a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the region, based on United Nations Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace. We support the inalienable
and legitimate right of the Palestinian people to a
homeland. We recognize the right of all States of the
region, including Israel and Palestine, to exist
peacefully within secure and internationally recognized
boundaries.

An important issue that has vitiated the
atmosphere has been the establishment and expansion
of Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory. The rapid growth and expansion of
settlements and the establishment of new ones since the
signing of the Oslo Accords and the establishment of
the Palestinian Authority undermine mutual confidence
as well as the credibility of the peace process. We trust
that Israel will respect the overwhelming sentiment of
the international community for a freeze on all
settlement activity.

We remain convinced that, under the leadership
of President Arafat, the national aspirations of the
Palestinian people, for which they have waged a long
struggle, can be realized. We remain vitally interested
in peace, development and stability in the region and
are ready to assist in whatever way we can.

We believe that the Mitchell report and the Tenet
plan are means to enable the transition from the current
situation to the negotiating table, where the modalities
of ending the Israeli occupation and final status issues
must be resolved.

Violence and terrorism have to be abjured; there
can be no justification for such acts. We believe that,
given will and determination, and a commitment to
settle disputes peacefully, no odds are insurmountable,
no goals too far. Ultimately it is the parties themselves
that have to shoulder the major responsibility for
achieving a permanent and lasting solution. A spirit of
accommodation and political will must imbue the
negotiation process. The parties must harness all their
energies to achieve a just and comprehensive peace in
their vital mutual interest.

