The President: I thank Mr. Awan for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland.

First, let me thank the Secretary-General for his
latest annual report (S/2019/509). We particularly
welcome the focus in this year's report on prevention
and reintegration efforts. I also commend the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative for
their commitment and continued efforts to mainstream
the issue of children in armed conflict as a priority on
international agendas.

I would also like to thank Ms. Henrietta Fore,
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund, for her tireless and dedicated work. In addition,
we highly appreciate the moving and inspirational
testimonies of Ms. Mariatu Kamara and Mr. Majok
Peter Awan.

For the first time in the Security Council, the
intention to pay serious attention to the situation of
children affected by armed conflict was voiced through
a presidential statement (S/PRST/ 1998/ 18) during
the Portuguese presidency in 1998. Since then, in the
Chamber we have agreed on a number of legal and
systemic improvements - to name but a few, resolution
1261 (1999), which placed the issue of children affected
by conflict on the Security Council agenda; resolution
1612 (2005), which appointed the working group; and
resolution 1882 (2009), which extended the list of
triggers of the six grave violations against children by
adding sexual violence against children to the nexus in
the Secretary-General's annual reports.

Notwithstanding those efforts, we still struggle to
provide the right protection and preventive measures
for girls and boys caught in conflict settings as we face
a severe reality of complex crises and new conflict
dynamics. The number of verified cases is still striking
and the full scale of violence, neglect and exploitation
still remains unknown. In 2018, despite some positive
developments on the ground, the report (S/2019/509)
identifies more than 20 countries with verified cases
of grave violations against children and an alarming
increase in incidents involving State actors.

Children are among the first victims of war and
violence. The Secretary-General's report shows that in
conflicts around the world children are being maimed,
abducted, attacked in schools and hospitals, recruited
to fight, sexually abused and denied humanitarian
aid. Such traumas deprive them of their childhood and
dignity and leave permanent marks on their adult lives.

Most of the current conflicts originate from poor
political and economic governance, violations of
fundamental human rights and freedoms, impunity,
corruption, injustice and inequalities. We should start
every single discussion by acknowledging the most
obvious truth, namely, that addressing the root causes
of conflicts, prevention and finding political solutions
should come before anything else.

Conflict and post-conflict periods deprive children
of one of their basic needs and rights 4 safety. Their
protection and the prevention of grave violations are
a fundamental priority within the United Nations
mandate to safeguard civilians and put human rights
at the centre of peace and security efforts. The issue
of child protection should be taken into account in
all phases of the conflict cycle: mediation, ceasefire,
peacekeeping, peace talks and post-conflict situations.

Protecting children affected by armed conflict is a
joint responsibility that requires a collective response to
all forms of violence. Still, for the protection mandates to
be more effectively executed by the United Nations, the
bottom-up approach must be one of the principles. That
should be achieved by extending and supporting the role
of child protection advisers responsible for addressing
child rights and protection issues at all stages of the
peacebuilding process, as well as protection actors on
the ground, including those based in the community.
Last year, child protection actors were able to support
the reintegration of more than 13,600 children.

The protection of vulnerable and fragile groups
of children, namely, refugees, internally displaced
persons and children with war trauma, remains one
of the priorities of Polish development cooperation.
Poland has been assisting the youngest victims of
conflict in eastern Ukraine with psychological support
and has been providing the most basic needs, shelter,
rehabilitation and education in the Middle East.

In that context, we want to reiterate our strong
support for the efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and UNICEF in drawing
attention to the importance of reintegration
programmes that benefit children formerly associated
with armed groups. We are also very honoured to
serve as a member of the steering committee of the
Global Coalition for the Reintegration of Former Child
Soldiers, as well as a member of the Group of Friends of
Reintegration of Child Soldiers. Poland strongly calls
for full inclusiveness of the reintegration programmes
and underlines the fundamental importance of the
community-based approach, including the role of local
and religious leaders in supporting the fight against the
stigmatization of children previously associated with
armed conflicts.

The scale of violation and suffering of children often
remains unnoticed despite the heroic and persistent
efforts of humanitarian, social and protection officers
around the world. Earlier this year, the Office of the
Special Representative launched the global advocacy
campaign Act to Protect. Let us therefore reflect on
ways that the Act to Protect advocacy campaign could
further serve as a genuine and measurable tool in
accelerating progress on the ground.

Resolution 1882 (2009) fed into the process of
strengthening the zero-tolerance approach towards
killing, maiming, rape and other violations of a sexual
nature against children. We renewed our commitment
to safeguarding children against sexual violence in the
recent resolutions 2427 (2018) and 2467 (2019).

During an armed conflict, children with disabilities
are more likely than others to experience violence.
Also, the fundamental legal framework is in place and
efforts to ensure the fulfilment of their rights have
improved. Girls and boys with disabilities continue to
remain among the most marginalized and exploited.

The further strengthening of the foundations for
the protection of the most vulnerable groups is critical.
Poland actively participated in the process through the
adoption of resolution 2475 (2019), on persons with
disabilities, which stresses the specific needs of those
with disabilities in armed conflict.

What I believe we all wish to achieve is to give
children their childhood back and to stop the cycle of
violence. We should act together in order to achieve
that goal.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

