Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): The threat of terrorism continues to loom over
international peace and security. The heinous terrorist
acts recently committed in Nigeria highlight their
perpetrators' contempt for human life and all the values
we hold dear. I take this opportunity to express yet
again, and vehemently, my country's strong
condemnation of such acts and those who commit
them. The ongoing threat remains so strong that to
defeat the scourge of terrorism will require increased
focus and vigilance on the part of the Council. My
delegation thanks Ambassadors Wittig, Puri and
Sangqu for their briefings on the work of the
Committees they chair.

We express our firm support for the actions and
mechanisms of the fight against terrorism put in place
by resolution 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) on
Al-Qaida sanctions, 1373 (2001), which led to the
creation of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, and
resolution 1540 (2004) on weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery.

I would like to say a few words about the work of
the Committees. Regarding the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated persons and
entities, my delegation commends the Council's
17 June adoption of resolution 1988 (2011) and 1989
(2011), creating new sanctions regimes for the Taliban
in Afghanistan and Al-Qaida, respectively. We also
applaud the commitment of the Committee, with the
help of the Secretariat and the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team, to implement resolution
1989 (2011), in particular by carrying out the
provisions governing its working methods.

Moreover, strengthening the mandate of the
Ombudsperson in the de-listing persons and entities on
sanctions lists is a significant and welcome step
forward, especially in allowing the Ombudsperson to
make recommendations to the Committee on those
cases. My delegation believes that the Ombudsperson
and the Monitoring Team must continue to lend their
valuable support to the Committee in order to bolster
its effectiveness, transparency and fairness.

The Committee must also maintain
communications with the Member States in order to
improve its grasp of the difficulties they face.
Increased contact at the regional and subregional levels
would contribute greatly to enhanced cooperation,
facilitating implementation by States of resolution
1989 (2011). Continued cooperation in information-
sharing between the Committee and INTERPOL
remains essential. We encourage the Committee to
continue reviewing the lists for entities that no longer
exist and for listings that are not sufficiently warranted.

Regarding the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), established by resolution 1373 (2001), of which
my country chairs subcommittee C, the special event

commemorating the tenth anniversary of resolution
1373 (2001) organized by the CTC and CTED on
28 September focused on the principle of zero
tolerance and the need to take a multidimensional
approach in the fight against terrorism, which we
welcome.

In that regard, Mr. President, my delegation
would like to thank you for your initiative to address
the role of peacekeeping missions in the fight against
terrorism. It is also encouraging to note that the
Committee updated the global survey of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), assessing
the nature and degree of the difficulties countries have
in fully implementing that resolution.

We take this opportunity to stress that Gabon
believes that strengthening the capacities of States in
confronting terrorism is essential to an effective global
strategy to fight terrorism, because in places where the
State security structure is in crisis an increase in
terrorist acts is always a serious threat. Effective
measures aimed at strengthening national capacities,
bearing in mind specific needs and known threats,
should be urgently undertaken.

Regarding the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), my delegation welcomes its
presentation on 12 September 2011 of its report
(S/2011/579) on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), and on 17 June of its tenth programme of work.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is a
serious threat to international peace and security. In
that regard and pursuant to its programme of work, the
Committee will have to better promote international
instruments of non-proliferation and disarmament to
effectively fight that phenomenon.

The Committee should also improve its dialogue
with the 1267 and 1989 Committees and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, maintaining sufficiently close
cooperation to confront threats specific to some States
or regions, such as the illicit movement of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery. It should
also promote cooperation with international, regional
and interregional organizations, as well as education,
collaboration and assistance to drive forward the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

In conclusion, the fight against terrorism
demands more engaged international cooperation, and
we must make sure that the relevant mechanisms fulfil
their role in building the capacities of States that are
ill-equipped to effectively engage in the fight against
the scourge. Our efforts in the fight must combine in a
global approach that strictly honours the obligations
imposed by international law, human rights law,
refugee law and international humanitarian law.

