Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Wane for his briefing on
activities that have been undertaken over the past two
months since the adoption of resolution 2359 (2017)
to operationalize the joint force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). As usual, it was a very
comprehensive, lucid and helpful briefing.

Let me take this opportunity to condemn in the
strongest terms the terrorist attack in Ouagadougou,
as well as that in Mali against the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. We express our sympathy to and solidarity
with the families of the victims of these attacks, and
we hope that the perpetrators of these heinous attacks
will be held to account. We fully support the press
statement issued by the Council yesterday (SC/12955).
This most recent attack again serves to underscore the
importance of the G-5 Sahel joint force and the need
for its speedy operationalization to combat the threat
of terrorism and violent extremism faced by countries
of the Sahel region, including Burkina Faso and Mali.
In that regard, we welcome the official launching of the
G-5 Sahel joint force on 2 July and take note of the
efforts being made to fully operationalize it before the
end of this year.

The G-5 Sahel countries have demonstrated their
commitment to fighting terrorism and transnational
organized crime by mobilizing their forces and
resources, but they need more financial and logistical
support to fully operationalize the joint force. We note
the commitment made by some bilateral and multilateral
partners in financing the joint force, but what has so far
been pledged falls far short of what is needed to cover
the preliminary budget required to sustain the force for
one year

The funding gap will be a major challenge
hampering the full operationalization of the joint
force, and there is an urgent need to exert more effort
to mobilize international support for the force. In that
context, we note the plan by France and Germany to
organize a conference in Berlin in mid-September to
secure more support for logistics and training for the
G-5 Sahel joint force. Without adequate financial and
logistical support, it would be extremely difficult to
fully operationalize the force, let alone sustain it. That
is why the issue requires serious attention. We hope
that bilateral and multilateral partners will enhance
their support to the joint force.

We believe the holding of the planning conference
in line with resolution 2359 (2017) could be instrumental
in mobilizing the international community in support
of the G-5 Sahel countries. It is indeed vital that the
Council support that regional initiative. We believe
that it is in line with the global regional partnership
that was advocated by the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations and the Secretary-General's
implementation report (S/2015/682). It is obvious that
the United Nations does not have the capacity to fight
terrorism. It is therefore only appropriate that it provides
the necessary support to those regional organizations
and arrangements that are ready and willing to carry
out such operations.

That should be seen for what it is, namely, a
contribution of global significance, although, on the
surface, it looks local and regional. As the representative
of France stated earlier, that is why the international
community has a moral responsibility to contribute
to the efforts being made by the G-5 Sahel countries.
In fact, when one looks at the genesis of the whole
crisis, one can argue that the international community
also has a political responsibility. Of course, the
multi-faceted challenge facing the Sahel region can be
effectively addressed only through a comprehensive
strategy that encompasses security, governance,
development, human rights and humanitarian issues.
Therefore, as called for in resolution 2359 (2017),
the rapid and effective implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel is critical. We
hope that the countries of the region, in cooperation
with bilateral and multilateral partners, will redouble
their efforts in implementing the Strategy. No doubt,
as the representative of Sweden stated, the question
of coordination is an issue that should be given very
high priority.

