Mr. Yankey (Ghana): Mr. President, it is my
pleasure to acknowledge your presence here as the
Foreign Minister of Peru, and to thank your delegation
for organizing this debate. May I also express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative and to the Executive Director of
UNICEF and the representative of Save the Children
for their contributions to this debate.

We very much welcome the opportunity to
participate in another discussion on the recruitment and
use of children in armed conflict, a practice that should
be denounced for its devastating and far-reaching
social consequences. It is bad enough that rebel groups
frequently recruit children to fight their cause, but it
becomes deeply disturbing when Governments, which
have the responsibility to protect their own citizens, are
caught indulging in this criminal enterprise.

As a signatory to the African Charter on the
Rights and Welfare of the Child, which has been in
force since November 1999, Ghana is keenly aware of
the enormous challenges faced by African countries in
their endeavour to end all violations of the rights and
dignity of children and to extend to them the protection
they so desperately deserve. We believe cooperation
could be enhanced between the African Committee of
Experts on the Rights and Welfare of the Child and the
United Nations, as well as the relevant non-
governmental organizations (NGOs), so as to
complement each other's efforts in the area of child
protection.

In fact, the African Committee of Experts on the
Rights and Welfare of the Child is mandated, among
other things, to collect and document information,
commission interdisciplinary assessment of situations
on African problems in the fields of the rights and
welfare of the child and also to cooperate with other
African, international and regional institutions and
organizations concerned with the promotion and
protection of the rights and welfare of the child.

It is for these reasons that we attach great
importance to the findings and recommendations in
both the report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict and the independent review of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism for children and
armed conflict progress.

In particular, State parties must have the political
will and commitment to strengthen measures to prevent
recruitment of children for armed forces or armed
groups and their use in hostilities, particularly by
signing the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the Involvement of Children in
Armed Conflict. More importantly, all concerned must
enact legislation clearly forbidding the recruitment of
under-age children - those under 15 years of age -
into armed forces and groups and their direct
participation in hostilities.

Let us also bear in mind that actions plans can be
meaningful and effective only when they are rooted in
realism, in terms of both the required resources and the
capacity to deliver, plus a genuine commitment to the
underlying objectives. Without that, all our efforts will
come to naught.

We recognize that information constitutes the
greatest weapon in the whole enterprise of redressing
the negative impact of armed conflict on children.
Consequently, the role of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism cannot be overstated, and everything must
be done to strengthen its overall resource base and
capabilities. As the report rightly notes, action is
required in that respect, at both the national and
international levels, to mobilize the necessary
resources and enhance the capacity to gather first-hand
information in the field for use by the appropriate law
enforcement authorities.

We welcome the progress that has been made by
the monitoring and reporting mechanism in extending
its reach by building the necessary linkages with a
range of important actors, such as various United
Nations agencies, national authorities and NGOs. For
its part, the Security Council, through its Working
Group, must continue to pay close attention to the
mechanism and extend to it every support in meeting
the challenges ahead, not least the elimination of the
conditions in which the abuse of children flourishes.

