Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour of speaking on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti, comprised of Argentina, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, France, Guatemala, Peru, the
United States of America and my country, Uruguay. I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, and the United
Kingdom delegation on having organized this debate to
discuss the most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2012/128). The Group of Friends of Haiti welcomes
the presence today of Mr. Mariano Fernandez, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, and
thanks him for his comprehensive briefing.

The Group of Friends of Haiti expresses its
continued support for the Government and people of
Haiti in rebuilding their country, consolidating peace,
democracy and stability, and promoting recovery and
sustainable development. The Group of Friends
recognizes the achievements made since the prior
report (S/2011/540) with respect to post-earthquake
reconstruction and peacebuilding, including progress in
the strengthening of the rule of law in Haiti, such as
the long-awaited appointment of the President and
Vice-President of the Supreme Court.

However, the Group notes with concern the
information contained in the recent report of the
Secretary-General on the political tensions among the
branches of the Government, in particular as noted in
paragraphs 54 and 55. The Group of Friends
encourages the representatives of the executive and
legislative branches to coordinate their efforts in a
spirit of compromise in order to strengthen democratic
institutions and the rule of law and, above all, to meet
the needs and aspirations of the people of Haiti.

The Group notes that the overall security
situation in Haiti has remained stable, albeit fragile. In
that context, the Group reiterates that political stability
is essential to maintaining progress towards
stabilization and reconstruction, and underlines the
importance of mitigating the potential negative impact
of political uncertainty on the situation. In that respect,
the Group of Friends emphasizes the critical role of the
Haitian National Police (HNP), and stresses the
importance of completing the process of strengthening
and reforming the HNP to enable its full assumption of
the responsibility for security in Haiti.

The Group acknowledges once again that, since
the prior report of the Secretary-General, the military
and police personnel of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) have
continued to play a vital role in maintaining overall
security and stability and in supporting the reform and

strengthening process of the HNP, which remain
priorities for MINUSTAH, as well as in reconstruction
and other efforts. It also takes note of the ongoing
process of the drawdown of staff, pursuant to
resolution 2012 (2011), and encourages its smooth and
orderly conduct.

The Group of Friends of Haiti expresses its grave
concern regarding the allegations of serious
misconduct by some MINUSTAH personnel, which
have negatively affected support for the Mission and
risk undermining its work. The Group of Friends urges
all actors involved to assume their responsibilities in
order to prevent such cases, to investigate allegations
and to eventually hold those responsible accountable.

I would like to add a brief note on that issue in
my national capacity. I take this opportunity to affirm
that, since our last attendance at a meeting of the
Security Council to discuss this issue (see S/PV.6618),
Uruguayan authorities have continued to take the
allegation of a case of grave misconduct in Port Salut
very seriously. The case has now been referred to the
ordinary criminal court, which is now considering the
case under statutory norms and developing sustained
cooperation with the Haitian authorities and the
Secretariat in order to achieve justice based on
transparency and due process.

The Group acknowledges with satisfaction the
reduced number of internally displaced persons in
Haiti. However, it would like to underscore that Haiti
continues to face significant humanitarian challenges,
such as the more than 500,000 camp residents, the
ongoing cholera epidemic and dependence on food
assistance. Those challenges remind us of the
importance of maintaining the cooperation between the
international community and the Government of Haiti
to meet the needs of the Haitian people. In that regard,
the Group of Friends of Haiti acknowledges the efforts
of the donor community and calls on them to fulfil the
pledges they have made without delay.

The Group of Friends of Haiti stresses that
security, development and stability are closely related,
interlinked and mutually reinforcing. At the same time,
the Group stresses that there can be no genuine
stability or sustainable development in Haiti without a
strengthening of its democratic institutions. In that
context, the Group emphasizes the importance of
promoting the rule of law in strengthening Haitian
institutions and further reaffirms the responsibility of
MINUSTAH to support the Haitian State in the fields
of the rule of law, good governance, the extension of
State authority and the promotion and protection of
human rights, in accordance with its mandate.

Finally, the Group reiterates its solidarity with the
Haitian people and its commitment to working closely
with the Haitian authorities and MINUSTAH, and
encourages the Haitian political leadership to work
cooperatively to provide the political stability
necessary to strengthening democracy, institutions and
economic development in Haiti.

The Group of Friends of Haiti expresses its
support for and recognition to the women and men of
MINUSTAH for their dedication and tireless efforts to
support the recovery and stability in Haiti.

