Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Let me thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this open meeting to discuss
the report of the Security Council mission to Kosovo
and Belgrade, which took place from 16 to 18 June
2001. I wish also to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Guehenno, for his
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
contained in document S/2001/565, and to say how
much we appreciated that report, because it provided a
very useful input during my delegation's preparations
for the Security Council mission.

I wish also to express my personal appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for the impressive and effective
leadership you provided for our short but intense
mission as we sought to fulfil the terms of reference
provided by the Council.

Coming just more than a year after the first
Security Council mission to Kosovo, the recent mission
provided us with an opportunity to assess the critical
role played by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) over the
past two years in promoting peace, reconciliation and
stability, and in creating viable democratic institutions.

As the report indicates, the mission, in its
meeting with local leaders, conveyed a strong message
on the need to eschew violence and extremism and to
focus on inter-ethnic reconciliation and inclusion.

Our visit to Belgrade also provided an
opportunity to engage with the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, to listen to their
concerns and to obtain their support for progress
towards a multi-ethnic Kosovo.

As my delegation entirely supports the findings
of the mission, I will only make brief comments on
some issues which are of particular concern. These
include the volatile security situation, efforts to
enhance law enforcement, the return of refugees and
the issue of missing persons and of detainees.

As we were able to witness first hand, there has
been considerable progress in the area of peace and
security. While the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has tried
to develop a comprehensive strategy aimed at
improving the quality of life for all communities, the
security situation for Kosovo's minority communities,
particularly the Kosovo Serbs, remains of great
concern. This is particularly true of Mitrovica. Unless
the security situation of Kosovo's minority
communities improves, peace and reconciliation are
doomed to fail, and this will, in turn, reduce the
possibility of the return to their homes of substantial
numbers of refugees and displaced persons and our
ability to provide sustained economic growth and
sustainable development for the people of Kosovo.

We were, therefore, pleased that the initiative
recently undertaken by UNMIK to establish Pillar I to
improve the coordination of police and justice matters
is having success. In this regard, we welcome the
promulgation of regulations pertaining to illegal border
crossings and to the possession of illegal weapons.

We wish to emphasize the appeal made by
UNMIK for an increase in the number of international
judges and prosecutors and for additional funds to
increase detention capacity. My delegation views these
as crucial to improving the law and order situation,
especially in the light of comments that perpetrators
may have had to be released from detention due to the
lack of proper detention facilities.

I wish to take this opportunity as the Chairperson
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1160 (1998) to draw attention to
paragraphs 25 and 33 of the report (S/2001/600) and
their importance to the process of maintaining law and
order in Kosovo. These paragraphs highlight the
discussions held between members of the mission and
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) on the strengthening and
monitoring of the arms embargo imposed pursuant to
resolution 1160 (1998).

We were pleased to have had very fruitful
discussions and we wish to thank the Commander of
KFOR, Lieutenant General Thorstein Skiaker for his
cooperation. We particularly appreciate the promise of
detailed information on the origin, type and quantity of
weapons seized.

We were also informed by the UNMIK Police
Commander about the quantity of weapons being
seized and the attempts being made, some successfully,
to disarm the population where appropriate.

My delegation was pleased with the political
progress being made on the preparations for elections
to be held in November. We wish to reiterate the
importance we attach to close collaboration between
UNMIK and the authorities in Belgrade, particularly in
regard to the registration and the participation of
minority communities in the electoral process itself.
For us, it is important that all communities participate
in the governance of Kosovo, as only in this way will
we be able to provide full participation in the
democratic institutions.

One issue on which all communities again,
pleaded for assistance, as they did last year, is missing
persons. We believe that further progress can now be
made on this issue with the use of DNA in the forensic
work being carried out by UNMIK.

We also wish to encourage UNMIK to continue to
promote conditions conducive to the return of refugees
and displaced persons and to commend them for the
progress already made in this area.

The report indicates that one of the greatest
challenges is the promotion of multi-ethnicity. We
believe that there is no simple or speedy solution to
this problem. With the elections approaching, these
issues become even more important, and we
unreservedly support the emphasis in the report on the
need for multi-ethnic initiatives in the social, economic
and religious areas to start building confidence
between the communities.

At your initiative, Mr. President, a representative group
of Kosovo women's non-governmental organizations
met with members of mission, and during this meeting
a number of issues of concern were raised. The
representatives underlined the need to involve women
in peace negotiations and in the political decision-
making process in accordance with resolution 1325
(2000). The importance of the international
community's support for the economic empowerment
of women, tackling discrimination and providing
employment and equal opportunities, were identified as
equally important. Emphasis was placed on the need
for regular dialogue and enhanced cooperation between
local women's groups and UNMIK.

We are grateful for the opportunity which, at your
request, Mr. President, was provided to meet with the
representatives of the non-governmental organizations
because of the importance that we attach to civil
society and the role that they play in the reconciliation
efforts.

On the surface there has been improvement in
Kosovo's economic situation. We saw reconstruction;
we saw improved agricultural activity; we saw
economic activity taking place throughout Pristina.
Nevertheless, the economic situation continues to be of
great concern, with high levels of unemployment,
particularly among the youth, and the need to resolve
issues relating to property rights, which could provide
an enabling environment conducive to attracting
foreign investment.

It is important that these and other issues be
addressed, as these problems can influence the return
of refugees and displaced persons who are reluctant to
return where there is no viable source of income.

In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to
express my delegation's appreciation to Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, and to his staff, to the KFOR
Commander and his staff, and to the men and women
of UNMIK for the tremendous assistance provided to
the mission during its stay in Kosovo.

