Mr. Brammertz: I am grateful for the opportunity
to address the Security Council about the activities
of the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. My
written report (S/2019/888, annex II) provides details
about our activities and results during the reporting
period. Today I would like to highlight a few important
issues.

Events during the reporting period demonstrated
that our residual functions remain important and
necessary. In The Hague, my Office remains committed
to meeting all court-imposed deadlines and effectively
presenting our arguments in the retrial of the case
Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanisie and Franko Simatovic
and the appeal of the case Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladic'.

At the Arusha branch, my Office has taken
significant steps to carry out our mandate from the
Council to ensure the continued protection of witnesses
and prosecute contempt of court offences under the
Mechanism's statute. In September, the Appeals
Chamber rejected the request for review submitted
by Augustin Ngirabatware, and affirmed the appeal
judgment against him. A few weeks later, a single
Judge likewise confirmed our indictment against
Mr. Ngirabatware, charging him with two counts of
contempt of court and one count of incitement to commit
contempt of court. Augustin Ngirabatware is a former
Rwandan Government minister who was convicted in
2014 for inciting, instigating and aiding and abetting
genocide and was sentenced to 30 years in prison.

In 2016, he asked the Appeals Chamber to reverse
his convictions on the basis of an alleged new fact.
Specifically, he submitted that four witnesses who
testified against him at trial had recanted their
testimonies. In the course of investigating that matter,
my Office uncovered extensive evidence of a broad
criminal scheme involving many individuals over
three years, aimed at influencing those four witnesses
to recant their prior testimonies. With that evidence,
we successfully defended Ngirabatware's conviction
for genocide and have now indicted six individuals for
contempt of court, including Mr. Ngirabatware himself.
Those results are a clear demonstration to all witnesses
who testified before the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the Mechanism that
they continue to enjoy the Mechanism's protection.

For the fair administration ofjustice, it is necessary
that the Mechanism provide the opportunity to
convicted persons to seek review of their convictions
when legitimate new facts arise. At the same time,
my Office will firmly stand against any attempt to
undermine thejudgments ofthe ICTR, the ICTY and the
Mechanism through the commission of further crimes.
Such contempt of court, as in that case, constitutes a
form of genocide denial that must be opposed, for the
sake of peace, reconciliation and the truth.

As I have previously reported to the Council, my
Office has been taking a number of important measures
to strengthen our activities to locate and arrest the
remaining eight fugitives indicted by the ICTR. That is
one of my Office's most important residual functions.
Over the past two years, our reforms and renewed efforts
have generated a number of important actionable leads.

Unfortunately, I must report today that we are not
obtaining the cooperation that we need from some
Member States. I deeply regret South Africa's long-
standing failure to execute a Mechanism arrest warrant.
Since my Office was officially notified in August 2018
that one of the fugitives had been located in South
Africa, I have endeavoured to work with South African
authorities to secure the fugitive's arrest. At all times
we have sought to handle this matter with discretion
and respect for South Africa's sovereignty. During
discussions that have taken place over the past year,
South Africa provided changing reasons as to why it
could not act. For each and every challenge that was
posed, my Office sought to work with South Africa and
find solutions to overcome them. To our disappointment,
the situation remained the same, which obliged me to
raise this matter during my previous two briefings (see S/PV.8576 and S/PV.8416).

After assurances in July that cooperation would
be forthcoming, I was cautiously optimistic that the
arrest would take place expeditiously. My Office was
greatly surprised then to receive in September a formal
response from South Africa informing us, for the first
time after more than a year of discussions, that it could
not cooperate because it lacked the necessary domestic
legislation. We quickly responded by reaffirming South
Africa's obligation to cooperate under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations and reiterating our
request for the fugitive's prompt arrest.

After we had submitted our critical written report to
the Security Council, South Africa last week informed
us that it had finally submitted the arrest warrant to the
competent judicial authorities for execution. While we
welcome that procedural step after nearly one and a half
years of inaction, the fact is that while we are speaking
today, the fugitive remains at large. At this late stage,
neither the victims nor the Council can be satisfied with
anything less than the fugitive's immediate arrest.

In other areas we are also facing challenges in
obtaining cooperation. My Office is generating valuable
intelligence and leads - telephone numbers, places of

residence, identification documents, travel details and
more. We have submitted numerous urgent requests
for assistance, particularly to countries in East and
southern Africa, to follow up on those leads. However,
many time-sensitive, important requests have remained
unanswered for more than a year. Among other issues,
we have credible information that some fugitives
have been able to illegally and corruptly procure
passports from a number of different countries, which
has enabled them to freely cross borders and evade
our efforts. National authorities have not, however,
provided us with access to the persons and information
that we need, or otherwise treated our requests with
urgency. The Security Council has repeatedly urged
Member States to provide all necessary cooperation in
the search for the fugitives. That message, sadly, is not
being heard by some States. And when a member of the
Council fails for 16 months to arrest a fugitive wanted
for genocide, it definitely sends the wrong signal.

This year marked the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Rwandan genocide. The victims have waited far
too long to see those fugitives brought to justice. Our
success depends on timely and effective cooperation
from Member States.

In relation to national prosecutions of crimes
committed in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia,
my written report provides detailed insight into their
current status and challenges. It is clear that much more
remains to be done to achieve more justice for more
Victims. My Office continues to receive a large number
of requests for assistance from national authorities,
which is a tangible demonstration of the fact that
domestic investigations and prosecutions are under way.
Unfortunately, however, the glorification of convicted
war criminals and the denial of crimes - including
genocide denial - continue to pose significant
challenges to accountability and reconciliation.

While my Office is undertaking significant efforts
to locate the eight remaining fugitives indicted by the
ICTR, Rwandan authorities are searching for at least
500 additional fugitives suspected to have participated
in the genocide. We remain committed to supporting
the Prosecutor General of Rwanda and his Office
in those efforts, and our cooperation continues to
develop in a positive direction. Nonetheless, there are
still concerted efforts to deny the Rwandan genocide,
particularly among Rwanda diaspora communities.
Some promote revisionist accounts that minimize the
scale of the genocide. Others continue to deny that the
crimes were committed with the intent to destroy the
Tutsi group in whole or in part.

In relation to the former Yugoslavia, national
authorities now have primary responsibility for
achieving justice for war crimes. Thousands of cases
still need to be processed by national courts, which
will be possible only with significant improvements in
regional judicial cooperation.

Our support for colleague prosecutors remains an
important area of development. At the request of the
War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia, last
week my Office provided a five-day induction training
for new deputy prosecutors and legal assistants, which
was generously funded by the Netherlands. Early next
year my Office will similarly deliver an advanced
training programme on prosecuting sexual violence for
the Prosecutor's Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina, at
its request.

Yet at the same time, for a number of years my
written reports have underscored that the denial of
crimes and the glorification of convicted war criminals
are pervasive throughout the former Yugoslavia, and
the situation continues to get worse. Such a climate
has a negative impact on national justice for war
crimes, and it is impossible to speak about meaningful
reconciliation when communities are growing further
apart, not closer together. To understand the problem,
one need only look at the actions of some politicians.
They do not seek votes by promising reconciliation
or by building bridges to other communities. Instead,
politicians believe that they win elections by denying
atrocities and glorifying those responsible. Some
promote revisionist histories, while others try to gain
votes by commemorating, rather than condemning,
war criminals.

In Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, prosecutors,
judges, civil society and others continue fighting
to bring the perpetrators of the most horrific crimes
to justice, establish the rule of law and promote
reconciliation. They need our help and support as much
as ever.

In conclusion, my Office is firmly focused on
completing our remaining functions efficiently
and effectively. In that regard, we fully support the
evaluation currently being conducted by the Office of
Internal Oversight Services.

My Office needs the Council's support in the
search for the fugitives. Some Member States are not
adhering to their obligations of providing the needed
cooperation. The Council can send a clear message
to all Member States underscoring that the search for
the fugitives is still vital to international peace and
security today. We also remain committed to providing
our support to national authorities in their continued
implementation of the ICTR and ICTY completion
strategies so that greater justice can be achieved. We
are grateful for the continued support of the Council in
all of our efforts.

