Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank Mr. Danilo Tiirk for his briefing
and to state that developments in Bougainville give us
cause for optimism. Yesterday's enemies have decided
to settle their differences through peaceful means and
to prepare for their future together.

We have noted the progress that has been made in
the area of weapons collection, in spite of delays in
concluding stage II. We believe that the Buka Action
Plan of 17 February is particularly important in this
regard. It clearly identifies the obstacles to be
overcome and sets out priority tasks. It will enable us
to speed up the process of collecting weapons that are
still in the hands of the factions. We will, of course,
have to see to it that the specific containerization
measures planned within the framework of stage II are
carried out successfully. Indeed, the success of this
stage will be a key factor in the holding of a
Constituent Assembly in Bougainville.

That Assembly will be charged with adopting the
future Constitution. The Constitutional Commission for
Bougainville submitted last February an initial draft,
and an amended version is to be issued in the days to
come. This is a major political stage which perhaps
will open the way for elections by the end of this year.

Despite this progress, we still have some points
of concern. I am thinking in particular of the fact that
Mr. Francis Ona and his Me'ekamui Defence Force are
not taking part in the peace process. This refusal might
well hinder the complete elimination of weapons from
Bougainville, and that is why we should encourage the
efforts of the parties to the Bougainville Peace
Agreement aimed at inducing Mr. Ona to take part in
that process.

I should like to conclude my statement by looking
ahead. The United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville will close up shop at the end of this year.
We would like to thank Mr. Noel Sinclair for the work
he has done. But now we have to think about the way
in which other actors within the United Nations system,
and also the international donor community as a whole,
will take over. Bougainville will continue to require
broad support in order to embark on the path of
sustainable development. This will be one of the
essential aspects for peace to take root.

