Mr. Lambertini (Italy): As highlighted in our
statement of 28 November (see S/PV.8116), resolution
2178 (2014) was a milestone in the fight against
international terrorism. Its clear and timely guidelines
enabled the Security Council to introduce coherent
measures that could respond to the seriousness
and the scope of the new phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters.

In the spring of 2015, Italy fully implemented the
provisions of the resolution. First, it updated its law,
adding new types of offences regarding travel, training
and forms of terrorist funding. Secondly, it adapted
its mechanisms and working methods dedicated to
combating terrorism to emerging needs. These changes
have brought positive results, and a few judgments have
been handed down in Italian courts sanctioning the
conduct of foreign terrorist fighters.

Many things have changed in the past three years
in terms of combating terrorism on the ground, but the
global threat posed by terrorists continues to evolve
and diversify, which is why measures tackling the
phenomenon of returning or relocating foreign terrorist
fighters have become urgent. This is a complex issue
that encompasses the political, legal and operational
fields of activities.

Today's important resolution (resolution 2396 (2017)) introduced provisions that touch on all these
aspects and in particular point to the centrality of
international cooperation. Along with the greater
efforts required on the part of all Member States, the
resolution underscores the need for greater efficacy in
technical assistance, capacity-building and support for
countries that request it.

Italy attaches great importance to the fact that
the text, together with the measures on foreign
terrorist fighters to be adopted, also includes specific
measures for the family members of foreign terrorist
fighters, especially children. We welcome the efforts
of the Council to reconcile the need for a criminal-
justice response when crimes have been committed
and the need to adapt measures tailored to individual
situations and to promote the integration of foreign
terrorist fighters and their families into the community.
This has proved to be the best way to prevent further
radicalization and the emergence of new threats to
society. The comprehensive protection of human rights
and the rule of law is of vital importance to the fight
against violent extremism and terrorism.

In this context, we value as particularly relevant
projects conducted during terms served in prison,
and the Nelson Mandela rules are an advanced tool
at the disposal of every country. Just as relevant is
the engagement of civil society in reintegration and
prevention programmes.

Italy hopes that future resolutions will contribute to
better defining the legal provisions regarding the return
and travel of foreign terrorist fighters to their country
of nationality or residence. This was not addressed
in resolution 2178 (2014), but proved to be a difficult
issue for the authorities of transit and destination
countries alike. We trust nonetheless that the resolution
guidelines and the cooperation of States and bodies
with the United Nations will enable us to find a shared
solution to be applied uniformly.

Italy is honoured to have contributed to the adoption
of a text that complements the fundamental resolution
2178 (2014), adapting it to the challenges that we are
all currently facing. Solving the difficult problem
of returnees and relocators through the adoption of
balanced and effective measures is a necessary step in
countering the new and emerging threat of international

terrorism. But this is not enough. The new resolution
must be rapidly implemented, and Member States,
United Nations bodies and international organisms are
called on to take coordinated action, also in support
of those countries that do not have the resources or
capacity necessary to implement all the important
obligations that this resolution contains.

Italy will end its mandate in the Security Council
in a few days, but remains steadfast in its will to
contribute to the common efforts and give constructive
assistance to those countries requiring support.
