Mr. Burkhalter (spoke in French): It is a great
honour for me and for my country, Switzerland, to
address the Council today as Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). I thank the Council for its invitation.

Switzerland has embraced its chairmanship of the
OSCE with great determination and modesty, realizing
full well that security is an art, and a difficult and
fragile one, as the events in Ukraine are demonstrating
once again - indeed, I shall dwell on that topic for
longer that I had intended, as things there have now
moved into a new phase.

Switzerland decided to assume the chairmanship of
the OSCE for strategic reasons. We view the promotion
of stability in Europe and its neighbouring regions, as
well as in the fragile regions of the world, as a major
axis of our new foreign affairs policy. We also believe
that our tradition of mediation and good offices can add
an enriching contribution to the OSCE.

We wish to contribute on the international
front in order to demonstrate our responsibility and
solidarity, which are two of the underlying principles
of Switzerland's policy of peace and security.

With regard to the United Nations, our policy is
also reflected in our decision to seek membership
in the Security Council for the period 2023-2024,
as well as in our OSCE chairmanship for a second
time - Switzerland being the first country to do so.

This is also the first time in the history of the
OSCE that two countries holding the chairmanship for
a second time cooperate so closely - Switzerland this
year and Serbia in 2015. We have together developed
a joint work plan and we hope that this consecutive
chairmanship will guarantee more continuity in the
work of the OSCE. Moreover, we think that this
continuity model should be instructive for the future.

It is therefore with particular pleasure that I
address the Council under Lithuanian chairmanship,
given that it was your Government, Madam President,
that facilitated that innovative type of presidency at the
Vilnius Ministerial Conference in 2011. Today, I will
outline the priorities of our presidency by setting them
off against the backdrop of the cooperation between the
OSCE and the United Nations. As chairperson-in-office,
I want to strengthen that cooperation. I will also talk
about the role the OSCE plays in international efforts
to manage the crisis in Ukraine. That topic has strongly
marked the initial phase of the Swiss chairmanship of
the OSCE.

As the Council is aware, the OSCE is the largest
regional security organization. It covers both the
Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions. It brings together
57 countries, from Vancouver to Vladivostok, as well as
11 partners, all the way to Australia. It takes its decisions
by consensus. That is both a strength and, at times, a
weakness, as we must constantly reach compromise in
order to act. That is the spirit of cooperation that is at
the heart of all the activities of the OSCE.

That spirit of cooperation is also reflected in
relations with the outside. The work of the OSCE, as a
regional organization under Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, contributes to the efforts of the
United Nations to maintain and re-establish peace,
security and international stability.

Secretary- General Ban Ki-moon recently relaunched
the debate on the revitalization of the role of regional
organizations under Chapter VIII. We will organize a
conference on that very subject in Vienna on 27 and
28 May, at which representatives from the United
Nations and several regional organizations will
participate.

The concept of multidimensional security that the
OSCE has developed could inspire other regional actors.
The Helsinki Final Act of 1975 recognized for the first
time that threats to stability and security not only came
from troops and weapons but also - without reference
to any hiearchy - from economic crises, environmental
degradation and human rights violations. Today, that
comprehensive security model is more relevant than
ever because it provides effective responses to current
challenges and the security needs of the individual. We
therefore hope to strengthen cooperation between the
OSCE and other regional security organizations and the
United Nations, always in line with the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter.

The cooperation between the OSCE and the
Council of Europe is an example at the regional level.
One week ago, the Austrian presidency of the Council
of Europe and the Swiss chairmanship of the OSCE
jointly organized a conference aimed at strengthening
institutional cooperation between the two organizations
in the fight against trafficking in human beings. The
conference was a success. A framework identifying
concrete measures was developed that, among other
things, provides for developingjoint training to improve
criminal prosecution.

With regard to relations between the OSCE and
the United Nations, further cooperation should be
envisaged on the ground. A successful example is
undoubtedly the work carried out in Kosovo by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo and the OSCE Mission.

Within the OSCE, we have launched a process
of reflection with regard to further improving the
efficiency of our field missions. The OSCE and its four
specialized agencies carry out 16 missions - from
Bosnia and Herzegovina to Kyrgyzstan - with a
relatively modest annual budget of €145 million. To
give an example, that is 15 times smaller than the
amount that Switzerland devotes to internaitonal
cooperation. We would like to introduce a new mission
model that better corresponds to the specific needs of
each host country. At the same time, we should ensure
that we preserve the crucial preventive role played
by our missions and that we safeguard the identity of
the OSCE as a field organization that supports host
countries in the implementation of the commitments
made at the organization.

We could also consider other joint actions under
Chapter VIII of the Charter f for example, in the
area of training. Two years ago, we organized a course
on conflict prevention for employees of the United
Nations, the European Union (EU) and the OSCE. That
format should be reactivated and serve as a model. We
are prepared to devote ourselves to that task.

On elections, there is close cooperation between
the United Nation and regional organizations and,
as in the case of Georgia and Afghanistan, efforts
are complementary. The OSCE will support the
presidential elections to be held in Afghanistan in April
2014. Afghanistan is one of the OSCE's six partner
cooperating countries in the Asian region. That will be
the fifth time that the Office for Democratic Institutions
and Human Rights (ODIHR) of the OSCE will monitor
elections in Afghanistan.

I should briefly like to expand upon an idea
concerning the Asia-Pacific region. Next year,
Switzerland will assume the chairmaship of the Partners
for Cooperation in Asia forum, where we hope to discuss
how to implement elements of an OSCE integrated and
cooperative security model in East Asia. In the context
of ongoing territorial disputes, rapidly increasing
defence budgets and the increased risk of tensions
and political polarization, East Asia could benefit
from the experience of the OSCE on the establishment
confidence-building measures and common standards
through dialogue and transparency. The Asia-Pacific
region is an engine for economic integration, and that
may serve as a model when it comes to integration on
the security front.

(spoke in English)

Since assuming the chairmanship of the OSCE at
the beginning of 2014, my agenda has been dominated
by the political crisis and recent escalation of violence
in Ukraine. The outbreaks of violence in the context
of the struggle about the future course of Ukraine and
the high degree of instability the country has recently
faced are a sobering reminder that security in Europe
cannot be taken for granted. Those developments have
revealed the need to foster dialogue, re-establish trust
and rebuild bridges, both within Ukraine and across
the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions. It is my firm
conviction that the OSCE has a major role to play on
both counts.

During recent weeks, I have repeatedly called
upon all sides to refrain from violence, resolve the
crisis through dialogue and political means and respect
human rights. In a series of meetings, I have discussed
options for OSCE assistance with the then-Ukrainian
Government as well as with members of the opposition.

The agreement reached on 21 February marked
an important step towards ending the violence and
paved the way for a political solution to the crisis.
I congratulate everyone involved who made that
breakthrough possible, including the Polish, German
and French Foreign Ministers and the Special Envoy of
the Russian Federation.
With the appointment of an interim President by
the Parliament, Ukraine has now entered a new phase of
transition. Formidable challenges lie ahead. We should
unite in our efforts to support Ukraine in these difficult
times. A stable, democratic and united Ukraine is in
the interest of us all. I therefore propose establishing
an international contact group on Ukraine. Ukraine
should of course play a prominent role in the group,
and the key international actors should be included.
We are currently consulting on that idea with all actors
involved. The main task of the proposed group would be
to support Ukraine in this transition period. The contact
group would serve as a platform for coordination and the
sharing of information on international assistance and
project activities in Ukraine. Through its impartiality
and inclusivity, the OSCE has the necessary attributes
to host and moderate the group. Ukraine and all
international actors involved in the crisis are in fact
participating States of the OSCE.

I have decided today to appoint Ambassador Tim
Guldimann as my personal envoy on Ukraine. He will
coordinate all ongoing and planned OSCE activities in
Ukraine on behalf of the chairmanship. He will quickly
start consultations with all sides and will cooperate
closely with international partners.

A small OSCE core team has been sent to Ukraine
to conduct a needs-assessment mission in the next few
days. There is an urgent need to rebuild trust among
all the parties involved. I encourage the new leaders of
Ukraine to invite the ODIHR to send a human rights
assessment mission to the country to establish the facts
and circumstances of the incidents that took place in
Ukraine. A human rights assessment mission would
recommend measures to deal with serious violations of
human rights allegedly committed during the crisis. Its
findings would be presented in a report and would help
advance national reconciliation in Ukraine.

Presidential elections will be a crucial moment in
the current transition period. We expect the Ukrainian
authorities to issue an early invitation for an ODIHR
election observation mission. In view of the rapidly
changing developments, we are also ready to review
and further specify the activities of the OSCE project
coordinator's office in Kiev.

We are currently witnessing aphase ofde-escalation
in Ukraine. It is essential to support a fair and inclusive
process of transition that does not marginalize any part
of Ukraine or any community. Ukraine deserves full
international attention and support. I am convinced that
the OSCE has the necessary tools to assist Ukraine in
this difficult phase.
I will now turn to the priorities of the Swiss OSCE
chairmanship. As the Council can see on the outline
distributed this morning, we would like to contribute
three main objectives, that is, fostering security and
stability, improving people's lives and strengthening the
OSCE capacity to act. Those three objectives embody
three values - security, freedom and responsibility. For
each of those main objectives, we have defined three to
four priority areas. The Council will find information
on the priority areas in the fact sheets provided. I am
going to focus on some of them in this discussion with
my following comments.

With regard to our first objective of fostering
security and stability, I will limit myself to our
geographical priorities, namely, the Western Balkans
and the Southern Caucasus. I will also briefly mention
the situation in Transdniestria.

In the Western Balkans, we want to make progress
on regional cooperation and assist people to overcome
the difficulties of the past - the reconciliation. A
specific field of cooperation we wish to support
concerns the issue of missing persons. We also intend
to launch a process on migratory challenges, which
should lead to the development of a regional strategy
with the Regional Cooperation Council and in close
consultation with the European Union.

The violent recent protests in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the resignation of several political
leaders there have reminded us of the difficult political,
economic and social context in that country and the
prevailing risk of instability. Our mission on the ground
is working closely with the European Union Force and
the EU delegation to help improve the situation. The
OSCE field presence is ready to offer its good offices
and to facilitate dialogue in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It
is well positioned to do so, as it has managed to build
up trust over the years both with cantonal and federal
authorities and with representatives of civil society. My
Special Representative has called on the authorities to
engage in immediate dialogue with the citizens.
We will also contribute to normalizing the
situation in northern Kosovo. The OSCE is not only
organizing elections there, but it also aims to help
create a democratic environment, restore confidence
and encourage the political participation of minorities,
again in close cooperation with the European Union.

As for our second geographical priority, Switzerland
is looking for ways to build on its long-term involvement
in the Southern Caucasus to help resolve the protracted
conflicts in that region.

In Georgia, the OSCE is working closely with the
United Nations and the EU in the context of the Geneva
international discussions. The Swiss chairmanship
will support that format as much as possible. We stand
ready to revive discussions on an international presence
in Georgia if that is in line with what Georgia wants
and if all the parties involved demonstrate a degree
of openness and flexibility on the issue. The Geneva
discussions should move towards a real format for a
settlement of the crisis.

Concerning the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh,
the Swiss chairmanship will maintain and support the
established formats for conflict settlement, primarily
the Minsk Group, co-chaired by the United States,
Russia and France. The conflict deserves particular
attention at this stage, as tensions have been rising
lately with several violent incidents.

I also consider it important to draw the Council's
attention to the difficult situation in Transdniestria and
throughout Moldova. Alongside Russia and Ukraine,
the OSCE has been mandated to act as ajoint mediator
in the Transdniestrian settlement process since 1993.
There are indications that we may be entering a period
of growing tensions in the conflict. I ask all the parties
involved to act with caution and to refrain from making
unilateral moves. More than ever, it is essential that the
international community act in a coordinated manner.

Our second objective aims at improving people's
lives. It is important for the OSCE to act not only in
the interest of States but also of their citizens. All good
politics is in the service of the people, by the people
and for the people. That notion also lies behind our
leitmotiv for our chairmanship in 2014, which is to
create a security community for the benefit of everyone.

The Swiss chairmanship is convinced that
reinforcing cooperation between regional and global
organizations in promoting and protecting human rights,
democracy and the rule of law would significantly
increase the impact of our work. Regional organizations
need to play a leading role in implementing on the
ground the commitments undertaken in the context of
the United Nations.

That is precisely why we have decided to focus
our efforts on better implementation. International
instruments for human rights, democracy and the
rule of law, as well as conventions and political
commitments, can help improve people's lives only
if their implementation is accepted and promoted by
States at the national level. Organizations like the
United Nations and the OSCE should do everything
possible to support States in those efforts. Our focus
is therefore on implementing the current commitments
and not on developing new ones.

One particular aspect worth mentioning in that
regard is our focus on the prevention of torture. A
chairmanship event on the issue will bring together the
United Nations Special Rapporteur on torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degradeing treatment or punishment,
Mr. Juan E. Mendez, and experts from civil society
and other multilateral and national agencies involved
in torture prevention. There will also be a sequence
of regional workshops with a view to increasing the
involvement of civil society across the OSCE.

The Swiss chairmanship undertakes such initiatives
with a view to encouraging the implementation of
international commitments throughout the OSCE,
beginning with those contained in the basic documents,
namely, the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
and its Optional Protocol. The Optional Protocol, which
has not yet been ratified by all participating States, is
a fundamental instrument in combating torture in all
its forms.

Next is the topic of climate change and security. As
a consequence of climate change, the number of natural
disasters is increasing. Those disasters put the lives of
many individuals at risk. That is why we have decided
to make better prevention, mitigation and management
of natural disasters a priority of our chairmanship.
Promoting know-how and fostering cooperation on
such issues will help to improve the safety conditions
for people who live in the OSCE area and beyond.

We are working on that in close cooperation with
specialized United Nations agencies, such as the United
Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. By doing
so, we also seek to contribute to the World Conference
on Disaster Risk Reduction of March 2015, held in
Sendai, Japan. Moreover, we are committed to firmly
embedding the topic in the United Nations sustainable
development goals, also for 2015.

Within the field of combating transnational threats,
the fight against terrorism is a key concern. Kidnapping
for ransom is a major source of funding for terrorist
groups and organizations. They use those funds to
increase their operational capacity and to carry out
terrorist attacks. While they release upon payment,
they are in fact setting up new victims.

We should all find a common response to such
a challenge. That is why the Swiss chairmanship
welcomes resolution 2133 (2014), of 27 January. The
resolution invites Member States to continue holding
expert discussions within the United Nations and other
competent international or regional organizations.
Switzerland supports that line very clearly and the
OSCE will contribute to such discussions. Kidnapping
for ransom will be the subject of several OSCE debates,
notably within the Security Committee and at a
conference on counter-terrorism in Switzerland at the
end of April.

At that conference, we will also address the issue of
foreign fighters. Over the past few years, an increasing
number of citizens from OSCE participating States
have joined armed groups outside the OSCE area and
have participated in violent conflicts. Syria is just one
particularly prominent example with many such foreign
fighters. There are also other examples, such as the
Horn of Africa.

Once those people return, they often stay in
touch with extremists and terrorists, which means
a heightened risk of terrorist attacks for their home
countries. We therefore need to discuss how we can
prevent such people from being recruited and departing
to those conflict areas. But we also need to reflect on
how to reintegrate returnees from such conflicts into
our societies.

Concerning our third and last main objective of
strengthening the OSCE's capacity to act, I wish to draw
the Council's attention to the OSCE's current reform
process, called "Helsinki+40". The idea behind the
process is to adapt the OSCE to the changing security
needs, to address governance issues and to redefine
the organization's approaches. The United Nations
underwent a similar process in 2005, which resulted in
the adoption of the World Summit Outcome document.
As for the Helsinki+40 process, we are attempting to
get a clear idea of where the OSCE is heading by 2015,
40 years after the signing of the Helsinki Final Act.

Within the framework of that reform process, we
seek to strengthen the OSCE's mediation capacities.
During our Swiss chairmanship, we would like to
put Switzerland's particular expertise in the field
of mediation to the benefit of the organization. Our
goal is to create a unit within the OSCE that is highly
specialized in mediation and dialogue facilitation. It
is absolutely essential for an organization that must
be able to build bridges in all situations, particularly
between the East and the West.

The initial results are encouraging. We would like
to thank the United Nations, more specifically the
Mediation Support Unit, for sharing its knowledge,
for participating in an expert exchange and for
co-organizing a training session.

In that context, I welcome the recent establishment
of a United Nations-OSCE mediation partnership
framework between our Conflict Prevention Centre
and the United Nations Policy and Mediation Division.
I hope that the joint framework will lead to numerous
concrete activities in the field of mediation.

Lastly, we would also like to enhance exchanges
with representatives of civil society during our
chairmanship. In particular, we would like to give
young people a voice. We are organizing a model
OSCE, where youth ambassadors from all participating
States will jointly develop a youth action plan similar
to the Global Model United Nations and the United
Nations System-wide Action Plan on Youth. They
have already started their work, in mid-January in
Vienna. We strongly hope that their plan will inspire
the OSCE Ministerial Council to adopt a youth action
plan of its own and to provide young people with an
institutionalized role within the OSCE.

I have highlighted numerous opportunities for
closer cooperation between the United Nations and the
OSCE. We are eager to intensify the dialogue between
our organizations. My hope is that we will succeed
in translating many ideas for further cooperation into
successful projects.

