Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to thank Mr. Jack Lang for the report
(S/2011/30) he introduced to us and to express
appreciation for the remarks made by Mr. Mathias and
the Ambassador of Somalia.

The outlook presented, in particular the increase
in pirate attacks, their sophistication and the longer
time for which hostages are being held, is of great
concern. Piracy is another of the harmful consequences
of precarious economic conditions and institutional
weakness. It is urgent to adopt a new approach that
includes strengthening the rule of law and building
institutions that ensure the governability and the social
and economic development of Somalia.

The assistance provided by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, in coordination with the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
continues to be of great importance. A lasting
commitment to assistance and training in strengthening
the legal, penal and prison systems, as well as the
provision of logistical infrastructure and information
technology, can encourage more countries of the region
to help with the trial and imprisonment of pirates, as
Kenya and Seychelles are doing.

The critical situation and limited capacity of the
Transitional Federal Government to intercept pirates
and bring them to justice, to patrol and to provide
security in the waters off its coasts require the adoption
of concrete measures to facilitate the trial and
imprisonment of pirates, in accordance with applicable
international law. The picture of impunity painted by
Mr. Lang is regrettable. In that regard, curbing arms
trafficking through the Gulf of Aden and the imposition
of selective sanctions against the most important
leaders and those who protect them would contribute
significantly to international counter-piracy efforts.

The Monitoring Group for Somalia underscores
that, while the volume of arms transfers to Somalia
remains consistent and is small-scale, their effect is
devastating in the context of a continuing armed
conflict, the absence of an effective central authority
and a worsening humanitarian crisis. The Group
stresses that the increased piracy is also due in part to
the lack of implementation of the arms embargo. In
accordance with resolution 1844 (2008), sanctions
should be extended to those who obstruct the delivery,
access or distribution of humanitarian assistance in
Somalia.

Colombia stresses the primacy of the
jurisdictional and correctional components of any
international strategy to combat piracy. We reiterate
that the primary responsibility in the fight against
piracy and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia lies
with the Transitional Federal Government. In that
regard, we welcome the proposal to reform the penal
and procedural legal framework to include provisions
that enable the investigation and prosecution of pirates.

Piracy has become one of Somalia's most
lucrative economic activities, and its perpetrators use
part of the ransoms to improve their arsenals and to
make their operations more efficient. While we seek to
remove the impunity enjoyed by the offenders, it is
necessary to develop economic alternatives for the
population and to ensure that society sees that crime as
an activity that limits its development options.

Mr. Lang's report proposes encouraging unskilled
labour-intensive activities, such as fishing, port
operations and livestock exports. In the long term, such
investments, which provide lasting results by
preventing the population's growing dependency on the
criminal industry developed through piracy, are less
costly to the international community.

We are convinced that the United Nations should
lead the international response to this growing problem
and that a stable and lasting solution requires a
comprehensive approach to the stabilization and
strengthening of the State in Somalia. Mr. Lang's call
for urgent action merits our full consideration.

