Mr. Toure (Mali) (spoke in French): I, too, wish
to join previous speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-
General Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, for the very full
update about the activities of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

Despite the complex and many difficulties facing
UNMIK in implementing Council resolution 1244
(1999), we must recognize that outstanding progress
has been made in establishing democratic and multi-
ethnic institutions in Kosovo. My statement will cover
a number of main points.

Regarding the political situation, on 26 July, my
delegation expressed firm support for Mr. Haekkerup
and the whole UNMIK team for having promulgated
the Constitutional Framework for provisional self-
government in Kosovo and for having announced the
date of elections. On that same day, we said we agreed
that the Constitutional Framework and the
announcement of the date of elections were definitely
decisive steps towards a democratic and multi-ethnic
Kosovo. Today, we note with great interest that notable
progress has been made in the preparations for the
elections to be held on 17 November.

Because those elections are an essential
framework to combat intransigent extremism and
ethnic intolerance, my delegation encourages all the
people of Kosovo to participate in them in large
numbers. We believe that the unreserved participation
of all communities is crucial to the success of the
elections. That is why my delegation will give
unstinting support to UNMIK initiatives to draw up
inclusive electoral rolls conducive to the free
participation of all ethnic groups in the electoral
process.
Participation by all communities, in particular by
the Serbian minority, is a major concern for my
delegation. Efforts taken by UNMIK, the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and the international community to encourage
Serb political figures to join the ongoing democratic
process in Kosovo are to be welcomed and encouraged.
We welcome the positive attitude adopted by Belgrade
towards the registration of voters for the upcoming
elections, particularly the registration of Serbs. In order
to encourage this process, adequate security measures
should be taken to encourage all refugees, in particular,
those from the Serb minority, to return home and
participate actively in the elections, and to build a
multi-ethnic democratic society in Kosovo.

Turning to the Constitutional Framework, it
should be stressed that its implementation is of crucial
importance to my delegation, because it will enable the
people of Kosovo to administer their daily lives by
encouraging the moderates to advance the political
process, while marginalizing the extremists. That is
why my delegation reiterates its appeal to all of the
inhabitants of Kosovo to participate actively in the
structures that have been set in place and in the future
Government of the territory.

Turning to security issues, my delegation remains
concerned at the persistence of ethnic and political
violence and of organized crime in Kosovo. The 21
August 2001 murder of five members of the Hajra
family near Glogovac was eloquent evidence of this
mindless violence. There is no doubt that this violence
against the minorities of the province is the greatest
obstacle to the establishment of peace, democracy and
prosperity by the international community in Kosovo.
We strongly condemn this mindless violence, which,
unfortunately, is also the biggest obstacle to the return
of refugees and displaced persons.

The establishment by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General of pillar I and the enactment
of laws that punish organized crime, illegal arms
possession and terrorism are useful measures, which
have considerably improved the security conditions in
Kosovo.

Because they have proved to be effective, my
delegation also supports the specific steps taken by
UNMIK and KFOR to monitor the administrative
borders of Kosovo, in particular the border with the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. All useful
steps should be taken to prevent Kosovo from
becoming a rear base for Albanian rebels of the
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA). We encourage the
Macedonian authorities and KLA leaders to comply
strictly with their commitments undertaken under the
auspices of the European Union. We hope that, after
the weapons are collected, the international community
will do everything possible to create the best possible
conditions for lasting peace to be established in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

Turning now to the economy, in order to put an
end to the disastrous state of the economy and the
resulting high unemployment in Kosovo, the
adjustment measures taken by UNMIK should be
encouraged and continued. Convinced that economic
development is a major element in bringing about
stabilization, my delegation recommends the
mobilization by the international community of
additional funding for economic recovery programmes
at the village level.

Furthermore, the question of missing persons and
detainees a which remains one of the main obstacles
to reconciliation- is a major concern of my
delegation. We support the United Nations Mission in
Kosovo and the parties concerned in implementing
decisions taken with regard to this fundamental
question.

Finally, my delegation, while recognizing the
magnitude of the job to be done by UNMIK, pays
tribute to Mr. Hans Haekkerup for his leadership of
UNMIK and to the entire local and international staff
of UNMIK and KFOR for their determination and
commitment to implement resolution 1244 (1999). The
international community should continue to support
UNMIK at this crucial stage of its commitment to
Kosovo in order to attain peace, security and
sustainable development.

