Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): At the outset, Iwould
like to say that we strongly condemn the abominable
terrorist attacks in Turkey over the weekend that killed
and injured many innocent civilians. We offer our
deepest condolences to the Government and people
of Turkey and the families of victims of that heinous
crime.

We are so pleased that the President of Togo, His
Excellency Mr. Faure Essozimna Gnassingbe, has done
us the honour of presiding over the Council's meeting
today. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
compelling statement for action in Africa to fight
terrorism. We thank the Deputy Prime Minister of
Luxembourg, His Excellency Mr. Jean Asselborn; the
Foreign Minister of Morocco, His Excellency Mr. Saad-
Eddine El Othmani; and Vice Minister Kim Kyou-hyun
of the Republic of Korea and Deputy Minister Eduardo
Zuain Argentina for attending this debate. We thank
Togo for the terse and incisive concept note (S/2013/264, annex), which gives us a succinct overview of the rising
threat of terrorism in Africa.

Terrorism is a global threat that knows no
geographical boundaries. Africa is the new frontier
for international terrorism and rightly deserves the
enhanced attention of the international community.

Pakistan continues to be a major victim of the
scourge of terrorism. We therefore fully appreciate and
share the concerns and pain of our African brothers and
sisters over the devastation caused by terrorism on the
continent.

You, Mr. President, have expressed a genuine
apprehension that Africa runs the risk of becoming the
epicentre ofterrorism. We also agree with your analysis
outlining seven broad trends. First, terrorist groups
are hampering the United Nations and African Union
peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions. Second, the
terrorist threat in Africa conflates political, religious
and ideological extremism with organized crime.
Third, historical, cultural and political differences and
territorial disputes are hampering the efforts to fight
terrorism. Fourth, counter-terrorist activities take
precious resources away from economic development
and efforts to consolidate the rule of law and democracy.
Fifth, as a result of terrorist activities, many countries
and regions in Africa run the risk of becoming more
destabilized and disintegrated.Sixth, Africa may
become a ground for terrorist recruitment, training
and funding. Seventh, terrorists may gain control of
strategic natural resources such as oil, uranium and
diamonds in Africa.

In Somalia Al-Shabaab, in Nigeria Boko Haram, in
Mali Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, the Movement
for Unity and Jihad in Western Africa and Ansar Dine,
and in the Great Lakes Region the Lord's Resistance
Army have targeted Governments and civilians,
committed transnational crimes and thwarted national,
regional and international efforts to restore peace and
stability in those regions. In the Sahel, the toxic mix
of those activities is undermining security, governance
and the rule of law.

Typically, such terrorist groups take control of a
sizable portion of a country to use it as a launching
pad for their activities in other countries. They use
asymmetric attacks to terrorize populations and
destabilize Governments. Those groups are developing
linkages with one another, thus creating an arc of
instability stretching from the Horn ofAfrica to Central
Africa and the Atlantic Ocean.

The causes of terrorism in various parts of Africa
vary. Terrorist groups tend to exploit local grievances.
However, there are certain common factors that create
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism.
Those include poverty, long unresolved disputes and
conflicts, deprivation, marginalization, exclusion
and a lack of economic options. Africa's youth bulge,
which constitutes some 60 per cent of the continent's
population of 1 billion, must be harnessed properly by
providing them with economic opportunities to thwart
the lure of crime.

The Security Council and the United Nations
as a whole have already done impressive work by
developing the legal and normative framework for
countering terrorism and by creating mechanisms for
implementation. We welcome the increased focus by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee on the Sahel region.

African countries have demonstrated commitment
to combatting terrorism by adopting legal instruments,
investing in research and allocating funds out of their
scarce resources.

However, those efforts fall far short of the threat
posed by terrorism. The capacities of the countries
affected by the menace remain woefully inadequate if
they are to address it at the structural and operational
levels. It is apparent that terrorism will not be
defeated by law enforcement measures, or intelligence
operations, or military and security strategies alone.
What is therefore required is a comprehensive approach
that addresses all aspects of the crisis.

In our view, the strategy to address terrorism
in Africa should include the following six elements.
First, it should focus on capacity-building for the
criminal justice systems at the regional, subregional
and national levels. Priority must be accorded to
strengthening border controls and the sharing of
information. Secondly, regional and subregional
cooperation must be strengthened. Thirdly, the United
Nations and the African Union should develop an early-
warning mechanism as a preventive measure to counter
terrorism. In that respect, distinct competencies can
be built into United Nations field missions. Fourthly,
as security and development are interrelated, creating
educational and economic opportunities, in particular
for young people, should be part of the broader agenda
for the international community's involvement with
Africa. Fifthly, the option for dialogue with those
amenable to renouncing violence and willing to cut
off links with terrorist organizations must remain on
the table. That would help to promote reconciliation
and bridge differences. Pakistan's comprehensive
approach to terrorism is also based on three D's, that
is, deterrence, development and dialogue. Sixthly,
emphasis must be laid on countering the financing
of terrorism. In Africa's context, that would include
the proceeds of kidnapping for ransom, illicit drug
trafficking and piracy.

As Africa tries to defeat terrorism, there is a need to
intensify efforts to resolve long-festering conflicts and
crises that spawn terrorism. Terrorism and extremism
should not be associated with any religion, race, value
system or society. Combatting terrorism requires
resolute efforts by the international community in
a cooperative framework. Pakistan will continue to
contribute to that endeavour.

Finally, we endorse the Council's presidential
statement adopted today on combatting terrorism in
Africa (S/PRST/2013/5).

