Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honore, for presenting
the latest report (S/2014/162) of the Secretary-General
on the work of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

There have been many signs of stabilization in
Haiti lately. Despite the civil unrest and the further
exacerbation of tensions between the legislative and
executive branches of Government late last year,
the leadership of the country and the main political
forces appear to have reached significant agreements
in normalizing the political process. As a result of the
inter-Haitian dialogue, it has been possible not only
make those positive developments more sustainable,
but also to move towards resolving the most acute issue,
namely, the organization of elections, which we hope
will take place in October. The successful holding of
elections will be very important for stabilizing ofpublic
institutions and creating conditions that are favourable
to the socioeconomic development of the country.

There has also been progress in many other key
areas. The security situation remains relatively calm
and the level of crime has been falling. There are also
positive trends in the humanitarian sphere, although
much remains to be done in terms of resolving the
situation of internally displaced persons, ensuring food
security and combating cholera. In that regard, we note
the very positive efforts of the Haitian Government,
including in coordinating donor assistance and the
assistance provided through United Nations funds and
programmes.

We also take note of the Secretary-General's data
on the increased professionalism and manpower of the
Haitian National Police. A significant contribution was
made by the United Nations Mission, for which police
training is one of the key components of its mandate.
We consider that MINUSTAH should continue to
provide assistance to Haiti in developing its law
enforcement bodies and in strengthening law and
order so that ultimately the country's security is being
ensured by its own national police forces. However, it is
also important for peacekeepers to provide operational
support, if necessary, until the operation is completed.

We note with satisfaction the efforts of the Mission
in other areas provided for under the mandate. It is
hard to underestimate the long-standing contribution of
the Mission in stabilizing the situation. An important
role in stabilizing the country has also been played by
regional integration bodies.

Overall, we share the assessment of the Secretary-
General on the need to develop a holistic vision
for MINUSTAH for the period after 2016. At the
same time, the breadth of the various options for
reconfiguration - from the full and practical retention
of the peacekeeping mission in its form under the
current mandate to its full withdrawal - clearly points
to the fact that we should discuss concrete options very
carefully. Given the specific situation, it is important
to be guided not only by an in-depth analysis of the
situation this year, but also by the degree to which
sustainable trends continue. It is also important to
understand the extent to which it will be necessary to
retain a significant military contingent. One important
factor will be the pace at which responsibility for all
aspects of stabilization and development is transferred
to local authorities. Of particular importance will be
their view on the most preferred forms of cooperation
with the United Nations after 2016.

For the time being, the Government of the country
and the international community, led by the United
Nations, have a broad range ofcomplex issues to address,
a lead role in which should be played by the Haitian
Government. It is the Government that is responsible
for the effective use of the assistance provided by the
international community and should play a very active
role in coordinating that assistance.

