Mr. Kabba (Sierra Leone): I am honoured to address the Security Council at this debate on peace and security in Africa: countering terrorism and extremism in Africa. At the outset, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March and for hosting this very important debate. Let me also thank Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United Nations, and Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye for the insightful overarching framework that they provided earlier in order for us to understand the situation in Africa. The scourge of terrorism and violent extremism is a grave challenge to peace and security not only for Africa but also for the wider international community. Terrorism and violent extremism have jointly undermined Africa's development prospects, with shocking humanitarian consequences and a massive loss of lives across the continent. Terrorism and violent extremism, in all their facets, are a threat to international peace and security. Sierra Leone therefore appreciates the convening of this debate, which provides the opportunity to put forward multidimensional approaches and solutions to combating terrorism and violent extremism in Africa. While governance and economic challenges and marginalization from political processes have been some of the root causes of terrorism and violent extremism across much of Africa, there is a need to focus onprevention as a way to address both the proximate and the remote causes of terrorism. Clearly, solutions to this threat must therefore be expressly diagnosed and the root causes targeted and addressed. A comprehensive and inclusive approach to preventing and countering terrorism and extremism should involve adopting tenets of good governance, including the promotion and protection of human rights, implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals and climate adaptation and resilience measures as a way of addressing or preventing terrorism and extremism. Many concrete resolutions have been adopted on the prevention and eradication of terrorism and violent extremism across Africa, particularly in the Sahel region and other affected areas. Africa has demonstrated courage and resilience in dealing with the challenges of terrorism and extremism so as to sustain peace and security across the continent. However, given the transnational nature of terrorism, multilateral cooperation with Africa must be enhanced and the United Nations should step up its support to Member States to strengthen national capabilities and capacities against terrorism and extremism. There is therefore a need for well-equipped and well-resourced Members of the United Nations to provide both the technical and financial support to enable Africa to strengthen its counter-terrorism efforts, as well as for the international community to offer its full support in the implementation of mechanisms adopted for the prevention and eradication of terrorism and extremism in Africa. Sierra Leone has taken a number of measures to guarantee the full implementation of the counter- terrorism strategy of the Economic Community of West African States. These measures include but are not limited to the development of a communication strategy that involves radio and television discussion programmes and press conferences to counter radicalization. In addition, the Government of Sierra Leone, in February 2020, organized a national workshop for religious leaders from across the country in a bid to strengthen collaboration between the Government and the religious community. In support of the Government's efforts, some of those religious leaders have also embarked on a nationwide tour, delivering sermons on topics delinking Islam from terrorism and underscoring the Islamic precept of a religion of peace. Furthermore, counter- terrorism training for security personnel is ongoing, and anti-terrorism legislation has been drafted and validated and is currently with the Office of the Attorney General and Minister of Justice for consideration ahead of its promulgation into law. Moreover, in June last year the Anti-Money-Laundering and Combating of Financing of Terrorism law was amended and strengthened to ensure clarity on issues related to the financing of terrorism activities. The Government is also strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of Youth Affairs to provide training and job opportunities for young people in order to counter the threat of terrorism. Countering terrorism and extremism, especially within the context of peace and security in Africa, should also seek to address the human rights of victims of terrorism. Addressing and promoting the needs of victims of terrorism within the context of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is not only reassuring to victims of terrorism but also represents a significant measure in contributing to peace and security in Africa.
