Ms. Power (United States of America): Today's
resolution 2166 (2014) calls for a full, through and
independent investigation into the horrific downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7. When 298 civilians
are killed, we agree that we must stop at nothing to
determine who is responsible and to bring them to
justice. As we take that step, we are joined by the Dutch
and Australian Ministers whose countries suffered an
immense and heart-wrenching loss on Thursday, one
that they are still grappling with, together with nine
other countries from where the victims came. We
extend our deepest condolences to those countries, the
families of the victims they represent and all of the
people who lost loved ones on that plane. Their presence
here today, along with representatives of the dozens of
other countries struck by this heinous crime, gives even
greater urgency to our calls for the dignified return of
the victims and to our pursuit of truth and justice.

As we reflect on the immeasurable loss suffered by
those families around the world, we are not only outraged
at the attack itself, we are horrified and enraged by what
has happened since - by the clear intention of some
to obstruct an investigation into how the passengers
and crew died. Even after adopting today's resolution,
it is worth asking if there really is consensus that the
crime merits an immediate and impartial investigation.
Why did we still feel the need to meet today in order to
demand one? We came together because not everyone
has been supporting a real investigation into the crime.
If they were, international experts would have had
unimpeded access to the crime scene and all of the
wreckage would have been left where it had fallen.

That has not happened. Instead, armed thugs have
walked around the site with little regard for where they
step. We have literally heard the sound of debris, all of it
evidence that needs to be carefully preserved, crunching
beneath their feet. We have seen separatists moving
human remains around and carting away evidence from
the site. All around the world this weekend, people of
all cultures and faiths had similar reactions to seeing
the footage of the separatists damaging the site. "Stop,
those are people! Those are peoples' lives!", we all said.

The passengers aboard Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-l7 had nothing to do with the conflict in eastern
Ukraine. They were families heading out on vacation,
students returning home from abroad, researchers
trying to eradicate a deadly disease. Those who were
killed deserve to be treated with dignity. Their families
are crying out, as we have heard, for closure.

We condemn the actions of the separatists who
control the site. Indeed, almost everyone has condemned
that grotesque behaviour. But there is one party from
which we have heard too little condemnation, and that
is Russia. Russia has been outspoken on other matters.
Russian officials have publicly insinuated that Ukraine
was behind the crash. On Friday, Russia blamed
Ukrainian air traffic controllers for the attack, rather
than condemning the criminals who shot down the
plane. Since then, Russia has begun to blame Ukraine
for the attack itself, although the missile came from
separatist territory that Russia knows full well Ukraine
has not yet reclaimed. But if Russia genuinely believed
that Ukraine was involved in the shooting down of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7, surely President Putin
would have told the separatists, many of whose leaders
are from Russia, to guard the evidence at all costs and
to maintain a forensically pure hermetically sealed
crime scene.

We welcome Russia's support for today's resolution.
But no resolution would have been necessary had Russia
used its leverage with the separatists on Thursday and
gotten them to lay down their arms and leave the site to
international experts - or on Friday, or on Saturday,
or even yesterday. It turns out that only this morning,
coincidentally the very morning Security Council was
meeting to discuss the investigation, did President
Putin finally issue a public call to ensure the security of
international experts. However - and this is critically
important - President Putin still did not direct his call
to the separatists, who have threatened those experts
and over whom he has enormous influence.

President Poroshenko, by contrast, has consistently
done everything within his power since the crash to
allow capable investigators full and unfettered access
to the crime scene. He has been willing to involve
the International Civil Aviation Organization, the
Netherlands and other international players, and has
hailed their independence. Russia's muteness over the
dark days between Thursday and today sent a message
to the illegal armed groups it supports: "We have
your backs". That is the message Russia has sent by
providing separatists with heavy weapons, by never
publicly calling on them to lay down those weapons
and by massing thousands of troops at the Ukrainian
border.

Today we have taken a step towards combating
impunity. The resolution we have adopted provides
clear directions to safeguard and uncover the facts,
however inconvenient those facts may prove to be. We
have adopted a resolution today, but we are not naive.
If Russia is not part of the solution, it will continue to
be part of the problem. For the past six months, Russia
has seized Ukrainian territory and ignored the repeated
requests of the international community to de-escalate,
all in an effort to preserve influence in Ukraine, a
country that has long made clear its desire to maintain
constructive ties with Moscow. Russia must recognize
that no move on the geopolitical chessboard and no
zero-sum game with the West can offset the pain being
felt by the passengers' families worldwide, or the pain
that Ukrainians are experiencing daily as a result of
this needless conflict.

As we meet, we are seeing initial signs of the
separatists' allowing greater access to crash site.
Today, three Dutch investigators accessed the site.
The separatists are attempting to hold that up as proof
of their openness and good faith. But let us be clear:
this is an extremely complex and time-sensitive crime
scene. In that context, a spigot approach, letting in a
few investigators here and a few more there, simply
will not cut it. Access must be immediate and it must be
full, period. A spigot, or a stage-managed, approach is
a form of obstruction.

Russia can help change that. Russia can
unequivocally condemn the separatists' inhumane
treatment of the bodies at the site and use its influence
to ensure they stop tampering with evidence. Russia
can demand that the separatists immediately adopt a
ceasefire in the area around the crash site, as Ukraine
has done. Russia can press the illegal groups to sit down
with President Poroshenko, who has proposed a serious
and reasonable peace plan. Instead of continuing to
provide weapons to the separatists, Russia could take
back all of the surface-to-air missiles, tanks and other
heavy weaponry that it has delivered to them. Those
would not only be important steps towards achieving
accountability and achieving justice for the victims,
they would constitute a long overdue sign that Russia is
willing to take steps to end this deadly crisis.

