Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
take the floor on behalf of the 15 States members of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). Allow me to begin by conveying my
country's congratulations to Ms. Hina Rabbani Khar,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, and her
delegation on Pakistan's assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January. I
thank her most sincerely appreciation for her choice of
theme for today's debate, which unfortunately spares
no region of the world.

We honour the memory of the victims of the bloody
terrorist attacks in the Pakistan province of Balochistan
and in the Swat Valley, which recently led to the deaths
of at least 100 people in the region.

The scourge of terrorism is present on the African
continent, with the Al-Shabaab network in East Africa,
Boko Haram in Nigeria, and a collection of other
terrorist groups associated with Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb that are most active in West Africa, the Sahel
and beyond, as stressed during the ministerial meeting
of the Security Council on the situation in the Sahel,
organized by the Moroccan presidency of the Security
Council on 10 December 2012 (see S/PV.6882).

It is clear that identifying a global approach to
fighting terrorism is the foremost concern of the States
members of ECOWAS. Indeed, since the beginning of
the crisis in Mali about a year ago, ECOWAS - through
President Alassane Ouattara of the Republic of Cote
d'Ivoire and Acting Chair of the Conference of Heads
of States and Government of ECOWAS - has called
the attention of the international community to the
threat to regional and international peace and security
posed by the presence of terrorist groups in Mali.

In that regard, we welcome the joint vision and
action shared by the African Union, ECOWAS and
the Security Council with regard to Mali, leading to
the adoption of resolution 2085 (2012), authorizing the
deployment of the African-led International Support
Mission to Mali (AFISMA). Far more than in the past,
we are all seeing on the ground the manifest effort
of terrorists to make Mali a safe haven for terrorist
groups and organized crime by using that country and
its vast territory to recruit and train terrorists, launch
operations across the world and then withdraw in total
impunity. The most recent terrorist offensive launched
last week in southern Mali confirmed the concerns
that have led the African Union and ECOWAS to stress
continuously to the Security Council the urgent need
to adopt a resolution authorizing the deployment of an
international force to Mali.

Recent events clearly testify to the relevance
of resolution 2085 (2012), adopted by the Security
Council on 20 December 2012. The attacks carried
out by terrorist groups in southern Mali clearly pose
a direct, genuine and immediate threat to regional and
international peace and security. First and foremost,
they represent an imminent danger to the lives of
civilians and the territorial integrity of Mali.

In view of the situation on the ground,
ECOWAS - in its communique of 11 January signed by
President Alassane Ouattara of C6te d'Ivoire as Acting
Chairman of the Conference of the Heads of States and
Governments of ECOWAS - thanked the members of
the Security Council and the French Government for
their swift response aimed at stabilizing the military
situation in Mali and maintaining the territorial
integrity of that State Member of the United Nations.

Furthermore, the ECOWAS Committee of Chiefs
of Defence Staff are meeting today and tomorrow in
Bamako with a view to finalizing an evaluation of the
situation and developing a plan of operations for the
effective deployment of AFISMA with troops from
Nigeria, Senegal, the Niger, Burkina Faso, Benin and
Togo. In the light of ongoing events in Mali, a summit
meeting of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government is
scheduled to take place in Abidjan on 19 January.

ECOWAS considers France's intervention in Mali
to be absolutely legitimate as, on the one hand, it
responds to the explicit request for assistance expressed
by the legitimate Malian authorities and, on the other,
it is aligned with resolution 2085 (2012) of the Council.
We offer our sincere thanks to France for its leadership
in managing the Malian crisis, as well as to the United
Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Germany,
Belgium and Denmark for their multifaceted support to
the operations under way in Mali.

ECOWAS condemns terrorism in all forms and
manifestations, irrespective of the motivation, and
believes that nothing can justify an act of terrorism.
ECOWAS backs the joint activities of the international
community in that context and fully supports the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
adopted in September 2006. Moreover, ECOWAS urges
its member States to adopt the Strategy's Plan of Action
based on the four pillars of addressing the conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism; preventing and
combating terrorism; building States' capacity to
prevent and combat terrorism and strengthening the
role of the United Nations system in that regard; and
ensuring respect for human rights in the fight against
terrorism.

Many members of ECOWAS have established legal
frameworks to combat terrorism, including the adoption
by some States of specific legislation on terrorism, as
recommended by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. Indeed, many international tools adopted
in the fight against terrorism have also been ratified by
ECOWAS member States in the context of their efforts
to adopt specific measures to prevent, identify and
combat threats of terrorism. Such instruments include
the 1992 ECOWAS Convention on Mutual Assistance
in Criminal Matters; the 1994 ECOWAS Convention
on Extradition; the Intergovernmental Action Group
against Money Laundering in West Africa, established
1999; the 2002 regulation of the West African
Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) on the
freezing of assets and other financial resources under
the framework to combat the funding of terrorism; the
2006 ECOWAS Convention on Small Arms and Light
Weapons; the 2007 directive on combating the financing
of terrorism by member States of the WAEMU; and the
2009 Regional Action Plan to Address the Growing
Problem of Illicit Drug Trafficking, Organized Crime
and Drug Abuse in West Africa.

As has been reiterated many times, no State can
combat terrorism alone. That is why our approach must
be global. In particular, strengthened coordinated action
is necessary nationally, regionally and internationally.
In that respect, the support of the international
community is crucial, particularly through an effective
capacity-building programme to assist our States in
their resolve to implement the necessary inclusive and
integrated regional and global strategy to effectively
respond to the threat of terrorism.

In conclusion, ECOWAS cherishes the hope that
this important debate on terrorism will contribute
to further galvanizing the international community
around the need for the close and genuine cooperation
of all towards putting a definitive end to a scourge that
affects all States and undermines the foundations for
development necessary to ensure the peace, security
and stability of our States.

