Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to thank Ambassador Ne'stor Osorio, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), for his briefing today.

South Africa has maintained its commitment to
the mutually reinforcing relationship among
disarmament, non-proliferation and the right of States
to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. We
acknowledge that the important work of this
Committee lies within the larger context of the
commitments made by States to adhere to the grand
bargain of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT): the promise to develop
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes only by
working towards the complete elimination of nuclear
weapons.

South Africa's approach to the implementation of
safeguards is informed by our principled position on
the total elimination of all nuclear weapons and, in
reaching this goal, on ensuring their non-proliferation,
both horizontal and vertical. Furthermore, the
inalienable right to use aspects of the atom for peaceful
purposes requires from us to build confidence with the
5
international community in the peaceful nature of such
activities.

We note that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has transmitted the report by the
Director General on the implementation of its
safeguards agreement and the relevant Council
resolutions to the President of the Security Council
(see S/201l/695).

Being seized with this issue from 2003, the Board
of Governors of the IAEA has emphasized its resolve
to work for a diplomatic solution and the importance of
Iran extending to the Agency the necessary and
required cooperation to resolve the questions
surrounding its nuclear programme. These relate in
particular to the Agency's efforts to provide credible
assurances about the absence of undeclared nuclear
material and activities in the Islamic Republic of Iran.
While in the past such cooperation has indeed resolved
many of these questions, a renewed dedication by Iran
to intensify its cooperation with the Agency, without
preconditions, is of utmost importance.

The sanctions regime against the Islamic
Republic of Iran is broad, encompassing areas such as
export control, customs, transportation and financing.
Cooperation between the Islamic Republic of Iran and
the IAEA is indispensable in contributing to building
the required confidence in the exclusively peaceful
nature of Iran's nuclear programme and thereby
assisting the Agency to Clarify nuclear activities having
a possible military dimension.

In that regard, South Africa welcomes the
commitments expressed by Iran in a letter dated
30 October 2011, in which it extended to the Deputy
Director General for Safeguards an invitation to visit
Iran and to remove ambiguities, if any, regarding its
nuclear programme. South Africa considers it vital for
the Islamic Republic of Iran to follow through on this
commitment and for the Agency to seize this
opportunity and enhance its engagement with Iran.

Iran's implementation of the provisions of the
relevant Council resolutions would also be a step in the
right direction. The suspension of all enrichment-
related and processing activities, a legally binding
requirement in terms of resolution 1737 (2006), would
be crucial in building confidence.

In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms its vision
of a world free of nuclear weapons, as well as our

respect for the right of all States to use the atom for
peaceful purposes only. In that regard, we remain ready
to work tirelessly with the IAEA until full confidence
has been re-established in the peaceful nature of Iran's
nuclear programme.

