Mr. Powles (New Zealand): Exactly one week after
the Secretary-General presented his report of 8 September
1999 on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, the
Security Council authorized the deployment of a
multinational force to East Timor to restore peace and
security. In the days leading up to this decision the media
had conveyed shocking images of violence against civilians
and their large-scale dislocation by the militias in a pattern
of reprisal following the United Nations-conducted popular
consultation. Members of the Council, under the leadership
of Ambassador Andjaba of Namibia, travelled to Dili to
assess the situation at first hand and to report to the
Council.

The speed and effectiveness of the Council's response
in the case of East Timor was exemplary and sets a
benchmark for the future discharge by the Council of its
key role in combating the deliberate targeting of civilians.
New Zealand, for its part, along with many other countries
represented in this Chamber, contributed promptly to the
multinational force authorized by the Council and continues
to participate in the successor United Nations peacekeeping
operation through what is our largest deployment overseas
in nearly 50 years.

In the interval since the Secretary-General's report on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict we have also
been reminded of our failures. Last Friday we heard Mr.
Ingvar Carlsson, former Prime Minister of Sweden, brief
the Council on the findings of the Independent Inquiry into
the failure of the international community to prevent the
systematic slaughter of some 800,000 people in Rwanda in
1994. And the Secretary-General himself provided last
November his own report on the fall of Srebrenica.

We welcome the fact that the Council has taken the
initiative, through the establishment of its informal
Working Group, to take the matter of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict yet a stage further in
accordance with its responsibilities under the Charter, and
we strongly endorse action on today's draft resolution. By
this draft resolution the Council clearly indicates that it
intends to keep the question firmly at the fore of its
agenda.

When heads of State or Government gather here in
New York in early September for the Millennium
Summit, we believe the international community will be
presented with an unparalleled opportunity to make
further progress collectively. The Secretary-General's
millennium report offers valuable guidance on the
protection of the vulnerable. The Secretary-General notes
in particular the need to reassert the centrality of
international humanitarian and human rights law.

I think it is generally agreed that current
humanitarian law includes all the necessary principles and
basic rules to guide us. There is some further work to be
done in specific areas, but the fundamental principles are
well established and incontrovertible.

In the last few months the international norms have
been further developed in the child soldiers optional
protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Children are one of the most vulnerable groups in any
society. As the Secretary-General and others have noted,
they are often among the worst affected in a conflict
situation. They will also bear the scars of conflict into
their adult years, not just through injury and trauma, but
through lost opportunities to gain an education and to
grow up in normal social surroundings. This can lead to
the perpetuation of a culture of conflict. It is crucial that
special measures be taken to protect children from the
effects of armed conflict, and to prevent them from
participating.

The optional protocol's focus on the demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration of child soldiers
recognizes that, in tandem with legal safeguards, practical
action is required to protect children from the effects of
conflict. The recent appointment of child protection
advisers in United Nations peacekeeping missions in
Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is a welcome development in this regard.

As the Secretary-General has pointed out, the
problem of protection of civilians lies not so much in the

 

absence of law as in the refusal of belligerents throughout
the world to respect that law. The most urgent need is to
create a "climate of compliance" with international law. At
present the lack of effective enforcement mechanisms
means that an essential component is missing. We hope that
this will change in the near future with the establishment of
a permanent International Criminal Court.

The recent experience of the International Criminal
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda illustrates
the potential of the International Criminal Court. Over the
last year there have been a number of arrests and
convictions in both Tribunals. These confirm that
international criminal tribunals can and do work. However,
their importance goes beyond dealing with past events in
those particular countries. They serve notice that the
international community is serious in its resolve to bring
perpetrators of atrocities against civilians to justice and to
put an end to the climate of impunity. We look forward to
the outcome of the Indonesian Government's investigation
into Violations of human rights in East Timor and to the
holding of those responsible for such violations fully
accountable under the law.

New Zealand is firmly committed to ratification of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. It will
shortly introduce legislation to Parliament to implement
various obligations contained in the Statute, and New
Zealand hopes to be in a position to ratify the Statute
within the next few months, once that legislation has been
passed.
At the same time, my Government has decided to
create new offences of genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. There will be universal jurisdiction for
these offences which will allow the prosecution in a New
Zealand court of a person who is not a New Zealand
national and who did not commit the offence in New
Zealand. It is intended that these offences will come into
force on the passage of the legislation, which will mean
that New Zealand will be in a position to institute
prosecutions in its courts from an early date. This is
particularly important in the period before the International
Criminal Court comes into existence.

New Zealand urges other countries to accelerate their
ratification processes so that the International Criminal
Court can be established in the near future. This would
seem a most appropriate way to signal that the new
millennium is also the beginning of a new phase in
international criminal justice.

New Zealand also strongly supports the extension of
the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel to cover a broader range of
personnel and a greater variety of United Nations
missions. We saw the danger that some of those working
with the United Nations came under in East Timor.
Abduction and murder of humanitarian workers takes
place too regularly in arenas such as Chechnya. The
targeting of these dedicated people, who are often
working in extremely difficult circumstances to bring
relief to the civilian population, is cynical and brutal, and
we should do all in our power to have it stopped. We
look forward to the report of the Secretary-General, due
in May 2000, that will include recommendations
addressing the scope of legal protection under the
Convention. That report will set the tone for future debate
on the topic and act as a fresh stimulus towards concrete
action on expansion of the Convention's scope.

The violation of the rights and freedoms of internally
displaced persons is not necessarily separately covered in
international law. Nevertheless, such people are of course
covered by international human rights law. States have no
excuse for not following these principles and the legal
guidance based on them, contained in the Guiding
Principles on Internal Displacement.

Finally, the importance of the separation of
combatants and other armed elements from civilians in
refugee camps has been starkly demonstrated on
numerous occasions, including in the Great Lakes region
of Africa and in Timor. Safety and humanitarian relief
cannot be assured without it, and arrangements for
repatriation can be seriously hampered when militias exert
power over displaced people. Coupled with this is the
need to ensure access for civilian populations to sources
of humanitarian assistance. The diversion or withholding
of relief supplies as a means to political ends is contrary
to the principles of humanity and should attract
appropriate sanctions.

We are grateful for the opportunity to have spoken
on these important matters in the Security Council today,
and we look forward to the Council's continuing to carry
out its key leadership role.

