Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Uruguay wishes at the outset to sincerely
congratulate you, Madam President, and your team on
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September. On behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti, my delegation also wishes to
congratulate the delegation of the United States on
having taken the initiative to organize this timely
public debate on the situation in Haiti and the work
being done by the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). In particular, I wish to thank
Mr. William Clinton, United Nations Special Envoy for
Haiti; Mr. Hedi Annabi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General; and Mrs. Pierre-Louis, Prime
Minister of Haiti, for their participation in this debate.
I also thank the delegation of Brazil for having kindly
allowed me to make this statement on its behalf.

Before sharing with the Security Council a
number of opinions and observations of the Group of
Friends of Haiti regarding the issue before us, I should
like to reaffirm once again our Group's full
commitment to and support for the Haitian
Government and people in rebuilding the country,
consolidating peace and stability and promoting
recovery and sustainable development. As coordinator
of the Group of Friends of Haiti, I should like to
express our firm support for MINUSTAH and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
their efforts to improve the stability and governance of
Haiti.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on this subject, dated 1 September 2009 (S/2009/439),
emphasizes the progress made in the implementation of
the Mission's mandate in conformity with Security
Council resolution 1840 (2008) and previous Council
resolutions. The Group of Friends of Haiti welcomes
with satisfaction the progress made in four of the five
areas considered fundamental to consolidating the
stability of Haiti: political dialogue; the extension of
State authority, including border management; and the
strengthening of security, the rule of law and human
rights. We also recognize the strong commitment of a
group of Latin American countries that are pooling
their resources to assist in the training of the Haitian
National Police.

The Group of Friends of Haiti stresses the
growing political cooperation that is facilitating
progress in a number of areas, such as the recent
senatorial elections, the adoption of key legislation and
the establishment of an inclusive dialogue on various
fundamental issues facing the country, based on the
work carried out by a number of presidential
commissions.

The Group of Friends of Haiti expresses its
concern over the grave socio-economic situation,
which remains a direct threat to the country's stability.
As the Secretary-General's most recent report shows,
the daily living conditions of the majority of the
Haitian population are still characterized by hardship
and privation. Haiti has also continued to grapple with
food insecurity, extreme poverty and a fragile
humanitarian situation.

With regard to the development challenges that
Haiti continues to face, the Group of Friends of Haiti
wishes to emphasize the great importance of the
appointment of former United States President
Mr. William Clinton as Special Envoy for Haiti. Our
Group is convinced that the new Special Envoy will

help to advance the country's social and economic
recovery efforts by focusing attention on the
importance of new partnerships and efforts with the
private sector, civil society and donors, as well as on
the strengthening of local capacity.

The Group noted that the last visit undertaken by
former President Clinton and Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon to Haiti helped to identify better ways for
developing the country's economy, energy supply, food
security, private sector, ecology and health care.

The Group of Friends of Haiti shares the view of
the Secretary-General that there is a link between
development and stable security, since the current
levels of poverty, deprivation and suffering in the
country are clearly incompatible with its long-term
stability. It is therefore urgent that the Haitian
authorities and the international community work
closely together to facilitate the distribution of
humanitarian aid and recovery tasks and lay the
foundations of renewed private sector activity in the
interests of achieving the country's long-term
reconstruction and development.

The Group of Friends of Haiti has taken note of
the report of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group of the
Economic and Social Council (E/2009/105), in which it
recommends ways to explore the enhanced use of
MINUSTAH engineers for greater synergy between the
mandate of the Mission and the country's development
needs. The Group welcomes this idea and encourages
the Council to consider it.

Lastly, the Group of Friends of Haiti, highlights
and agrees with the recommendation made by the
Secretary-General in his most recent report on the need
to extend MINUSTAH'S mandate for an additional year
and to adjust its military and police components to
enable the Mission to operate effectively in the current
environment. In the next few days, the Group will
submit a new draft resolution for consideration by the
Security Council.

