The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Cote d'Ivoire, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the consideration of the item, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bailly (Cete d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council takes note that, as
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General
dated 14 October, the peace process has crossed a
critical milestone with the launching of the
identification and registration of voters
operations on 15 September. It also however
notes that the delays occurred since the launch of
the identification and voter registration processes
on 15 September have proven greater than
expected. It takes note that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General indicated
on the 27 October 2008 that, if the elections
scheduled for the 30 November 2008 were
delayed, they were likely to be delayed by several
months, due mainly to some logistical
difficulties. The Security Council expresses its
deep concern about a possible third consecutive
delay since the signature of the Ouagadougou
Political Agreement, which could put at risk the
entire Ivorian peace process.
"The Security Council commends the
Facilitator for convening a meeting of the
permanent consultative framework on the
10 November 2008, in order for the Ivorian
political actors to address all the main difficulties
of the electoral process, and in particular with a
view to finding an agreement on the new electoral
time frame. It urges all the Ivorian political actors
to cooperate fully with the Facilitator, with the
support of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and to demonstrate their
political determination to fulfil the commitments
taken in the Ouagadougou agreement and in the
framework of its follow-up mechanisms.

"The Security Council further urges to this
end the President of the Independent Electoral
Commission, which is in charge of the
organization of the elections, to share publicly
this new timeline, including in particular the full
rollout of the identification process and some
other stages such as the publication of the
provisional and final versions of the electoral list,
the fabrication and distribution of the identity and
voter's cards and the date of the presidential
election. It emphasizes that all political actors
must pay a particular attention to the
accumulating logistical delay.

"The Security Council urges the Ivorian
parties to take immediately and as a priority the
concrete steps necessary to complete the
identification and registration of voters
operations in a credible and transparent manner
before the end of January 2009. It expresses its
determination to bring its full support to a
credible electoral process in Cote d'Ivoire, on the
understanding that the presidential elections will
be organized before the end of spring 2009. The
Security Council recalls that all political parties
agreed to abide by the Code of Good Conduct for
elections they signed under the auspices of the
Secretary-General on the 23 April 2008.

"The Security Council recalls that any
threat to the electoral process in cote d'Ivoire
shall constitute a threat to the peace and national
reconciliation process and it reaffirms its
determination to impose, pursuant to resolutions
1572 (2004) and 1842 (2008), targeted measures
against any person designated by its sanction
Committee on C6te d'Ivoire to be responsible for
08-59333
these threats. The Security Council expresses its
willingness to review the sanctions regime at the
latest three months after the presidential
elections.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to keep it informed of the
evolution of the situation. It reaffirms its full
support to the efforts of his Special
Representative and his certification mandate,
including the explicit certification of the electoral
list. It expresses its intention to take the progress
08-59333
of the electoral process fully into consideration
when it will review the mandate of the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and
the French forces which support it, before
31 January 2009."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2008/42.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

