Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in French): I wish to thank Mr. Herve Ladsous, Mr. Yuri
Fedotov and Ambassador Tanin for their presentations.

I align myself with the statement to be made later
on by the observer of the European Union.

The NATO Summit that was just held this past
month in Chicago set a timetable for the development
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
as well as objectives for a professional, credible and
sustainable Afghan security force. It endorsed the
principle of creating a new NATO mission that will,
starting 2015, be mandated to provide training, advice
and assistance to the Afghan armed forces. I am pleased
that Mr. Evans, of the NATO International Secretariat,
will present his results to the Council today.
The regional process launched in Istanbul last
November has been boosted by the ministerial
meeting on 14 June in Kabul. At that time, France
stated its interest in participating in the development
of confidence-building measures aimed at the fight
against drugs and terrorism as well as natural disaster
mitigation. We are also ready to participate in a new
meeting on the margins of the General Assembly in
New York, if the Afghan authorities believe that will be
useful. Regional cooperation remains one of the keys
to Afghanistan's future and, as a result, a priority for
us all.

We thank Mr. Kubis for his commitment in
preparing the economic conference to be held on 8 July
in Tokyo. The adoption of five new national priority
programmes will help to advance the formulation of
Afghan priorities. We hope that the conference will
also define mutual commitments for the transformation
decade, in particular with respect to the need for the
Afghans to define a timetable and modalities for the
next national elections. We hope that an agreement can
be reached in establishing a cross-cutting anti-drug
trafficking mechanism, which is one of the main
challenges for Afghanistan, its neighbours and the
international community as a whole.

France's actions are based on the framework defined
by NATO in Lisbon and Chicago. Surobi and Kapisa,
where our troops are deployed, form part of the second
and third tranches of the transition process, which is
now a reality for 75 per cent of the Afghans.

We will progressively scale down our military
presence. Our combat mission will conclude at the end
of the year, leaving on the front line the third brigade of
the Afghan army, which has already shown its combat
capabilities.

We will continue to help train the Afghan police
and army as part of ISAF, until 2014. In addition, our
actions will be based on the Treaty of Friendship and
Cooperation signed by the President of France and
President Karzai in Paris on 27 January. The 2012-
2016 action plan that is part of that agreement will be
given substance by a significant increase in our civilian
engagement in the areas of health care, education,
agriculture, cultural exchange, mining resources
and infrastructure. Naturally, we are committed to
harmonizing such action with the priorities of the
Afghan Government.

In Chicago, the Secretary-General reaffirmed
that the United Nations would continue to support
the Afghan Government. The United Nations will
therefore play an important role in the context of the
transition. The United Nations sanctions regime must
continue to be used as a confidence-building measure
in intra-Afghan reconciliation, rewarding those who
have made the choice of peace and punishing those who
want to pursue the path of violence.

We will consider, in that respect, requests for
de-listing, listing and exemptions conveyed to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) by the Afghan Government. It is important,
however, for the Government to take ownership of that
instrument by proposing new entities for listing. The
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
will be increasingly at the heart of the efforts of the
international community as it develops and moves
towards a civilian-supported presence.

France endorses the three poles recently identified
by the Secretariat as being at the heart of the Mission's
work beyond 2014: political good offices; human rights,
particularly the rights of women; and consistency of
international aid. Proper cooperation with the funds
and programmes remains key in terms of electoral
reform, countering drug trafficking, supporting the
Afghan police, the reintegration of insurgents and aid to
refugees. On all these fronts, we are pleased to continue
working with the United Nations as the central actor for
the future of Afghanistan.

