Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing. I
thank my British colleague for keeping the Security
Council updated.

Last week, the Council met five times to discuss the
chemical weapons attack in Douma. Today we are here
yet again to talk about chemical weapons. This time it
is about a military-grade nerve agent used against two
people on British soil. In the constant push of meeting
after meeting here in this Chamber, it is easy to lose
track of what this means. We are rapidly confronting
a frightening new reality. If chemical weapons can
appear in a small English town, where might they
start appearing next? None of us will be immune from
this threat unless we immediately start rebuilding our
consensus against chemical weapons.

I will not engage in an argument over self-evident

facts. I will not trade accusations of shameful behaviour
with those who have no shame. I will not waste the
Security Council's time. I will only say this - the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
has released an independent report that confirmed the
United Kingdom's lab analysis of the toxic chemical
that was used in Salisbury. Three people were seriously
injured. Hundreds were exposed. This act was brazen
and in complete defiance of the international consensus
against the use of chemical weapons.

As we have stated previously, the United States
agrees with the United Kingdom's assessment that
Russia is responsible for the chemical weapons in
Salisbury. Whether it be through Russia's direct
act or the result of its irresponsibly losing control of
the agent, which could be worse, our support for our
British friends and colleagues is unwavering. Douma
and Salisbury are just the two latest incidents involving
the use of chemical weapons around the world. They
offer us a reminder that these are weapons of terror.
They are indiscriminate. They have no place in the
civilized world.

We hope our colleagues on the Security Council
will join us as they have before in delivering a clear
condemnation of the use of a Russian nerve agent on
another Member's soil, because unless we stop this now,
there will be more death and more scenes that nobody
wants to see. There is nothing more troubling than
the idea that the use of a weapon of mass destruction
becomes routine.

Last year, it was Malaysia and Khan Shaykhun.
Last month, it was Salisbury. Last week, it was Douma.
If we do not come together soon and take a firm
unequivocal stance against this deadly trend, the next
attack will come, and it could very well come closer
to home for one of us. Then, of course, it will be too
late - too late for the victims, too late for the wounded
survivors, too late for the women and children. This is a
matter of basic morality. We cannot in good conscience
allow this to continue.

