Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, Ambassador
Vale de Almeida of the European Union delegation
and Ambassador Pecsteen de Buytswerve of Belgium,
in his capacity as Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for their
briefings to the Council on the implementation of the
resolution 2231 (2015). We also thank Ms. DiCarlo and
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve for presenting the reports
(S/2019/492 and S/2019/514).

I think that everyone would agree that the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is a historic
achievement in multilateralism, or, in the words of
the Secretary-General, a hard-won achievement of
successful multilateralism, nuclear non-proliferation,
dialogue and diplomacy. In that regard, I would like to
highlight the following points.

First, we continue to support the full implementation
of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2105) as a whole.
We commend Iran's compliance, which to date has
been verified by 15 reports of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). We hope that Iran will
continue to comply with the JCPOA and cooperate
with the IAEA in the performance of its verification
mandate. We of course deeply regret the withdrawal of
the United States from the J CPOA, which continues to
present difficulties with regard to its implementation.
On the one hand, we understand that challenge; on the
other, we are also concerned about Iran's intention to
reduce its JCPOA commitment. It is in the interests of
all parties to preserve the JCPOA. Therefore, we would
like to urge all parties to refrain from taking actions
to the detriment of the implementation of the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015) as a whole. We further urge
all JCPOA participants to live up to their commitments
to preserve the JCPOA by faithfully fulfilling their
obligations under resolution 2231 (2015).

Secondly, we strongly urge all parties to continue
engaging in constructive dialogue to resolve differences
that arise from the interpretation and implementation of
the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). Implementing
sanctions, in particular unilateral ones, is essentially
not the way forward sought by the international
community. In the same vein, we ask Iran to consider
relevant concerns when carrying out its activities in
order to sustain stability in the region.

Thirdly, we should keep other issues not directly
related to the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015)
separate. We need to be very cautious in addressing the
issue of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015), as its
implications might go beyond the issue of the Iranian
nuclear programme. Their delicate balance needs to
be preserved. It is also our collective obligation to
ensure that the proper consideration of the JCPOA
issue contributes to improving the overall situation in
the region. We acknowledge that, to some extent, the
situation in the region influences the implementation of
JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). In that regard, we
urge all parties to exercise restraint and refrain from
taking actions that could exacerbate the situation. It
is pertinent for us to create stability and a conducive
environment for the full and effective implementation
of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015). That
responsibility does not exclusively fall upon the
JCPOA participants or Council members, but the entire
international community.

Let me conclude by reiterating our main objective
of ensuring the peaceful use of nuclear energy by Iran
and protecting the legitimate interests of Iran. Within
a broader scope, our objective is to maintain peace and
stability and uphold the rule of law in order to enjoy a
safe and prosperous world for all.

