We thank Mr. Tanin for his briefings today. We also express our gratitude for the noble work of the Special Representative and his team in the field, who continue exerting extraordinary efforts to discharge their mandate in the face of the challenging health circumstances currently affecting the world. We also thank His Excellency Mr. Daeic¢ and Ms. Meliza Haradinaj-Stublla for their statements. We take this opportunity to warmly welcome the reports that the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the United Nations Kosovo team are, together with the political leaders and the efforts of the Kosovar people, tackling the challenge of the health crisis head on, especially to mitigate the effects of the pandemic on the most vulnerable. This is a good opportunity to urge the various political factions in Kosovo to set their differences aside as they risk hampering the greater task of safeguarding the public health of the people. These activities will require the full support of all sectors of society to public institutions. In this regard, we encourage donor countries to increase their support through official development assistance and innovative financial and debt-relief programmes for countries most affected by the pandemic and its devastating consequences. We also call for the vaccine and other health technologies required to tackle coronavirus disease to be made available on an equitable basis and their global distribution guaranteed. We welcome with satisfaction the agreements signed by the parties under the auspices of the United States to facilitate economic normalization. We likewise welcome the resumption of talks between Belgrade and Pristina, facilitated by the European Union. We understand that they have been crucial steps, and provided a great opportunity to reach a comprehensive and legally binding agreement on the on the normalization of relations. We echo the call of the Secretary-General on the leaders of Belgrade and Pristina to show flexibility in their positions in order to overcome differences. At the same time, we urge them to identify an inclusive process that involves women and young people in consultation and decision-making processes affecting the present and future of all residents. During the Arria Formula meeting we convened in September on the implementation of resolutions on youth, peace and security in peacekeeping operations, we heard from a representative of UNMIK that, while Kosovo had youngest population of Europe, their opportunities were very limited - limitations illustrated by the representatives of civil society, Dielza and Angela. We echo their accounts. All efforts to advance peace and security in Kosovo must have the full backing and participation of young people in building inter-ethnic trust, local governance and economic development. Like other colleagues, we express our concern about the construction of a road in the special protection zone around Visoki Deeani monastery. We hope that the suspension of construction will be definitive so as to conserve the areas considered of cultural value for humanity, and to uphold inter-community trust. As this is the final meeting where we will discuss this important issue before my country leaves the Council at the end of this year, we want to reiterate our support for UNMIK's ongoing initiatives in collaboration with the United Nations Kosovo team, which are aimed at empowering young people, women and civil society and at strengthening multilingualism, inter-community dialogue and respect for human rights. We also recognize the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo for its work in strengthening the justice system and the independence of the judiciary. In conclusion, we congratulate the parties on the progress achieved in this period. For those gains to last, we urge the parties to accept the commitments of the Brussels declaration and to act on the basis of resolution 1244 (1999). We reiterate our support and appreciation to UNMIK, the Kosovo Force, the European Union and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe for their dedication to building peace for the Kosovar people.
