Mr. Dauth (Australia): I know we must be brief
and thus must dispense with the courtesies, but it
would be very wrong of me not to congratulate
Denmark on its outstanding handling of the Council's
work this month. It is typical of the wonderful work
which my friend and colleague, Ambassador Laj, does
here.

As the current debate recognizes, post-conflict
peacebuilding is a crucial challenge facing the
international community and entirely properly a focus
of Security Council attention. Peacekeeping is often
the prime focus of the Council's deliberations, but it
represents only the start of a longer-term progress
towards peace, stability and prosperity in conflict-
affected areas. As history and bitter experience show
us, even the best peacekeeping efforts can come to
naught if post-conflict peacebuilding is neglected. In
that regard, Australia has warmly welcomed the recent
successful end to United Nations peacekeeping in
Timor-Leste and the creation of a successor mission
with a strong peacebuilding mandate.

It is important to remember, however, that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are not necessarily the
endpoints of a linear process - they are interlinked,
interwoven and, at times, interdependent. Planning for
peacekeeping must recognize that peacebuilding often
needs to start before peacekeeping ends. Clearly,
peacebuilding is not easy. Indeed, building peace -
including strengthening State institutions,
re-establishing law and order and creating
prosperity - can often be more difficult than ending
the war.

Peacebuilding must be a multifaceted and
comprehensive exercise across the full scope of
development, security and human rights - I mention
human rights very deliberately - reflecting the
interconnected nature of issues and the complex
challenges facing post-conflict societies. It must also
place strong emphasis on developing local capacity and
encouraging ownership of peacebuilding activities.
Others have spoken of this. In that regard, partnership
and close consultation with affected communities and
the early delivery of a peace dividend to consolidate
ongoing community support are vital.

Security sector reform, encompassing police,
corrections and judiciary, is an important element of
peacebuilding and can often be the key prerequisite for
rebuilding shattered economies and restoring social
services. To be effective, however, peacebuilding must
also address longer-term economic and social
development issues. Peacebuilding must be able to
determine and address the sources of conflict, be they
poor access to government services, a breakdown in
traditional authority structures or uneven economic
opportunities, which are the factors that underline that
good governance and soundly based economic policies
are important components of peacebuilding.

Regional peacebuilding is a vital complement to
the work of the United Nations. In our own region,
initiatives such as the Regional Assistance Mission to
the Solomon Islands (RAMSI) provide valuable
examples of how peacebuilding works in practice.
Initiated in July 2003 as a common Pacific Islands
Forum response to a direct request for assistance from
the Solomon Islands, RAMSI has enjoyed remarkable
success and benefited from direct contributions of
personnel from some ll regional nations to date. The
Solomon Islands' call for assistance posed a key
peacebuilding test that the nations of our region, under
the framework of the Forum's Biketawa Declaration,
met with collective resolve. The RAMSI experience
has also highlighted the value of taking an integrated
and sequenced approach to peacebuilding, coordinated
between all security and development actors and in
close collaboration with the affected country.

Not least, given our experiences in our own
region, Australia welcomes the current proposal for a
Peacebuilding Commission and believes that close
coordination between the Commission and the Security
Council would be vital to ensure that the United
Nations is well placed to assist post-conflict societies.
The creation of a Peacebuilding Commission would
also offer the opportunity to coordinate and foster a far
more effective international response capability and
would enhance the integrated mission planning
process. In addition to post-conflict peacebuilding,
prevention of conflict remains an important objective,
and we should continue to do our utmost to strengthen
the United Nations conflict prevention and mediation
capacities, including through the Security Council and
the good offices role of the Secretary-General.

