Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): First, I would like to thank Mr. Kenzo Oshima
and say how very much we appreciate his
comprehensive and very informative briefing. We
thank him for the recommendations and the very
specific information given in the report.

There are some goods signs regarding the
development of the political process in Angola. We
believe that this is basically due to the sincere efforts
of the Government of Angola itself to restore peace and
stability in the country, which has suffered all too long.

The return of a large number of refugees - about

10,000 people in recent months - and the plans that
have been made to ensure the return of even greater
numbers of them deserve the full support of, and
follow-up by, the international community. Likewise,
the Government's mine-clearance programme, which is
very costly, as we all know, should also be a priority
and receive the full support of the international
community.

We believe that investing in the restoration of
peace and stability in Angola will have a positive
impact on the peace process and on the region in
general. This point was touched on in Mr. Oshima's
briefing, in particular with respect to certain measures
that the Angolan Government is expected to take.

We believe that three of these trends reflect
certain economic aspects, and that they require, as we
mentioned earlier, greater support from the
international community. Repairing roads, exempting
certain goods from customs duties, even when this is
limited to those supplied by humanitarian agencies, and
speeding up the customs control process - all of these
measures require resources, and hence support must be
given to the country so that it can complete all of its
tasks.

A fourth aspect concerns the simplification of the
entry visa requirements for international agencies. We
believe that the Government of Angola recognizes that
it is in its best interests to facilitate these procedures.
But have these aspects have been discussed directly
with the Angolan Government, and what was its
reaction to these aspects?

Once again, we would like to thank Mr. Oshima
for having paid a visit to the country. We know that the
conditions of the visit were very difficult, and we all
appreciate the efforts that his Office is making to
provide support to all people in dire straits in that
country.

