Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this open briefing on a topic that particularly affects
Africa, our continent. I would also like to thank
Mr. Guterres, the High Commissioner for Refugees, for
his briefing, which made very clear the importance that
he attaches to the issue of refugees and displaced
persons in Africa - an issue that he highlighted when
he took up his duties.

We are aware of the magnitude of the task and the
difficulties involved in such a delicate and complex
area, which includes humanitarian assistance and the
return of refugees and displaced persons. His efforts
thus far are commendable; his first working visit to the
Great Lakes region is a case in point.

Despite some progress that has been made here
and there, the overall situation for refugees remains
troubling and is not improving in any significant way,
which can only be a cause for concern for my
delegation. That is why my delegation would like to
ask that particular attention be focused on what
Mr. Guterres described as emergency situations - the
Sudan and the Great Lakes region, where every day
violence coexists with impunity. In that context, we
support his appeal with respect to bringing
international pressure to bear on the various actors
involved, which could help us to reverse the current
negative trends.

We welcome the efforts made by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) with regard to refugee return in certain
countries, including Burundi, the Democratic Republic
of Congo and Liberia, and we encourage the
consolidation of processes under way in those
countries - in particular in the Democratic Republic
of Congo, where the situation is very unstable. We also
know that particular attention needs to given to the
situation of persons returning to their countries so as to
facilitate their integration into everyday life. We must
provide the optimal conditions for such returns, and in
that respect we call for donor support for the important

activities being carried out by UNHCR.
In his briefing, Mr. Guterres also highlighted
security problems, including those affecting
humanitarian workers, and we would like to express
our concern in that regard. We know - and this has
been mentioned by previous speakers - that the
problem of refugees and displaced persons often
originates in the recurrent conflicts in Africa.
Resolution 1625 (2005) is quite eloquent on that
subject. My delegation would therefore like to stress
that, while we need to deal with the problem of
displaced persons and refugees, special attention
should be given to the causes of conflict in Africa.

We would like to ask Mr. Guterres a few
questions for the purpose of clarification. The first is
simply a request for information. We would like to
know where we stand with regard to the "Convention
Plus" initiative, which has been the subject of many
discussions in recent years, in Geneva in particular. He
also raised the issue of the sustainable settlement of
refugees within the host countries and the possibility of
their participating in development activities. My
delegation would like to know something more about
his expectations are in that regard.

