Mr. Czaputowicz (Poland): First of all, let me thank
the State of Kuwait, and in particular His Excellency
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, for
convening today's important debate. Let me also
thank Secretary General Antonio Guterres for his
valuable remarks, and former Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his important comments. Those comments
demonstrate the continuation of work of the Security
Council in the field of maintaining international peace
and security.

It is indisputable that the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations proclaim the most
fundamental values for the international community
of States. They describe both the goals that should be
pursued and the essential rules that should be followed.
I would like to reiterate that Poland has always been
deeply committed to the fundamental ideas constituting
the legal basis ofthe United Nations, beginning with the
signing of the Declaration by United Nations in 1942.
Throughout over 70 years of our membership in the
United Nations, Poland has been strongly committed
to maintaining international peace and security.
That strong commitment continues until the present
day - when Poland, as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council, makes efforts aimed at strengthening
the Charter and enhancing trust in international law.

Let me recall the sometimes underestimated
principle set out in Article 2, paragraph 2 of the Charter,
which states:
"[a]ll Members, in order to ensure to all of them
the rights and benefits resulting from membership,
shall fulfill in good faith the obligations assumed
by them in accordance with the present Charter."

That principle should be considered as a
Grundnorm- in other words, a fundamental norm - for
United Nations Members. In fact, as a horizontal system
of cooperation, international law depends on the
reliability and constancy of commitments undertaken
by States. That principle consists of two parts, namely,
the fulfilment of the obligations assumed and acting in
good faith.

With regard to the first part - the fulfilment of
the obligations assumed - we stress that respecting
obligations by every State is a basic tenet of
international legal relations. It ensures confidence and
trust among States.

As for the second part, the principle of good faith
obliges States to apply their international law duties
reasonably and in such a manner that their purpose can
be achieved legally. That principle works as a corrective
factor and prevents the abuse of one's rights. Respecting
international law obligations in good faith therefore
means that States must abstain from acts contrary to
the purpose of their commitments and obligations.
Let me stress that, if a State acts without respect for
the principles set out iin Article 2, it diminishes the
significance of the Charter and, in consequence, the
global peace architecture based on it.

In that context, it is indispensable, once again,
to strengthen our call for the peaceful settlement
of international disputes. The date of today's
debate - 27 years after the liberation of the State of
Kuwait, in which Poland was actively engaged i is a
forceful reminder for the international community of
States. Today too we face one of the most egregious
expressions of the threat to international peace
and security, that is, the aggression of one State
against another.

We reiterate that the Security Council has proved
to be a guardian of the purposes and principles of the
Charter. Therefore, the Council should be considered
the ultimate custodian of States' territorial sovereignty,
the peaceful settlement of disputes between States,
the prohibition of the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of any
State and respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all and without distinction. It is also the
Security Council that can take significant initiatives
and actions in that regard. One of the most prominent
examples of the pivotal role of the Security Council as a
guardian of the maintenance of international peace and
security wascthe liberation of the State of Kuwait from
the Iraqi occupation.

Moreover, actions taken to prosecute the alleged
perpetrators of the most heinous international crimes
through the establishment of the International
Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia, as well as through the referral of cases to
the International Criminal Court, have also been of
paramount importance. Equally, Council resolutions
aimed at combating international terrorism must be
acknowledged and commended.

Nonetheless, there are still flagrant Violations of
international law posing threats to international peace
and security, as well as to the protection ofhuman rights
and fundamental freedoms, such as the illegal annexation
of Crimea and support for separatist forces in eastern
Ukraine. In that vein, we are also deeply concerned
about violations of international humanitarian law and
the Chemical Weapons Convention in Syria.

Having mentioned Syria, I must also refer to very
worrying developments we learned about yesterday
with regard to further shelling of eastern Ghouta. There
is no justification for indiscriminate attacks on innocent
civilians and civilian infrastructure, including health
facilities. They must stop, and parties to the conflict
must strictly comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law. We call upon everyone
to alleviate the suffering ofcivilians, including children,
by granting them free and safe access to humanitarian
assistance. We urgently call for stopping hostilities in
all of Syria.

As stated by the Secretary General,

"[p]eace is a tireless undertaking, to which
all United Nations agencies and bodies must
work, in accordance with their mandates and
responsibilities." (S/PV. 7926, p. 2)

We therefore pledge to engage actively in all efforts
to strengthen the role of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter. We cannot forget that the
Security Council is not only one of the guardians of
the purposes and principles of the United Nations, but
is also obliged, under the Charter, to act in accordance
with them.

