Mr. Corman (Turkey): We thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2009/359) and Special
Representative Angelo for his briefing.

Like other members, Turkey is concerned about
the negative developments that have occurred over the
past three months and that have served only to
aggravate an already tenuous humanitarian situation. It
is clear that attacks by the Chadian armed opposition,
and tensions between N'Djamena and Khartoum, have
combined to make the environment in which the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) is being deployed
much more complicated.

The progress that MINURCAT has made thus far
in attaining full operational capacity is noteworthy. We
hope that, as in the case of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur across the border,
MINURCAT can also come close to achieving its
authorized strength before the end of the year. As this
process continues, it will be important to ensure that
there are no security gaps due to delays in deployment.
The full deployment of the Detachement inte'gre'
de securite (DIS) is a major achievement. Turkey
welcomes the additional security it has provided.
MINURCAT will have to continue to support DIS
logistically, technically and operationally as it assumes
more and more responsibilities and works to become
fully operational. Bearing in mind that MINURCAT
cannot stay forever, the Chadian Government will also
need to do more to support DIS.

Ultimately, whether through DIS or its armed
forces, Chadian authorities will eventually have to
assume full responsibility for the security situation in
that part of the country. It is therefore important for the
Chadian Government to work sincerely to create a
political setting through which the sources of conflict
in the East of the country can be efficiently addressed.

The agreement brokered just a few days ago in
Tripoli between the Chadian Government and the
National Movement is a very welcome step in the right
direction. We hope that, with the help of ongoing
mediation efforts, the Chadian Government can build
upon that momentum and create an inclusive and
comprehensive political process through which other
larger elements of armed opposition can be brought
back into the fold.

At the regional level, the deterioration of bilateral
relations between Chad and the Sudan is having very
unfortunate consequences on the ground, not least for
civilians. Cross-border air and ground raids are not
helping what is already a grave situation. Both
countries need to understand that their interests lie not
in conflict but in cooperation. A change of tone and
approach is sorely needed. Many agreements have been
enacted, and not implemented. Turkey believes that a
high-level mediation effort, building on existing
agreements, that takes into consideration the complex
interests and dynamics at play and includes the right
incentives is the way forward for a lasting political
settlement.

