Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks your delegation,
Madam President, for having organized this important
debate. We also express our appreciation for briefings
provided by Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations; Mr. Maman
Sidikou, Permanent Secretary of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-S Sahel); Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations; and Ambassador Joao Pedro Vale de Almeida,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.

The situation in the Sahel presents maj or challenges
in the areas of security, governance and development.
The region continues to face a volatile and complex
environment, including asymmetrical threats from
armed and terrorist groups, as well as transnational
crime, including trafficking in drugs, human beings
and arms, among other things. Those factors not only
jeopardize the stability of the countries of the region,
but also represent a threat to political peace processes.
They also represent a threat to the civilian population,
who are worst affected.

Bolivia has insistently reiterated the need not only
to analyse but especially to identify the structural
causes of conflicts. In the specific case of the Sahel,
those causes have had a profound impact across the
region. There is no need to explain that the policies of
interventionism and regime change triggered, in the
aftermath of the 2011 conflict in Libya, the collateral
destabilization of the Sahel, heralding chaos and
horrors that continue to this very day.

Unfortunately, in addition to the precarious security
situation, the Sahel presents other great challenges. The
humanitarian situation requires our attention in more
detail. According to data provided by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, eight countries
in the region are at risk of humanitarian crisis; out of
the 150 million inhabitants, some 24 million require
humanitarian assistance and 32 million are at risk
of food insecurity. Another 5 million people are
experiencing similar conditions, including refugees and
forcibly displaced persons - without even mentioning
the adverse effects produced by climate change that are
further deepening the crisis in the region.

In Mali, insecurity has intensified and clashes
between armed groups, asymmetrical attacks, cross-
border influences and intercommunal violence have
led to mass displacement, further worsening the
humanitarian situation. Insecurity has spread from the
northern regions to its centre. It is worth mentioning
that 5.1 million people - who represent more than
27 per cent of the population of that country - live in
the affected areas.

Furthermore, there are some 59,000 internally
displaced persons, while almost one in five Malians
suffer from food insecurity. With that in mind, we
consider it essential to consolidate the political process
in Mali, which will ultimately contribute to the long-
term stabilization of the region.

Despite the alarming panorama in the Sahel, we
wish to underscore the important efforts made by
the regional and subregional organizations led by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
We welcome and commend the efforts and laudable
political determination of Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger in terms of cooperation
and operationalization of their forces on the ground.
The Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel is an exemplary
demonstration of the coordinated efforts between the
African Union and the United Nations, as well as of a
high level of solidarity among member countries of the
international community in general.

We consider it essential that the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force, within the operational framework approved by
resolution 2359 (2017) and endorsed prior to that by
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union,
generate the necessary capacities for the full deployment
of military, police and civilian components. In that
regard, we highlight the fact that two thirds of troops
have already been deployed. We hope that the remaining
third will be deployed as soon as possible. To that end,
it is imperative that the countries that make up the Joint
Force receive technical cooperation and predictable and
sustainable financing. It is also essential to finalize the
Joint Force operational plan scheduled at the start of
this month.

Likewise, the pledges made at the high-level
conference on the Sahel of the European Union and
other countries held on 23 February in Brussels are an
encouraging sign for the strengthening ofthe capabilities
of the Joint Force contingents. All initiatives aimed at
achieving stability and lasting peace in the region are
vital. We are concerned that those pledges of financial
cooperation have not yet been fully met. We reiterate
once again that all initiatives in favour of achieving
stability and lasting peace in the region - within the
framework of respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity and independence of the countries that
comprise it - are fundamental.

We also believe that financial support for the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) should continue.
We call on countries to promptly channel their
cooperation through the Organization. It is important
to operationalize the technical agreement among
the United Nations, the European Union and the G-5
Sahel countries in order to consolidate operational and
logistical support to the Joint Force.
Furthermore, it is essential to bolster the programmes
envisioned in the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, which provides a general framework aimed
at strengthening governance, resilience and security
in the countries of the region. Strengthening those
capacities and, above all, ensuring their ownership and
leadership by the countries of the region, on the ground
is fundamental. Cooperation among the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, MINUSMA, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
African Union is crucial within this framework.

We also believe it is necessary to improve and
strengthen coordination among the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force, Operation Barkhane and MINUSMA in order
to avoid duplication of tasks. We stress that each force
must have a clear mandate. Intelligence and information
exchange mechanisms must be consolidated in order
to achieve the full operation and deployment of the
Joint Force.

Finally, we believe humanitarian action in the
Sahel is critical: it has saved many lives, but millions
of people still urgently need it. We strongly urge and
encourage the international community to continue
contributing technical, economic and humanitarian
support to all initiatives that support the peoples of the
region in the interest of achieving stability and peace.

