Mr. Amorim (Brazil): The situation of children
affected by armed conflict is one which presents the
international community and the United Nations with a
serious and urgent challenge. We have reached a consensus
in identifying this topic as one of grave concern. But the
dire predicament of the young whose future is being
ravaged by war requires not only enhanced international
awareness but, most of all, a strategy capable of acting as
a shield to protect children and adolescents from the
physical and psychological traumas provoked by cycles of
violence. I think Mr. Olara Otunnu has offered today some
of the elements for such a strategy.

We are grateful to Ms. Graca Machel for having
disseminated a groundbreaking and comprehensive report
on the multiple ways in which children are abused and
brutalized in situations of armed conflict. Other timely
initiatives ensued. The establishment of a working group
of the Commission on Human Rights to negotiate a
protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
regarding the involvement of children in armed conflict
represents an important effort to deal with this pressing
issue. More recently, the appointment of Mr. Olara
Otunnu as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict has contributed to
focusing increased attention on this critical problem, while
raising expectations that effective measures will be
devised for dealing with it.

Mr. Otunnu has already proved to be an impressive
advocate for our cause, judging not only from the
enlightened passion that he has devoted to the subject, but
also from the several commitments he has been able to
extract with a view to safeguarding the rights of children
in areas of conflict he has personally visited.

Brazil will continue to lend its firmest support to
such initiatives and welcomes the possibility offered by
this debate to associate the authority of the Security
Council with Mr. Otunnus endeavours. It should be
pointed out, nevertheless, that the role of the Security
Council in this context must be placed in a wider
perspective that will allow for fruitful and mutually
reinforcing coordination with the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council, whose competence and
responsibilities must be preserved. We strongly encourage
Mr. Otunnu to develop a substantive dialogue with those
bodies. We are convinced that both the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council have an important
and, indeed, an irreplaceable role to play in relation to
some tasks the Special Representative mentioned today,
such as education, rehabilitation and post-conflict peace-
building, as well as in addressing the value structure that
has been tragically reversed. The humanitarian segment of
the Economic and Social Council can offer an opportunity
for such a dialogue.

It is our belief, on the other hand, that the Council,
when discharging its functions in matters related to
international security, should address questions such as
the disarmament and demobilization of child soldiers and
the recruitment and use of children in armed conflicts, as
well as the role of peacekeeping personnel in this regard.
The Security Council must also be mindful of the impact

 

of sanctions on the civilian population and, above all, on
children, in line with General Assembly resolution 51/242.

But as we address the tragedy of children affected by
armed conflict, we must not forget that the use of
indiscriminate weapons, such as landmines, is one of the
biggest causes of death and maiming among children. We
should pursue our efforts to ban such weapons, as well as
all weapons of mass destruction. We should also pay
attention to the flow of arms - especially light or small
arms - which are to be put in the hands of children.

If we are to secure a better world for future
generations, where peace and understanding will prevail, we
cannot fail to protect the rights of children affected by
armed conflict. By doing so we will be helping to ensure
that today's victim does not become tomorrow's aggressor,
through the promotion of the values on which the United
Nations has built its foundation. There can be no better
cause for investing the political and material resources of
this Organization than that of assisting the sons and
daughters of belligerence to survive the pain and
devastation of conflict in order to become instruments of
peace.

