Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for presenting the forty-
third report on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2013/263, annex).

We note that the security situation in the country
continued to remain stable. Among achievements
registered during the reporting period were regular
meetings of the State-level Council of Ministers,
the timely adoption of the State budget for 2013, and
continued cooperation with the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia. We also note the efforts
made to address the needs of displaced persons in
the country and finding durable housing solutions for
them in a more coordinated way. However, according
to the report, the unfortunate dynamic - a reverse of
progress and a return to the prevailing negative trends
of the previous six years - continued during the
reporting period. As a result, no concrete progress has
been made towards meeting the outstanding objective
for the closure of the Office of the High Representative.

The political consensus has been undermined
by deepening divisions among political parties and
the protracted power struggle at the federation and
cantonal levels. We are alarmed by the continuation
of direct and open challenges to the fundamentals of
the Dayton Peace Agreement, including in particular
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Azerbaijan condemns divisive rhetoric advocating
the dissolution of the State and any action or attempt
to challenge the functionality of the State and its
constitutional responsibilities. We would like to
emphasize in that regard that neither the General
Framework Agreement for Peace nor general
international law contain any provision invoking the
claimed right to self-determination for the purpose of
unilateral secession from, or dissolution of, the State.
Obviously, attempts to negate or challenge vital aspects
of the Peace Agreement and to undermine the unity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina require special attention by
the international community. We agree with the High
Representative that abiding by the Dayton Agreement,
in particular the constitutional framework and the rule
of law, is a prerequisite for long-term stability.

The economic and social situation in the country
continued to weaken during the reporting period, with
a decrease in exports, imports and industrial production
and an increase in the foreign trade deficit and
unemployment. It is therefore critical that all political
factions in Bosnia and Herzegovina focus on the
country's economic and development priorities. There is
also a need for redoubled efforts to address and resolve
long-outstanding humanitarian issues, in particular
those related to property, and to ensure that the rights
of returnees are fully guaranteed and implemented. We
call on all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to engage
in constructive dialogue with a View to addressing the
pressing challenges, overcoming the political stalemate
and strengthening the stability and unity of the country.
It is also important that the Security Council and the
broader international community continue to support
progress towards stability and development in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the efforts of the country's
political leadership to that end.

