The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
New Zealand.

1 thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Tadamichi Yamamoto for his briefing.
Mr. Yamamoto has assumed his role at pivotal moment
for Afghanistan.

Afghanistan has been at war for far too long. Indeed,
most Afghan people have no memory of anything
but war. New Zealand speaks today as a country that
has supported Afghanistan in its pursuit of peace and
stability over many decades, stretching back to the
withdrawal of Soviet forces in 1989. Since 2001, more
than 3,500 New Zealanders have served in Afghanistan.
Some have lost their lives there. We have invested
millions of dollars towards supporting Afghanistan's
economic development and strengthening its security
forces. And we are still there.

New Zealand's contribution is only a small part
of the enormous investment made by the international
community in Afghanistan's future over the past 15
years. But as we have heard today, sustainable peace
remains a distant prospect. The Taliban and other
extremist groups continue to pose an existential threat
to the Afghan State and to conduct horrific attacks
against civilians. The people ofAfghanistan will require
the support of international partners until the cycle of
war and terror is brought to an end. That is Why New
Zealandjoined others in Warsaw in July to reaffirm our
support for the security and stability of Afghanistan.
We extended the provision of military mentors to the
Afghan National Army Officer Academy and funding
to the Afghan National Security and Defence Forces.
To take any other course would be to concede to the
terrorists and accept the failure of the Afghan State.

At the same time, experience has also taught us that
no amount of international support can by itself bring
Afghanistan peace. It is time for an honest conversation
about why peace is proving so elusive - and what
needs to change. The future of Afghanistan ultimately
lies in the hands of its Government and its people. Over
the past 35 years, Afghanistan has been plagued by
poor governance. Too often its leaders have prioritized
group and personal interests over the welfare of their
people, and resorted to graft and the use of force to
achieve their goals. The formation of the National Unity
Government, two years ago, with its reform agenda,
was cause for new hope. It offered an opportunity for
the country's leaders to put aside their differences and
to establish a Government free from self-interest and
corruption. But what do we see today?

Today we see a President and Chief Executive
Officer whose relationship is dysfunctional and a
failure to undertake the necessary electoral reforms
to enable parliamentary elections to be held, thereby
undermining the legitimacy of the current Government
and sowing the seeds of future electoral disputes and
instability. We see a Government that, two years into
its existence, has yet to fill senior positions. And
we see a host of promised reforms for improving
governance and tackling corruption that are yet to
be even seriously discussed, let alone implemented.
Those failings are profoundly concerning. Continued
division and dysfunction within the National Unity
Government threatens the progress we have made
together over the past 15 years. At a time when the
international community is renewing its commitment
to Afghanistan, we therefore reiterate our expectations
of the Government in return.

First, we expect President Ghani and Chief
Executive Abdullah to overcome their differences and
to work together for the good of their people. How can
a Government that does not talk to itself hold peace
talks with others? We expect promised reforms to be
implemented and serious efforts to be made to tackle
corruption. We expect credible efforts to enact electoral
reform, and elections to be held in a timely manner.

While prospects for a resumption ofpeace talks may
be constrained in the short-term, New Zealand urges
the Government to prepare for engagement on peace
and reconciliation with all parties. As unpalatable as
it may be, achieving a stable and peaceful Afghanistan
is ultimately dependent upon achieving some form of
reconciliation with elements of the armed opposition.

We also call on Afghanistan's neighbours and
international partners to display genuine commitment
to the process. The Taliban sanctions regime should be
used to create, not obstruct, an environment in which
talks can take place. The Afghan Government needs
to take on more ownership of this process, which, if
properly used, could provide leverage in its negotiations
with the armed opposition.

These expectations of the National Unity
Government are conveyed in the spirit of friendship
and partnership that has underpinned New Zealand's
support for Afghanistan over the past 35 years. We
remain determined to honour our commitment, but that
will truly benefit the people of Afghanistan only if the
National Unity Government does the same.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to other members of the
Security Council.
