Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank all
the briefers for their especially enlightening remarks.
I particularly welcome the presence around this table
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation ofBurkina Faso, His Excellency Mr. Alpha
Barry, in his capacity as current President of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel). We truly appreciate
the Minister's presence and once again extend a warm
welcome to him.

I would like to begin my statement by expressing
our heartfelt condolences to the Nigerien authorities
following the tragic human toll of the terrorist ambush
that struck the armed forces of the Niger along the
Malian border, and I would like to reassure them that
France stands in complete solidarity with them.

I would also like to pay tribute to the memory
of all the civilians, national staff and members of
Government and international armed forces alike who
have lost their lives during intercommunal and terrorist
violence, which unfortunately strikes the countries of
the Sahel on an almost daily basis.

Lastly, I would like to make a heartfelt mention of
the two French soldiers who died a few days ago in an
operation to free hostages in Burkina Faso, following
the national tribute that was paid to them yesterday.
We especially appreciated the Minister's words in
that regard.

In order to make progress, we must be clear about
what we are seeing. The deteriorating security and
humanitarian situation in the Sahel is being fuelled
by the spread of the terrorist threat and the increase in
intercommunal violence. Such a deterioration poses an
unprecedented risk to the stability of West Africa as a
whole. The G-5 Sahel countries are now the first to be
affected, but others will soon face the same challenges
if adequate responses are not urgently provided.

We are therefore collectively engaged in a real
race against time to stabilize the Sahel. It requires
the urgent implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, a merciless fight against
terrorist groups operating in the region, as well as good
governance and the creation of sustainable economic
opportunities for the people. As we all know, we will
succeed only if we proceed simultaneously along the
security and development tracks.

The G-S Sahel Joint Force is a key element
of the security component of those efforts, which
complements the other security presences deployed in
the region, each of which has its added value. The Joint
Force is unique in its nature, without any real precedent
or equivalent on the continent. It demonstrates the
shared will of the G-5 Sahel States to coordinate the
response to a threat, let us make no mistake, that has
consequences for us all. Our shared responsibility as
the international community is to provide them with
support commensurate to what is at stake.

The latest - and significant - gains made have
enabled the Joint Force to take a major step in its
operationalization. In that regard, I would mention the
resumption of operations, sending a strong signal of
resilience, following the attack on the headquarters in
Sevare. I am also thinking of the full operationalization
of the human rights compliance framework,
demonstrating awareness that the Joint Force's activities
can be effective only if it has the full support of the
people. Lastly, I am thinking of the progress made
in the deployment of the police component, which is
essential for the proper functioning of the Force.

In this context, the full mobilization of the G-5
Sahel States is more crucial than ever so that the Joint
Force is able to deliver on its full potential. Judicial
proceedings against alleged perpetrators of any kind
of infraction must also be brought to completion. The
deployment of officers with provost duties as part of the
Joint Force and the judicialization of the Force's action
must be finalized, with the support of the various
partners, including the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the European Union Common Security
and Defence Policy Sahel and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA).

Beyond the commitment of the G-5 Sahel States,
the success of the Joint Force will depend on the
provision of effective and appropriate international
support. Much has already been done, notably thanks to
the unprecedented mobilization of the European Union,
which has already been mentioned, in liaison with the
Permanent Secretariat of the G-5 Sahel. The Permanent
Secretariat, whose activities I commend, should
eventually become the sole interface for international
aid and the needs on the ground.

We also wish to continue improving the
effectiveness of the existing international arrangements.
In this context, we will, at the forthcoming renewal
of MINUSMA's mandate, propose clarifying the
modalities for the use and delivery of support provided
under the technical agreement to ensure that it better
meets the needs of the Force. Our ultimate aim remains
to strengthen multilateral support to the Joint Force by
equipping it with a robust mandate and implementing
a logistics package, because we know that only with
predictable and sustainable support can we ensure the
success of G-5 Sahel efforts in the medium term. The
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2019/371) remain our compass in this regard.
We are ready to take them to the Council as soon as
the Joint Force makes its first significant progress on
the ground.

In this difficult regional context, the situation in
Burkina Faso deserves our full attention. The recent
Security Council mission to the Sahel provided an
opportunity to observe the mobilization of the Burkina
Faso authorities on the ground but also the need for
significant international support to enable them to
restore stability. France fully supports the process
begun at the initiative ofthe Secretary-General to adjust
the United Nations presence on the ground, in the light
of the needs generated by the deteriorating situation in
the region. We hope that the United Nations response
will be ambitious and meet the expectations of the
Burkina Faso authorities in the fields of humanitarian
aid and development, training of the security forces,
respect for human rights, the promotion of the rule of
law and support for the fight against terrorism. In our
View, the Peacebuilding Commission is the appropriate
entity to support this process, on which we expect the
Secretariat to provide regular briefings.

The threats weighing upon the Sahel call for
redoubled commitment and the full attention and
mobilization of the Security Council. I assure the
Council of France's steadfast determination in this
regard, and we will propose a press statement to that
effect at the end of this meeting.

