Mr. Biegman (Netherlands): First, Sir, I should like
to offer you my sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council.

The presence in our midst of many illustrious
visitors - the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity, as well as no fewer than 11 Foreign
Ministers of African States - is a reflection of the fact
that this is a momentous occasion. More than two years
after the first United Nations attempt to bring peace to
Angola failed, the guns are largely silent and we find
ourselves on the eve of a new, large-scale peacekeeping
operation. After 34 years of suffering, of the gruesome
ordeal of the struggle for independence, followed by
relentless civil strife, there is hope again for the Angolan
people.

My country has a long-standing relationship with
Angola in the field of development cooperation and
humanitarian assistance, and we have therefore witnessed
with particular interest the long and difficult road both
parties have walked to finally arrive at the Lusaka
Protocol. We were extremely pleased when, on
20 November last year, the Protocol was finally signed.
We commend the role that the Secretary-General, the
three observer States, Zambia, as host country of the
negotiations, and several other African States have played
in this respect. Most of all we pay tribute to the special
representative of the Secretary-General, Maitre Beye,
who, apart from being a professional optimist, seems to
have endless patience and perseverance.

Of even greater importance is the fact that the cease-
fire, concluded shortly after the signing of the Protocol,
is holding, since agreements and cease-fires have been
concluded before in Angola, but did not last. The draft
resolution before us bears witness to the fact that the
international community has learned from previous

 

experience and is not naive any more about stated good
intentions by warring parties; it contains numerous
conditions for the deployment and continuation of activities
of the various components of a third United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), which are all linked
to the need for the parties to show good faith and the
necessary political will by effectively implementing the
commitments which they themselves have undertaken. The
Netherlands Government therefore urges the parties not to
allow any further delays, but scrupulously to comply with
the time-table envisaged in the Lusaka Protocol. On the
other hand, in order to avoid a dangerous vacuum, the
timely deployment of the peace-keeping forces - once the
conditions listed in the Secretary-General's report are
met - cannot be overemphasized.

In order to facilitate the peace process, an early
meeting between President dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi is,
in our view, crucial, and we call upon both leaders to make
every effort to realize such a meeting at their earliest
convenience.

It goes without saying that my Government
wholeheartedly supports the decision the Security Council
is about to take to establish UNAVEM. III. Netherlands
military and police observers have served in UNAVEM. II,
even during the fiercest hostilities, and will continue to
serve in UNAVEM. III. We fully share the importance
attached in the draft resolution to the speedy establishment
of a comprehensive mine-clearance programme in Angola.
Among all the activities UNAVEM. III is expected to carry
out, mine-clearance is of the utmost importance, as the
continuous presence of mines could greatly hamper the
implementation of other elements of the "Acordos de Paz"
and the Lusaka Protocol.

In 1994 my country contributed 10 million
Netherlands guilders - roughly $6 million - for
humanitarian assistance to the people of Angola. We
express the sincere hope that, through the efforts of both
the Angolan parties and UNAVEM. III, our future assistance
and cooperation will not have to be limited to emergency
and humanitarian aid only, but our humanitarian assistance
to Angola will be continued in 1995.

Let me finally express the hope that on the road to
peace and national reconciliation all sides will be guided by
statesmanship, wisdom and above all generosity towards
their former adversaries. UNAVEM. III will be there to
help, but it is ultimately for the Angolans themselves to
realize our common dream of a unified, peaceful,
democratic and prosperous Angola, where good governance,
multi-party democracy, power-sharing and respect for
human rights prevail. Let peace not become elusive once
more. The Angolan people deserve better - and much
better - than that.

