Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden. I will deliver an
abbreviated version of the statement circulated in the
Chamber.

There has been considerable improvement in the
Council's working methods in recent years. We
underscore the need for regular informative briefings to
non-members of the Council. Interactive wrap-up
sessions at the end of each presidency would enhance
information-sharing and openness. The Brazilian
presidency held such a meeting, for which we thank it.
We encourage other Council members to consider
organizing such briefings in the future.

The annual Finnish workshop aims at giving new
members of the Council an in-depth orientation to the
practice, procedures and working methods of the
Council, in order to help new members to hit the
ground running. The workshops also serve the wider
membership, as their reports are distributed as official
documents of the Council.

The Security Council report is another initiative
that has greatly contributed to information sharing and
increased openness about the work of the Council.

Efficiency in the Council's work is very
important. Conflicts today are more complex and the
Council's agenda is increasingly stretched. There is
scope for improving the quality of open debates by
ensuring that outcome documents reflect input from all
participating countries. Concept papers could direct the
focus of debates to questions on which the Council
would like to consult the larger membership.

Lately the Council has increasingly been using
video links to receive briefings from the ground. This
is a welcome development and we encourage the
Council to continue developing the practice further.

The Council should improve its cooperation with
other United Nations bodies. In addition, troop- and
police-contributing countries should be more closely
engaged at all stages of decision-making for
peacekeeping operations.

The Council should continue to actively seek
ways to improve its ability to prevent conflict and to
solve long-term conflicts on its agenda. Good
cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission and
other partner organizations, such as regional and
subregional organizations, the Bretton Woods
institutions and others, is instrumental in that
endeavour.

The Council has made good progress in
developing cross-cutting issues, such as women and
peace and security. The Council should now
systematically link country-specific situations and
horizontal themes, and follow up on requests for
thematic information when handling reports on
country-specific situations.

The Nordic countries welcome the significant
progress achieved in enhancing due process for the
listing and de-listing procedures of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities. We welcome the renewal of the mandate of the
Ombudsperson. We recommend that fair and clear
procedures be extended to all sanctions regimes.

We call on the Council to continue on a positive
reform path and to hold annual open debates on this
issue. In this context, we would like to emphasize the
importance of presidential note S/2010/507, and we
urge the Council to fully implement the innovations
contained therein.

