Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Brazil on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and on organizing this debate on such an
important issue as the interdependence between
security and development.

During this debate, many very interesting
statements on the topic have been made. Unfortunately,
I must point out that this discussion also included a
50

statement from the representative of Georgia. It is not
difficult to understand that, in a Security Council
debate, factual and legal clarity on that statement is
needed. There was mention of the occupied territories
of Georgia. If we say that, logically there is reference
to Abkhazia and South Ossetia, that is, those countries
and peoples that suffered the aggression of Georgia in
the early 1990s and in August 2008.

If we talk about that from the legal standpoint, of
course, it cannot involve occupation. Indeed,
recognizing the sovereignty of those States, Russia
reached agreement with them on mutual assistance and
took responsibility for the security of Abkhazia and
South Ossetia and for the safety of their peoples.
However, there is no occupying regime there. Their
Government is being ensured by the authorities of
Abkhazia and South Ossetia, in accordance with the
democratic will of their peoples.

The representative of Georgia referred to
Georgia's pledge not to use force against Abkhazia and
South Ossetia. Of course, Mr. Saakashvili made such a
statement and, furthermore, he sent a letter on the issue
to the Secretary-General. Most important, there was
also letter by the authorities of Abkhazia and South
Ossetia to the Secretary-General. They were circulated
as official documents of the Security Council. I hope
that members of the Council and all members of our
Organization have read them. They provided an
opportunity to read about what Russia has said for
many years, that is, that before the August 2008
conflict, and after it, a regime of mutual legal
obligations between Georgia and Abkhazia and South
Ossetia on the non-use of force had been established.

Mr. Saakashvili also said publicly - he spoke on
the radio - that he invited the inhabitants of Georgia
to celebrate the next new year in Sukhumi, the capital
of Abkhazia. Of course, that could only give rise to
serious doubt about the intentions of that politician,
who, as is known, had already often broken his
promises.

Recently, we have said much about the fact that
politicians sometimes must work in the interests of
their people. Mr. Saakashvili committed a criminal act
with regard to the invasion of South Ossetia and, thus,
infringed that. The authorities of Georgia have
unpredictable policies and the Georgian people are
suffering with regard to their prospects for
development.
11-23198
