Mr. Holliday (United States of America): I
would like to welcome you, Mr. President, to the
Security Council. We would like to thank you and the
Romanian presidency for having organized this timely
and relevant debate. It is an honour to have you preside
over this meeting. We hope to build on last year's
meeting on a similar subject.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations will continue to be a timely
topic because of the ongoing surge in instability in a
number of regions. Regional organizations have a key
role to play in responding to conflict within their
regions. Often, action by regional arrangements is the
most timely and appropriate response. In some cases, a
collaborative effort between regional organizations and
the United Nations has proved to be quite effective.
The United Nations has an important role to play in
supporting such regional efforts, in particular efforts to
reach political settlements. In some cases - several in
the past year - we have supported direct United
Nations action to facilitate the implementation of such
political settlements.

In Afghanistan, NATO is working closely with
the United Nations and other organizations to prepare
for elections, train police and counter the debilitating
trade in narcotics. In the western hemisphere, the
international community's response in Haiti is another
example of the prospects for enhanced coordination
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
The Organization of American States (OAS) and the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) are important
partners for the United Nations, and their participation
will be essential to the success of international efforts
in Haiti. Indeed, Security Council resolution 1542
(2004), which authorized the deployment of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, directed that the
United Nations cooperate and coordinate closely with
the OAS and CARICOM. We hope that the OAS will
continue to play a key role in supporting Haiti's efforts
to hold new elections.

In 2000, the Security Council adopted resolution
1318 (2000), which called for strengthening
cooperation and communication between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
with respect to peacekeeping operations, particularly in
Africa. It emphasized the importance of continued
cooperation and effective coordination between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
and African subregional organizations in addressing
conflict in Africa. In the same year a special panel on
peacekeeping endorsed the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in the millennium report
(A/54/2000) that all who engaged in peacekeeping or
conflict prevention - for example, the United Nations,
the Bretton Woods institutions, Governments and
members of civil society - should address
peacekeeping challenges in an integrated fashion.

In order to provide rapid response capability in
times of crisis, European nations and Canada, in
addition to several others, formed the Standby High
Readiness Brigade, a trained and ready headquarters
unit that could develop a plan and move into a failed
State or post-conflict situation so as to stabilize it in
advance of the United Nations. It has performed
successfully in several operations, including the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea, and has
broadened its membership.

Over the course of a number of years, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) has become an important player. I pay
tribute to my colleague from Ghana, who has played
such an important role in that respect. It has performed
well in both Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire during the past
year. ECOWAS was able to activate its troops in the
ECOWAS mission in Liberia (ECOMIL) long before
the United Nations would have been ready. It managed
the transition to blue hats comfortably, and generally
served peacekeeping needs commendably. Thousands
of lives may have been saved in Liberia by the early
arrival of ECOMIL.

We must, however, recognize that there are
certain limits to the peacekeeping capacity of
ECOWAS because of the lack of funds. If the
international community wishes to rely on ECOWAS
on a continuing basis, it will have to address those
needs.

President Bush is committed to the idea of
supporting the African Union and other regional
organizations in their efforts to bring peace and
stability to the African continent. Our African
Contingency Operations Training and Assistance
initiative has provided training to a number of African
nations. The President's former Special Envoy for
Peace to the Sudan, Ambassador Danforth, shares this
commitment and has a personal concern for the Sudan,
which is, of course, a major focus for the regional
efforts in Africa. This specifically relates to the role the
African Union can play with regard to monitoring and,
of course, the deployment of protection for those
monitors.

As it was set forth in the Group of Eight action
plan for peace support operations in Africa, conflict
management is a key activity for the African Union
(AU), and we intend to continue to support its efforts,
as we have done in Burundi and are now doing in
Darfur. Darfur is an important test for the international
community. Council members and regional
organizations, especially the AU, must all work
together as we seek to help the people of Sudan. We
will all be judged not only by our expressions of
political will, which have been positive and proactive,
but also by our ability to use our talents and resources
to implement activities on the ground. The AU Peace
and Security Council is playing a catalytic role in that
effort. We hope that it will continue to press the parties,
especially the Government of Sudan, to adhere to the
ceasefire, maintain the pace in establishing the
ceasefire commission and press forward with political
talks in Addis Ababa. The United States Government is
working closely with the AU and other donors and has
begun committing several million dollars to support the
AU's work in setting up the ceasefire commission in
Darfur.

I would like to express just a few caveats related
to regional arrangements, which I would urge be
considered prior to utilizing regional arrangements in
which a country is providing peacekeepers to its
neighbours. On the one hand, a troop-contributing
country may share language, cultural elements and a
common understanding with the host country.
However, it may also have its own agenda independent
of the peacekeeping agenda. We need to watch
carefully for that possibility, given the goal of long-
term regional peace and stability.

There are two other issues the Security Council
has highlighted in recent years that I would like briefly
to touch on. The first is the role of women, not just as
victims of warfare but also as players and participants
in the peacekeeping process, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).

The second issue is the nexus between HIV/AIDS
and peacekeeping, addressed in Security Council
resolution 1308 (2000). In November 2003, the
Council was briefed by the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations on prevention
and education measures that missions should be taking
to protect both peacekeepers and host populations from
contracting HIV (see S/PV.4859). I would urge regional
organizations to consider appropriate policies in those
areas in preparation for participation in stabilization or
peacekeeping missions.

Let me conclude by thanking you again,
Mr. President, and the Mission of Romania for
convening this useful forum. There have been a lot of
good ideas advanced here today. We look forward to
studying them further. We would like to highlight again
the importance of critical thinking on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.

