Mr. Gayan (Mauritius): I wish to express my
appreciation for your kind words of welcome addressed
to me at the beginning of this meeting, Mr. President. I
note also that you are conducting the Council's
deliberations in a masterly manner.
My delegation would wish to thank the Secretary-
General for the report dated 11 January on the situation
in the Central African Republic. My delegation also
wishes to convey its appreciation to Mr. Cheikh
Tidiane Sy, Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mats Karlsson, Vice-President for External Affairs
and United Nations Affairs of the World Bank, and
Mr. Frederick Lyons, Acting Deputy Director of the
Regional Bureau for Africa of the United Nations
Development Programme, for their comprehensive
briefings this morning. My delegation also wishes to
welcome The Honourable Agba Otikpo Mezode,
Minister for the Promotion of Civic Responsibility in
charge of Relations with the Parliament of the Central
African Republic, to the Council.

The situation in the Central African Republic
remains a matter of serious concern for the Security
Council and the region in particular. The political
tension between the ruling party and the opposition is
unabated. The national reconciliation process seems
never to get under way. The absence of dialogue
between the Government and the opposition has
exacerbated the socio-economic crisis faced by the
Central African Republic.

The conflictual relations between the ruling party
and the opposition and the boycott of the meetings of
Parliament by the opposition constitute a serious
setback to the democratic process, which is itself
relatively new. Immense efforts have to be undertaken
by the political leaders and major stakeholders to
consolidate the democratic institutions that have been
established. It is therefore imperative that the political
leadership start, without delay, a process of dialogue
with a View to bringing peace and stability to the
country. But it is equally important that the opposition
respond favourably to any such initiative.

The democratic process, which must be an
inclusive process, depends upon the existence of
institutions that alone are capable of ensuring that the
fundamentals of a modern State are observed.

The political instability in the Central African
Republic has been a major cause of the economic
hardship suffered by the people for the past four years.
The non-payment of salaries to the military and civil
servants has resulted in social unrest and
impoverishment of the population. As long as State
employees are not paid their salaries, there can be no
reliable public administration. Institutions essential for
the smooth running of Government will be
undermined. The rule of law will disappear and the
resulting environment will lead to corruption and other
illegal practices. Such an environment will destroy
good governance and will give rise to abuses and
injustices, as well as social and political crises.

This situation cannot therefore be allowed to
prevail. Despite the great economic potential afforded
by highly unexploited natural resources, the Central
African Republic continues to face a fragile social,
political and economic situation. Although there have
been several attempts by the international community
to help the Central African Republic out of its crisis,
the outcome is, to say the least, disappointing.

The Bretton Woods institutions are of the View
that the challenges of maintaining macroeconomic
stability remain phenomenal in the Central African
Republic. I think this requires no further comment.

My delegation considers that it is important that
the request of the Government of the Central African
Republic for debt relief under the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt Initiative be approved as
early as possible, in order to enable it to address its
economic challenges.

It is also important that the situation in the
Central African Republic be viewed in the broader
context of what is taking place elsewhere in the
African continent. It is a matter of grave concern that at
the start of the twenty-first century, several countries in
Africa are still plagued by conflicts as a result of -
and here we, as Africans, have to be honest with
ourselves - the absence of good governance, non-
respect for democratic institutions, persistent violation
of human rights and the lack of transparency on all
fronts.

I had the honour of participating in the France-
Afrique summit, which was held last week in Yaounde,
in the Republic of Cameroon. The theme of the summit
was globalization challenges and opportunities for
Africa. While the summit was preparing to address
these fundamental issues, which are highly critical for
the future of the African continent, the news of the
assassination ofthe late President Laurent Kabila of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo filtered in. Such
acts unfortunately underscore the magnitude of the
problems which we face in Africa, and particularly in
the Great Lakes region.

But not all news out of Africa is bad. We need to
welcome the peaceful and democratic transition of
power in Senegal, Benin and Ghana. The mindset is
changing, and the leaders in Africa are working
towards the restoration of peace, stability and security
by engaging all parties in conflict situations with a
view to promoting regional economic integration.

Instability and insecurity are the greatest
impediments to development and progress in Africa. At
this time, when the challenges facing Africa are so
daunting and when the negative impact of
globalization has yet to be assessed, it is opportune for
Africa to look at the larger picture and concentrate on a
path of development which avoids conflicts, tension
and war and which enhances people-centred
development strategies.

We welcome the efforts ofthe Security Council in
the Central African Republic, and we wish also to
inform the Council that the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) leaders are working hard to defuse
potentially explosive situations throughout the
continent.

In the aftermath of the recent tragic events in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the current
Chairman of the OAU, President Eyadema of Togo, has
taken the initiative of convening an urgent meeting of
the Central Organ of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution. This
initiative is welcome, and, together with whatever the
Council undertakes, the OAU proposes to accompany
the Council's efforts and attempt to seek African
solutions to African problems.

We have to acknowledge that the conflicts in
Africa have become a source of instability not only
within the countries but also for other countries in the
region. These conflicts have had damaging
consequences, and they have already adversely affected
the future of generations of Africans that are yet
unborn.

Indeed, the predicament of the Central African
Republic cannot be dissociated from the dire conditions
prevailing in the Great Lakes region. The illegal
circulation of, and trafficking in, small arms and light
weapons; the use of mineral and other resources for
financing paramilitary and organized rebel groups; and
above all, the wrong utilization of human resources are
some of the issues that need to be tackled urgently. We
at the level of the OAU are engaged in getting African
countries on a course dictated by harsh realities and
pragmatism rather than ideology.

In conclusion, my delegation would wish an early
return of political normalcy in the Central African
Republic as well as a rapid economic recovery. My
delegation also wishes to underscore the importance of
viable regional cooperation to avert future conflicts.
