Mr. Wittig (Germany) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to congratulate you and your country,
Mr. President, on you assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the first time, as well as to
thank you for having convened this important debate.
I wish you and my friend Ambassador Rosenthal and
your very able team every success this coming. There
is no need to underline the fact that your country can
count on Germany's full support.
(spoke in English)

I would like to join others in thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Fernandez
Amunategui for his briefing.

I would like to focus my statement on three main
topics: the current political situation, the security
situation, including the need to further strengthen
the Haitian National Police, and the role of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
under its reconfiguration.

We welcome the fact that there are clear indications
that Haiti is moving towards a better future, albeit
slowly. We have seen some important milestones,
such as the swearing in of a new Government and
the publication of the corrected version of the
constitutional amendments that were pending when
the Security Council visited Haiti earlier this year.
At the same time, we are concerned about the refusal
by the Haitian Senate and Parliament to name their
representatives to the Permanent Electoral Council
and about the recent withdrawal of the three members
nominated by the Superior Council of the Judiciary. A
functioning Electoral Council is indispensable for the
elections mandated by Haiti's Constitution. All parties
need to make a renewed and speedy effort towards a
credible Permanent Electoral Council with all members
on board. Preparations for the elections must begin
without further delay.

We are encouraged by the progress reported on
the security front, including Government measures to
contain elements of the former armed forces who had
been illegally occupying sites throughout the country.
Security and stability should increasingly be provided
by an effective Haitian National Police. We welcome
President Martelly's stated intention to focus on the
continued strengthening of that institution, so that it
can provide security throughout the entire territory of
Haiti. We are encouraged by recent steps undertaken
by the Government to increase the number of police
recruits, in particular female ones.

The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
should not be in charge of long-term reconstruction
efforts. The Mission needs to continue to draw down
its post-earthquake surge in activities. In that sense, I
welcome the suggestions contained in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2012/678) about MINUSTAH's
reconfiguration and consolidation plan. The Secretary-
General's proposal that MINUSTAH further concentrate
its efforts on mentoring and developing the Haitian
National Police, and gradually phase out operational
policing activities, goes in the right direction. A
corresponding reduction of MINUSTAH'S troops, as
proposed by the Secretary-General, seems feasible but
requires a further build-up of the Haitain police. That
is why clear benchmarks will be required as foreseen in
MINUSTAH's reconfiguration and consolidation plan.

Finally, I would like once again to thank the
troop - and police-contributing countries for all their
efforts. We will continue to give our full support to the
Mission and to the Government and people of Haiti.

