Mr. Inzko (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity today to
present my fifth report as High Representative and the
thirty-ninth report overall. Since my last presentation
to the Security Council in November 2010 (see PV.6421), the political situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has unfortunately continued to develop
negatively. Today, regrettably, we are facing the most
serious and most direct challenges to the Dayton Paris
Peace Accord that we have seen since it was signed,
more than 15 years ago.

It is for this reason that, in accordance with my
mandate and in addition to my biannual report, I have
submitted to the Council a special report on recent
actions undertaken by the authorities in the Republika
Srpska that clearly Violate the Dayton Paris Peace
Agreement. I hope that my reports and my briefing
today will contribute to a better understanding of the
2
current political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the challenges that lie ahead.

(spoke in English)

More than seven months after the general
elections, there is still no prospect for the formation of
a new State Government, and many State institutions
are under serious political, institutional and economic
pressure - with a clear impact on their efficiency and
functionality. The European Union (EU) and the Euro-
Atlantic integration processes have come to a complete
halt, and the economy continues to suffer.

The authorities in the Federation - which forms
the larger part of Bosnia and Herzegovina - took
office only after months of obstruction of the election
of delegates to the Federation House of Peoples. The
Government formation process was stalled by lengthy
political disputes and interventions. I was forced to
intervene, with the support of the Peace
Implementation Council, when the appointment of the
authorities was disputed through various legal
challenges. In fact, there was broad consensus in the
Peace Implementation Council that taking no action
would have resulted in political and legal uncertainty,
with the prospect of the setting up of two parallel and
disputed Federation Governments, with two presidents
in place, and potentially no budget and the subsequent
dissolution of the Federation parliament, followed by
new elections. These risks have been averted, and the
Federation authorities now seem to be working
efficiently.

The current situation in the Federation also
comprises a philosophical dispute between ethnicity-
based politics - where ethnicity is most important -
and a more civic-oriented version of politics. In that
regard, the Bosnian Croat parties of the Croatian
Democratic Union have organized a council of Croat
cantons and municipalities consisting of Croat
majorities. While there are provisions in the Federation
Constitution that foresee cooperation between cantons,
such a development 15 years after Dayton is not really
the direction in which we should be going.

These developments would be bad enough at a
time when Governments should be redoubling their
efforts to deliver the deep reforms the country needs to
tackle the serious economic and social challenges its
citizens are facing, and, of course, to make progress
towards EU and NATO membership. However, within
this already difficult climate, the authorities in
11-32875
Republika Srpska have taken concrete actions that
represent the most serious violation of the Dayton Paris
Peace Agreement that we have seen since it was
signed.

The conclusions and the decision on the
referendum, which were adopted by the Republika
Srpska National Assembly in April, are not only a clear
breach of the Peace Agreement but also put into
question all laws enacted by the various High
Representatives by claiming they are in violation of the
Peace Agreement. As such, the recent actions by the
Republika Srpska, if allowed to stand, would have a
major impact on the functionality and sustainability of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The High Representatives, in
line with relevant Security Council resolutions, enacted
a significant number of decisions and laws
fundamental to the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I
would mention just a few decisions taken that are now
operational, namely, on Bosnia and Herzegovina's
passport, flag, national anthem and coat of arms and on
a single Ministry of Defence. 1 would remind the
Council that before the single Ministry of Defence was
created, there were three ministries of defence in
existence. There have also been other key reforms,
such as, inter alia, on border police.

The holding of a referendum on the High
Representative's powers and on his decisions would be
a serious breach of the country's constitutional
framework and of its international obligations. It would
also be contrary to annex 10 of the Dayton Paris Peace
Agreement and to a host of resolutions adopted by the
Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. In other words, such a referendum
would also, in a way, challenge the authority of the
Security Council and its relevant resolutions. In
addition, the conclusions seek to undermine the entire
constitutional system of the division of responsibilities
between the State and the entities as established by
annex 4 of the Peace Agreement, as well as the
Constitution and the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which is an institution established by
the Peace Accord.

With regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina's judicial
institutions at the State level, which are specifically
targeted by the referendum, I must point out that, under
the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the State
has exclusive competence for international and inter-
entity criminal law enforcement. The Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Bosnia and Herzegovina's
11-32875
Prosecutor's Office are institutions created with a View
to enabling the State to exercise those precise State-
level competencies.

On a technical but important point, and to avoid
any misunderstandings, this referendum would be
binding. Although there had been some statements
suggesting that the referendum would not be binding, it
would in fact be binding.

My approach to this challenge to the Dayton Paris
Peace Agreement has been clear and fully consistent
with my firm belief that dialogue should always be
given a chance. In this regard, I expect the Republika
Srpska authorities to rescind the adopted conclusions
and the referendum decision in the coming days.
Should that not happen, given my responsibilities to
uphold the Peace Agreement, I will have no choice but
to repeal the conclusions and referendum decision. In
this regard, I have strong support from the Peace
Implementation Council and the highest levels of the
European Union.

In addition to the conclusions and the decision on
the referendum, the authorities of Republika Srpska,
and in particular its President, have openly continued
to question the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina by repeatedly threatening the
sustainability of the country and by frequently
advocating in favour of its dissolution. The authorities
of Republika Srpska have also continued to undermine
and question other key State-level institutions in the
country. The policy behind that is to show that these
institutions are dysfunctional and therefore not needed
at the State level. The Republika Srpska authorities
have also continued to deny that genocide took place in
Srebrenica in 1995 - a fact which has repeatedly been
confirmed by international tribunals.

Seven months after the general elections, the
overall political situation in the country remains
unsatisfactory and has made the formation of
Government at the State level almost impossible. The
legislative process at the State level remains at a
standstill, and as a result there has been no progress
addressing EU- and NATO-related reform agendas.

I believe that it would be a mistake to view these
latest developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
short-term negative trend. We have in fact witnessed a
downward trend in political stability for five years
now, following the rejection of the April 2006 package
of constitutional amendments. While we must now
3
focus on the immediate difficulties, I believe that it is
also important to take a critical look at what we need to
do to secure a functional and Viable country in the long
term. It is clear that we need to support the ownership
principle in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Peace Implementation Council has continued
to express strong concern about developments in the
country, in particular about the events I have
mentioned. At the same time, the Peace

Implementation Council has noted that - with the
exception of the objective related to the Brcko
district * there has been little progress in

implementing the conditions required for closing the
Office of the High Representative.

On the State and defence property objectives,
which are the first and second objectives, there has
even been regression as the Republika Srpska
authorities unilaterally adopted an entity law on State
property in December that - had it entered into
force - would have led to all State property in that
entity being registered as Republika Srpska property.
This would have made a comprehensive negotiated
solution on State property impossible. Therefore, I had
to suspend the application of that law pending a
decision on its constitutionality by the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. On defence
property, Republika Srpska continues to refuse to grant
the State the right of ownership over defence property.

In contrast, there has been progress addressing
the outstanding conditions on the Brcko electricity
issue. I hope that we will also be able to resolve the
remaining issues soon. However, before this process
can be recommended, the Republika Srpska is required
to give proper and specific assurances on the
constitutional status and rights of the Brcko district in
the future, as well as on the terms of the Final Award,
as the Federation has done already. The Federation has
given assurances on Brcko, but the Republika Srpska
has yet to do so.

As I mentioned earlier, the entire international
community must take the deteriorating situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina very seriously. Further
erosion of the State, its institutions and the rule of law
will push Bosnia and Herzegovina into deeper crisis
and instability. This could also have negative
consequences for the entire region of South-East
Europe.
In this regard, allow me to say a few words on
how I think the international community should
approach Bosnia and Herzegovina in the future. We all
agree that the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
within the European Union and Euro-Atlantic
institutions. The EU and NATO therefore have an
important role to play in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
assisting the country to fulfil the requirements for its
aspirations to membership in both organizations. This,
by the way, is also the wish of the State Presidency.

At the same time, the need for an international
presence with an executive mandate in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is still evident. There are serious
challenges to the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina
coming from within the country, which demand the
presence of the Office of the High Representative and
the European Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina
with an executive mandate. We should have sufficient
tools to prevent attempts aimed at rolling back the
previously agreed reforms and at creating instability.

It is important that Bosnia and Herzegovina
remain on the international community's agenda until
the job is completed. There are some who believe that
it is now time to leave Bosnia and Herzegovina on its
own; some talk about international fatigue in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It has also been repeated over the
past two years that Bosnia and Herzegovina is no
longer the focus of the international community. I do
not share this View, and believe that such moves would
open the door to those who would attempt to weaken
and eventually divide the State, which could lead to
renewed disorder.

The international community has achieved
tremendous results in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the
past 15 years. However, it is clear from the current
political situation that we have not yet achieved a
lasting and sustainable political settlement that would
ensure a durable prospect of peace. To that end, we
also enjoy very good support from neighbouring
countries, President Tadie of Serbia and President
Josipovic of Croatia. One can say with some
confidence that we now have the best regional situation
of the past 20 years. This is not only about regional
cooperation; it is also about regional reconciliation.
That gives us reason to be optimistic.

Our continued attention on Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the way to get to the objective that we
all want to reach, in which Bosnia and Herzegovina is
11-32875
able to solve its problems institutionally and on its own
and move towards full Euro-Atlantic integration with
full ownership of responsibilities.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is a gold mine of talent
and full of people of excellence. We have to give those
people and the country a chance. They can do it, I am
sure. They only need some time and some patience. I
am truly convinced that this can become a reality. I
will, as High Representative and with the Security
Council's help, therefore continue to dedicate all my
efforts to assisting and supporting Bosnia and
Herzegovina's efforts in this direction.

