Mr. McNee: It is a great pleasure to brief the
Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the Sierra
Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). At the outset, I would like to commend the
impressive work of the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, and indeed of the entire United
Nations country team, in support of Sierra Leone's
progress and development. Mr. von der Schulenburg
has given us a very clear and insightful briefing this
morning.

Sierra Leone is entering another transition period.
This phase, marked by a gradual shift in emphasis from
late-stage peacebuilding towards longer-term economic
development, will be largely defined by three
processes, namely, the continued pursuit of the Agenda
for Change, which is Sierra Leone's national strategy
for peace consolidation and economic growth; the
conduct of elections in 2012; and the steady
realignment of international assistance behind
development priorities. I would like to focus on each of
those processes briefly and outline the PBC's
anticipated activities during the next six months.

First, I would like to commend the tremendous
strides that the Government and people of Sierra Leone
have made since the conclusion of the conflict. The
PBC is particularly pleased at the advances that have
been made in three areas of focus, that is, good
governance and the rule of law, youth employment and
drug trafficking. However, in spite of that progress,
each of those issues still represents a long-term risk to
Sierra Leone's stability. Each will require concerted
attention from the national Government and from
international community. As such, I would like to
reiterate the need for continued financial support.

The United Nations multi-donor trust fund
established to fund the Joint Vision and to support the
Agenda for Change remains nearly $175 million short
of its $381 million objective. For its part, the PBC's
Sierra Leone country configuration will be active with
donors and other key partners to help address Sierra
Leone's outstanding peacebuilding challenges. The
configuration will also continue to seek innovative
non-financial contributions to support the Agenda for
5
Change by facilitating South-South and North-South
partnerships.

Secondly, Sierra Leone also faces a more
immediate challenge in conducting successful national
and local elections in 2012. It is essential that political
conditions be established for free, fair and peaceful
elections. That will require continued progress on
implementing the agreements in the joint communique
of April 2009, further strengthening the Political Party
Registration Commission and providing the National
Electoral Commission with the necessary support. It is
especially important that the national institutions
charged with overseeing the elections, and the major
political parties, build a stronger relationship based on
improved cooperation and mutual trust. Successful
elections depend on the commitment of the parties that
contest them to play by the rules and respect the
results. The elections must be not only technically
sound, but also widely accepted.

In that respect, the Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General and the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone have
played an invaluable role in facilitating open dialogue
and building relevant national capacities. The PBC
fully supports those efforts and will focus more
directly on elections preparations in the coming year.

Should the necessary support be provided, there
is every reason to be optimistic. Last December's
peaceful by-election in Kono district demonstrates that
collective efforts to avoid violence can yield powerful
results. It is telling that the Sierra Leone police played
a significant role in the successful by-election.
Unfortunately, the police lack the capacity to perform a
similar service throughout the country. We see that as
an important gap. Continuing to build the capacity of
the Sierra Leone police to serve as a neutral and
effective force for stability is critical. The Sierra Leone
configuration has reiterated its appeal to the
international community to ensure that the police have
the necessary resources at their disposal - particularly
vehicles, parts and fuel - to respond to cases of
election-related violence in a timely manner.

Thirdly, the PBC will continue to have an
important role to play in the next two years as focus
shifts further from peacebuilding to development.
However, a number of risks will endure over the longer
term. Sierra Leone's significant youth population
expects progress and prosperity. Disappointment could

present a latent risk of political instability. In that
respect, rising investment in natural resources offers
promise for economic growth, but also poses a number
of challenges, some of which the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General outlined this
morning. That was a major topic of discussion during
my most recent visit to Freetown. The international
community, including the PBC, should be prepared to
respond promptly to any requests for technical
assistance or other forms of support.

Sierra Leone will also have to contend with
threats from outside its borders. Sustainable economic
development depends heavily on stability within the
subregion and on access to the assistance necessary to
weather any financial difficulties. Similarly, the flow
of illicit drugs and other forms of trafficking remains a
serious challenge, with the potential to encourage
corruption, undermine democratic progress and create
new socio-economic problems.

Those challenges demand continued support and
a wider regional focus. The Sierra Leone configuration
seeks to build stronger partnerships with relevant
international institutions and regional actors to address
those issues. It will also encourage closer collaboration
between the four West African country configurations
of the Peacebuilding Commission to facilitate the
pooling of resources, the exchange of national
approaches and the adoption of regional initiatives in
order to address those shared challenges, particularly in
the areas of illicit drug trafficking and youth
unemployment. A recent regional seminar on youth
unemployment, sponsored by the Austrian Government
and the Peacebuilding Support Office, as well as the
West African Coast Initiative, sponsored by the United
Nations and the Economic Community of West African
States, are two examples of the kinds of partnerships
through which the PBC will support more effective
action on transborder risks.

In conclusion, Sierra Leone rightly stands as a
multilateral success story in peacebuilding. Yet the
story is not quite finished. One of the important lessons
learned over the past two decades is that peacebuilding
requires constant and continued support. Faltering now
would risk all that has been gained. I therefore strongly
encourage all donors and partners to provide Sierra
Leone with the support it needs to pursue its Agenda
for Change, conduct successful elections and embark
on long-term development. As always, the
Peacebuilding Commission stands ready to be a
constructive partner through that transitional process.

