Mr. Castaneda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Guatemala is grateful to you, Mr. President,
and the delegation of Cote d'Ivoire for having convened
this debate and for having prepared the concept note
(S/2018/ 1064). We extend our gratitude to the Secretary-
General, Mr. Anto'nio Guterres, for his briefing and to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cote
d'Ivoire, Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, for his statement.

The topic that we have gathered here today to
discuss is of particular importance, given that regional
and subregional organizations have assumed a more
significant role in conflict prevention, in addressing the
root causes of conflicts and, in many cases, in providing
their good offices for the prevention and resolution of
disputes. That approach is in line with Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations.

The role of regional organizations is widely
recognized as key to the establishment of partnerships
with global institutions. Regional and subregional
organizations have evolved considerably since the
end of the Cold War. Despite their variability in size,
membership structure and strategic objectives, many
of those organizations have experienced an expansion
of their mandates, legal frameworks and organizational
capacities to address a wide range of political, security
and human rights issues.
The growing importance ofregional and subregional
organizations in the prevention of conflicts reflects
the need for more complex and multidimensional
cooperation, which, despite varying circumstances,
has always proven to be useful and complementary.
That is the case in the relationship between the
Security Council and the African Union regarding the
adoption of mandates for peacekeeping operations,
which are based on the principle that Governments and
national authorities have the primary responsibility
for determining, bolstering and steering the priorities,
strategies and activities aimed at sustaining peace.

The need for regional and subregional organizations
is clear. Some 33 regional economic organizations
have been founded since 1989, and 29 regional
intergovernmental organizations have established
agendas related to peace and security. The international
community has developed various tools and has learned
lessons on preventing the outbreak, escalation and
re-emergence of conflicts.

In the particular case of my delegation,
we commend the significant role played by the
Organization of American States (OAS) as a forum
enabling the implementation of conflict prevention and
resolution through the strengthening of representative
democracy across the inter-American system, which
is based on the Inter-American Democratic Charter
and is an instrument that seeks to strengthen and
preserve democratic institutions. We also recognize
the work of the Inter-American Defense Board, which
provides the OAS and its member States with technical,
advisory and educational consultation on issues related
to military and defence matters in the hemisphere, in
order to contribute to compliance with the Charter of
the Organization of American States.

To conclude, it is my delegation's view that the
cooperation of the United Nations with regional
and subregional organizations is fundamental to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, given that those
organizations complement the work of the Security
Council and help it to comply with its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security.

