Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We thank the
Uruguayan presidency for having convened today's
open debate on the Middle East and the Secretary-
General for his briefing, which will compel Member
States to act with a sense of extreme urgency and
responsibility. If not addressed speedily, the current
situation and developments could destabilize regional
and global security. In that regard, I would like to draw
the Council's attention to the following points.

First, the devastating situation in Syria, which
has spread beyond the region, is of great concern
to the rest of the world. Kazakhstan will continue to
support measures taken by the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative, the United Nations system,
the League of Arab States and the International Syria
Support Group. We call on the Syrian Government and
opposition to speedily determine the political future
of the country through dialogue, reconciliation and
direct negotiations, which we hope will start later this
week, to implement resolution 2254 (2015), as well as
recommendations within the framework of the Geneva
process. We think that it is necessary to address the
grave humanitarian crisis, including the use of hunger
as a weapon of war, in the Syrian Arab Republic and the
mass exodus of its citizens. We also need to facilitate
the work of the Joint Mission of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the United
Nations.

Secondly, prevailing tensions in the Middle East
are also concentrated primarily on the Palestinian
issue. Kazakhstan is convinced that the conflict will
ease only if the legitimate right to self-determination
of the Palestinian people is recognized. My delegation
therefore supports the creation of an independent
State of Palestine, peacefully coexisting with Israel
within the 1967 borders. We also promote Palestine's
accession to full-fledged membership of the United
Nations and welcome the raising of the Palestinian
flag on United Nations grounds. We see the two-State
solution as the only viable option for lasting peace and
call on Israeli and Palestinian leaders to demonstrate
political commitment and goodwill to reach a historic
peace agreement.

Thirdly, Kazakhstan is conscious of the tensions
between the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Islamic
Republic of Iran. We call on the leadership of those two
brotherly countries, together with others in the region,
to take the necessary measures to prevent a further
escalation of sectarian tensions and thus speedily
resume diplomatic relations.

Fourthly, with regard to Iran's nuclear programme,
Kazakhstan has always supported the process of
international negotiations between the P5+1 and Iran,
and held two rounds of talks in 2013, in Almaty, that
contributed to those negotiations. Kazakhstan is also
actively participating in the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, inter alia, by supplying
Iran with natural uranium as a part of the overall
agreement.

Fifthly, given the situation of violent extremism,
my delegation would like to present the proposal that
President Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan made at the
General Assembly in September 2015 (see A/70/PV.13).
It was his idea to establish a United Nations-led counter-
terrorism coalition network with a unified mechanism
to defeat this scourge and bring perpetrators and their
supporters to justice. Such an entity will bring together
and strengthen existing United Nations structures.

Kazakhstan also proposes that the current United
Nations mechanisms, including the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, should be made
legally binding for relevant Security Council resolutions.
We suggest the speedy adoption of a comprehensive
document on international terrorism, which has been
a challenge for us during the last 20 years. We call on
all delegations to support this bold and forward-looking
approach and to effectively implement the Secretary-
General's plans of action to prevent violent extremism.
In that regard, my country has also proposed organizing
a high-level debate in May under the patronage of the
President of the General Assembly entitled, "Religions
against terrorism" or "Religions for peace", with the aim
of showing the strength of religious unity against the
destructive nature of terrorism and violent extremism.

In addition, we are all aware that the activities
of terrorist groups undermine the foundation of the
existing world order far beyond the conflict zones in
the Middle East. We are concerned about its spread to
the Central Asian region, which Kazakhstan represents,
and beyond, including, first of all, Afghanistan. In that
context, we believe that it is necessary to tap into and
mobilize the potential of regional structures like the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Conference
on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in
Asia and others, including the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the League of Arab States, the African
Union, the Collective Security Treaty Organization
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, to maintain security and stability in this vast
area.

The ever-increasing violence has caused the
number of civilian victims to escalate, mainly women
and children. It has also caused the forced migration
of people from the Middle East and North Africa to
Europe at an unprecedented scale. This uncontrollable
exodus is of great concern not only to the European
Union but also to all of us, the United Nations and the
international community. Therefore, we reiterate our
robust commitment to ensuring peace in the Middle
East based on freedom andjustice for all.

