Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to say how
pleased we are at seeing you, Mr. President, personally
presiding over this meeting, which reflects your great
interest in the situation in Iraq. We would also like to
thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his extensive briefing
and for all his efforts as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Iraq. We acknowledge and
commend the excellent role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) under
his leadership. I should also like to thank Ambassador
Hamid Al Bayati, Permanent Representative of Iraq,
for his valuable statement.

UNAMI has done substantial work in the period
under review. It has had great success despite all the
challenges and difficulties it faces, especially in the
area of security. We would therefore like to underscore
the need to strengthen the role of the United Nations
and its specialized agencies in Iraq as an alternative to
the presence of foreign troops in Iraq.

Also in this period, Iraq has made great progress
on the political front by holding local elections in
14 provinces in January, including elections for
provincial councils. In that regard, we should like to
acknowledge and commend the efforts of UNAMI and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
support the Independent High Electoral Commission
and to resolve disputes about internal boundaries in
Iraq. We hope that tensions in the area of Kirkuk can
be brought to an end and that a political solution can be
achieved in line with Iraq's Constitution that satisfies
all parties and strengthens the unity of all segments of
Iraqi society.

We urge the Mission and the Special
Representative to continue their neutral role, so as to
build confidence between the parties, encourage
national reconciliation and help to promote dialogue.
We also urge them to work in consultation with the
Iraqi Government to achieve consensus among all
parties on disputed matters and to establish lasting
security throughout Iraq, which is a prerequisite for
development and prosperity.

The ongoing tensions and military operations in
the period under review once again lead us to reiterate
that the continued presence of occupation forces, under
whatever format, will be a cause for continued
instability. The withdrawal of such forces will
contribute to achieving national reconciliation, which
is essential for Iraq's stability, reconstruction and
prosperity, as well as an important element in
promoting and strengthening relations with its
neighbours. Withdrawal would also contribute to
reducing the level of support enjoyed by armed groups
and factions, especially those that claim that they are
operating against foreign troops in Iraq.

In that regard, I would like to mention paragraph
48 of the report (S/2009/284) of the Secretary-General,
which refers the readiness of the Iraqi Security Forces
to take over responsibilities from the multinational
forces. We hope that that process will be expedited.

The Secretary-General's report also states that
there is a possibility that Iraq's budget deficit for the
2008 fiscal year could reach $15.9 billion. Were that to
occur, it would be the highest deficit in the past six
years. That could hinder or delay reconstruction and
impede the implementation of Iraqi Government
policies. We hope that the rise in the price of oil may
contribute to reducing or completely eliminating that
figure. In that regard, we would like to emphasize that
it is important that the countries that led the invasion of
Iraq bear the responsibility for financing the special
international funds set up to assist the country.

On the humanitarian front, we note with
satisfaction the ongoing return of internally displaced
persons and refugees. However, we continue to be very
concerned about the fact that there are still millions of
Iraqi refugees outside the country, especially in
neighbouring States. We hope that the Iraqi
Government and United Nations agencies will give top
priority to the issue of the return of refugees and
provide the necessary contingencies and conditions for
that to occur.

In spite of the relative progress made in the area
of human rights, we continue to be concerned about
certain incidents that have resulted in the deaths of
several civilians and politicians, as we are about
killings and attacks against various groups in Iraqi
society.

We are also very concerned about the fact that
more than 15,000 persons are being detained by the
occupying forces and that Iraqi authorities have
rearrested some of them as soon as they are freed from
detention facilities under the control of foreign forces.
Iraqi authorities hold those people under difficult
circumstances, without having secured arrest warrants
against them from the judiciary and without giving
them fair trials. We hope that that will change soon.

The situation in Iraq today is very different from
what it was when resolution 661 (1990) was adopted.
The time has come for the Security Council to take the
necessary steps to allow Iraq to resume the
international and legal status it enjoyed before that
instrument was adopted.

