Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to welcome your presence here with
us, Madam Minister, and also to welcome your
country's initiative to organize this debate dealing with
one of the most sensitive areas in the work of the
Security Council.

I would also like to welcome the participation of
the high-level officials from the Congo and Indonesia,
and the African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security. I would also thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations for being here. I
thank all of them for their presence. It is an expression
of the importance that this forum gives to this
discussion.

In this statement, I will first touch upon the
general principles that Peru believes should guide our
cooperation with regional organizations. I will then
refer to some specific aspects of this cooperation with
regional organizations, in particular in Africa.

Regarding principles, I wish to underscore the
following points. First, I would note the importance of
conflict prevention and of early warning and rapid
response systems. That includes creating the capacity
to respond appropriately, depending on the nature of
the problem, when crisis situations arise, relying on
one of the three basic pillars supporting peace -
which is the focus of our work here in the Security
Council - I refer to development, security and human
rights.

Secondly, I wish to reaffirm that, for Peru, the
framework for the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations, such as the African
Union, in the task of maintaining international peace is
Chapter VIII and in particular Article 51 of the Charter.
Peru and other Latin American countries participated
actively in the drafting process to arrive at the present
wording which reconciles the prime responsibility of
the Security Council in the fulfilment of its
responsibilities in the area of international peace and
security, with the recognition of the purview of
regional agreements consistent with the Purposes and
Principles of the Charter. We believe that discussions
in the Council since 2003 have further contributed to
the updating and thinking of the Council in this area.

Thirdly, the United Nations must finance
peacekeeping operations which are within the mandate
of this Organization, and it must grant all Member
States access to these operations because participation
in peacekeeping operations is not just a duty, it is also
a right for Member States.

Fourthly, for Peru, the universal nature of the
participation by States Members of the United Nations
in these operations must not be undermined on the
basis of geographical origin, language or cultural
environment.

Fifthly, the best way to guarantee effective
international action is to maintain a credible standby
force which can be deployed rapidly in a crisis
situation, in order to contain, in internal conflicts, any
escalation of violence, massive violations of human
rights, ethnic cleansing or genocide, to mention but a
few scourges.

Sixthly, and finally, another fundamental
principle for us is that cooperation with regional
organizations must be flexible and must evolve because
every circumstance demands particular treatment.

As to the specific aspects, I wish to say that, for
Peru, the way in which cooperation among
international, regional and subregional organizations
has been carried out represents different realities. On
the one hand, it is clear that they have broad scope for
developing their joint action to prevent, manage and
resolve conflicts. They also have a comparative
advantage because of their capacity to recognize and
deal with structural problems in specific regions, such
as the problems that are at the root of many of the
conflicts in Africa.

Similarly, regional organizations have a holistic
vision which covers security, development, human
rights and even personal contacts. That is a
comparative advantage in peacekeeping operations, in
institution-building and in post-conflict reconciliation.
We therefore need to have greater operational
interrelationship between the United Nations and these
regional organizations.

However, at the same time, we must recognize
that, in some cases, difficulties in this interaction do
arise, sometimes because of the constituent instruments
of the regional organizations or their institutional
strength and at other times because of the political will
of the protagonists. That explains why,, on the ground,
this cooperation finds dissimilar forms of expression.

In point of fact, we have cases where cooperation
has been beneficial for the discharge of the functions
and mandates of both the United Nations and the
regional organizations. By way of example in this
category, we could refer to the experience of the
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in Burundi. As Latin Americans, we are
also mindful of the fruitful cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization of American
States in the stabilization of Haiti.

Then, we also have cases where, together, we are
still seeing how far participation, in this case with the
African Union in cooperation with the United Nations,
can go. That is the case with Somalia or the discussions
between the Ugandan Government and the Lord's
Resistance Army. These are situations where we have a
real expectation of progress.

At the other extreme are the situations where we
have had the most difficulties, and where, despite the
willingness of organizations, we have not yet been able
to cooperate in a sustained fashion to protect civilians
and restore political dialogue among all of the parties. I
am referring, of course, to the situation in Darfur.

The African continent requires our greatest
attention, because cooperation with the African Union
is of great importance and value for peace and security.
However, we must not lose sight of the fact that peace
is much more than the absence of hostilities. In this
respect, cooperation in peacekeeping should, from the
start, consider exit strategies based on long-term
stabilization that does not rely solely on the use of
force. Therefore, priority attention should focus on the
need to enhance our cooperation to ensure long-term
stability in the region through institution-building,
strengthening democratic governance and ensuring
economic viability. In that way, we will be laying the
groundwork for sustainable development making it
possible for the men and women living on the African
continent to achieve their aspiration to peace and
security, to enjoy human rights and economic growth
for all inhabitants.

In conclusion, like previous speakers, I would
simply express Peru's support for the draft presidential
statement that will be adopted at the end of today's
discussion. I would also thank the South African
delegation for drafting it.

