Mr. Haysom: In my previous statement to the
Security Council in March (see S/PV.7645) I said that
in 2016 the survival of the National Unity Government
would be an achievement. I stressed that the Government

had to overcome five distinct hurdles to prevail. The
Government would need to tackle a potent conflation
of political, economic and security challenges. To
do so, it would also need to face two additional
challenges, namely, that of securing medium-term
financial and military assistance from the international
communityand that of making headway in laying the
foundation for an effective peace process. A failure
to overcome any of those distinct hurdles could have
significant consequences for the country.

This is not to downplay the real progress
that Afghanistan has made over the past decade,
especially, for example, in education, human right, and
especially women's rights, and in the emergence of a
vibrant, democratic culture. That progress is widely
acknowledged, and rightly so. Rather, the objective
was to draw attention to the formidable obstacles
that Afghanistan faces and to underline the need
for a concerted response to the challenges from all
stakeholders, including the international community.

I am pleased to note that there have been positive
steps in meeting some of those five challenges since
I last addressed the Council. On the economic front,
we have noted progress in revenue collection, in
meeting International Monetary Fund benchmarks
and in developing thoughtful medium-term plans for
reform and for economic development under difficult
conditions. There has also been distinct progress in the
management of public finances. And, as we did only
two years ago, we do not fear an imminent default in
civil-service salary payments.

We should acknowledge some of the milestones
that have been reached on some of the most ambitious
projects, developed in collaboration with other countries
in the region. The past month has seen the inauguration
of the Salma hydroelectric dam, the CASA 1000
electricity project and a trilateral economic agreement
among Afghanistan, India and Iran. The agreement
on the development of the Chabahar Port will open
up a major new corridor for regional trade. Those
developments come on the back of the earlier launch of
the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India natural
gas pipeline project. Projects of such scale take time to
deliver, but have real potential to transform Afghanistan
into the regional hub it aspires to be. They Show what
can be achieved through regional partnerships.

On the security front, there has been a deliberate
response by the security forces to the lessons learned
from the dynamics and developments of last year. The
battlefield in many areas is in a state of flux, with
gains and reversals but with neither side effecting
clear dominance. The security forces continue to face
serious challenges, including in addressing questions
of morale, leadership, attrition and logistics. For now,
though, they are holding their ground.

I am pleased to note that the nominees for the
positions ofMinister ofDefence and head ofthe National
Directorate of Security were confirmed by the Wolesi
Jirga only yesterday. That is a positive development
that ends a protracted period of uncertainty, and which
will hopefully have both a positive operational impact
and boost morale.

Quite correctly, Afghanistan has been canvassing
support for a regional counter-terrorism strategy,
while recognizing that peace in Afghanistan and
stability in the region demand and deserve a regional
effort. I believe that the region accepts that logic and
that responsibility.

However, I remain deeply concerned about the
impact that the high level of violence is having on
the civilian population. There has been no let-up
during Ramadan, during which period there have
been some reports of disturbing brutality, including
attacks on worshippers. Only yesterday, an incident in
Badakhshan caused the deaths of 10 civilians, among
them several children. Civilian casualty levels remain
high and conflict-related displacement continues. I
am especially concerned about the trend of targeted
attacks on civilians working in the judicial sector and
on journalists.

In my View, there is a risk that the conflict could
enter a new phase, which could see retaliatory acts of
vengeance and an escalating spiral ofviolence. I remind
all parties to the conflict of their obligations to protect
civilians from the impact of hostilities. Perpetrators of
human rights and humanitarian law violations must be
held to account, both to ensure justice for victims and
to effectively reduce harm to the civilian population
through deterrence. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has especially had
cause recently to draw attention to the inviolate status
of schools and medical clinics during conflict.

Progress in the areas of the economy and security is
imperative so that the Afghan people have confidence
in their Government, and it is especially important at
this time, as the Government seeks to secure, in Warsaw
and in Brussels, a firm and longer-term of international
support - the third hurdle.

Serious engagement on the part of the Government
with donors to address the issues that would promote
success at those meetings is acknowledged. We would
strongly support the Afghan appeal that development
assistance is a more effective way of dealing with
migration than bearing the expense of integrating
migrants in host countries. However, what is expected
of Afghanistan is not proof of its considerable needs,
but of its demonstrable capacity to utilize resources
effectively so that aid has a real impact.

There have been real attempts to meet donor
expectations, as we have seen through progress in
refreshing mutual accountability indicators and in
providing an Afghanistan development framework.
Efforts to counter corruption are moving beyond
statements of intent. The establishment by President
Ghani of the high council on governance, justice
and anti-corruption is a first step in that regard, as
is the setting up of the anti-corruption justice centre.
The appointment of a new Attorney General was
another positive step. The challenge ahead will be
to demonstrate results, not only on paper and in the
machinery of governance but also in the everyday lives
of Afghans.

While we remain hopeful that the Warsaw meeting
will be successful, preparations for the Brussels
conference are still a work in progress. Afghanistan
needs increasingly to appreciate the range ofcompelling
demands from other countryies competing for donor
dollars. The donor community, for its part, needs
to recognize that its expectations of reform should
be realistic when measured against the full range of
challenges facing the Afghan State.

With regard to the establishment of a viable peace
process, with the failure, so far, of the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group to midwife such a process, and
the recent death of Taliban leader Akhtar Mohammad
Mansoor, such a process seems unlikely in the short
term. We believe, however, that there are elements
within the Taliban movement who are questioning
whether they can win militarily - at least in the short
term - and wondering whether a purely military goal
is desirable.

During my tenure, UNAMA has engaged
intensively in the pursuit of peace, both by supporting
others' initiatives and by proposing and pursuing our
own. Most recently, we teamed up with the Organization
ofIslamic Cooperation to insistjointly to the Taliban on
the need for a viable peace process and to emphasize
that a peaceful resolution of the long and bitter conflict
was not a second prize, but a preferable outcome. A
continued refusal to accept that will earn them only
outcast status.

We maintain our view that peace is not a luxury,
but a necessity without which Afghanistan as we know
it is not sustainable. Afghans must eventually agree
the arrangements by which they can live together in
peace and harmony. I am disappointed that there has
not yet been any traction on peace efforts, but I remain
optimistic that such a process will eventually emerge.

Finally, on the political front, slow progress in
advancing electoral reforms and setting an election
calendar is one indicator of the need for greater political
cohesion and a need for the members of a fragmented
political class to acknowledge their shared destiny.
On 13 June, the Wolesi Jirga voted against the draft
structure law, thereby necessitating further review and
discussions. The date of 17 June - the last date for
announcing, pursuant to Constitutional requirements,
the electoral calendar for the promised elections
on 15 October - has come and gone, and there still
appears to be no agreement on the way forward.

Continued uncertainty about the electoral calendar
will contribute to challenges to the legitimacy of both
the National Unity Government and the Parliament,
which has long overstayed its term of office. An
increasingly vocal opposition, drawing on the
dissatisfaction prompted by the economic and security
downturn but otherwise divided in its aspirations,
appears to be coalescing around a common demand for
a new Government arrangement.

A political confrontation is the last thing
Afghanistan needs as it endeavours to cope with
its current challenges, particularly in the period
immediately preceding the Brussels conference, when
Government effectiveness will surely fall under the
spotlight. I, together with my international colleagues,
have urged all political leaders to adopt a broader,
more collaborative approach, rather than allowing
the current fragmentation and division to stand. That
applies to the cohabitation between the legislature and
the executive, among the elements within the National
Unity Government, and with the political opposition
outside of it.

Looking forward with the insights I have gained
over the past four years, I remain optimistic that
Afghans can meet the challenges that they face. For
that I rely on an appreciation of two qualities. The first
is the resilience of the Afghan people in facing down
their difficult challenges. The second is the existence
of a real pan-Afghan patriotism, which survives in the
face of sectarian loyalties. That is a quality that, from
my experience in other war-afflicted countries, should
not be undervalued. Because it is endowed with those
two qualities, it is possible for Afghanistan not only to
prevail to survive in 2016 but also to grow stronger as
a result.

As this is my last briefing to the Security Council in
my capacity as Special Representative for Afghanistan,
I would like to thank my colleagues for their dedication
to the work and values of the United Nations. A
mission functions on the enthusiasm, professionalism
and commitment of its staff, and in UNAMA I was
extremely well served.

