Major General Kazura: I thank the members of
the Security Council very much for their comments, and
Lieutenant General Maqsood Ahmed and Lieutenant
General Dos Santos Cruz for theirs. With respect to the
various questions asked, I will try to base my answers
on the comments of Lieutenant General Ahmed.

In fact, the strategy needs to respond to many
questions on that point. Again, I am going to go back to
the subject of where we are today in Mali and talk more
about the problems we have there, so that we can see
what can be done about them.

I was very happy to understand that we all speak
the same language in terms of the situation on the
ground. We are no longer involved in peacekeeping. We
now have another programme: responding to terrorism.
Now that we know that we have a different situation
compared to what we had yesterday, I think that we
need to adapt and find new solutions to the problems
before us. I am saying that because, as has already been
said, we already have 30 troops dead on the ground and
many more wounded.

As I was saying, I do not want to believe that such
assaults are going to happen again, but it can happen
even as we speak. Once again, I think it is time to look
at what exactly we can do now and what we can do
tomorrow and what we can do in the future. It is good
to prepare for what we will do in the future, but we need
to understand that we need to something right away to
prepare for the action that we may encounter tomorrow.

That is why I am grateful for the cooperation
between the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and Operation
Barkhane and others, which have enabled us to be
where we are, even if we still have a problem. I think
we need to intensify operations now, because we need
to pin down the terrorists today so that we can have
time to organize our own troops for subsequent action.
If we do not do something today, we will be in trouble.

As the Council members know - I think they
know it better than I do - we have such problems not
only in Mali but also in many other countries in the
neighbourhood. We may think - and this is on the
political side, which the Council is more conversant
with than I am - that the talks in Algiers need to come
up with something that is concrete, so that there can
be some stability on the ground. Various movements
and actors on the ground have involved themselves
with the problem, saying that, if the talks in Algiers do
not produce a good solution, then we need to prepare
ourselves for tomorrow. By "preparing" themselves
they are actually creating more clashes. That kind of
ungoverned situation gives the terrorists the leeway to
continue to organize and kill our people.

As I said before, I think we need to continue to
push the movements to be accountable in the areas they
control. They claim that they cannot understand how
our troops are being killed. Indeed, the movements say
that they control an area, but when our people are killed
they say that they do not know what happened. I do not
think that is acceptable.

I have been asked by many Council members about
the intervention brigade. I believe that the Brigade is
being thought about in the context ofa strategic review.
As General Dos Santos Cruz said, if we are strong on
the ground, we send a good message about ourselves
and about the United Nations in general. If something
happens today and we do not react, then we are in fact
encouraging them to do something similar or even more
lethal tomorrow. That is something that people should
think about with reference to our case in Mali. I was
trying to answer that question, even as the leadership of
the United Nations is trying to think about it.

General Ahmed talked about training. Obviously,
we need to continue to think about that. The troops we
have on the ground were sent to deal with peacekeeping
missions. It is consistent with what General Dos Santos
Cruz was talking about - attitude and mindset. Having
the attitude and mindset of a peacekeeping operation
and then turning it into anti-terrorist activities is
something that we should be thinking seriously about.
The only way to go about that and to find a solution is
to try to train our people to know exactly where they
are, and, of course, after training to supply them with
the equipment that is suitable for responding to the
problems we have today.

Those were the various questions that I was asked
to respond to. Once again, I would insist on the fact
that in the environment that we have in Mali today,
the people we have who have been wounded and killed
were in fact killed because they were the ones who were
on the ground and they are the ones who are moving.
They were not killed while they were at home sleeping;
they were killed while they were out trying to do their
jobs. I would also insist on the fact that we need to see
how we can protect them and how we can train them
to be able to deal with the real situation on the ground.

In that regard, I salute what Operation Barkhane
has done in Aguelhok today, because they have sent a
liaison detachment that is now trying to cooperate with
the Chadians and help train them. If that can be done
in other camps by other countries, that would also help.
I am trying to emphasize the fact that we need to train
our people to be able to do their jobs while we wait
for various other measures to be taken. At the same
time, we are trying to get the proper equipment into
their hands. As General Ahmed said, we are happy to
be getting more equipment to deal with the situation. I
just want to remind the Council that delays in getting
us that equipment are not going to help, because the
terrorists are not going to wait until we get equipment
before they act. We need to be able to react now, even
though we are waiting for equipment.

