Mr. Garang de Mabior: First, let me thank you,
Sir, and this world body, the Security Council, for
inviting me to this meeting. I would also like to thank
the Council for coming to Nairobi last November,
which contributed positively to the achievement of
peace in our country. We - the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement (SPLM) and the Government of
the Sudan - promised the Council and the Sudanese
people that we would deliver a Christmas and new
year's present in the form of comprehensive peace, and
we did precisely that. We are grateful to the Council
and to all those who facilitated the signing of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

The Agreement we signed on 9 January 2005
ushered in a new era in the history of the Sudan, the
region and Africa. It took the parties 10 years under the
mediation of the Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) - from the time when the
Declaration of Principles was issued, in 1994, and the
Machakos Framework Agreement was reached, in July
2002, to the holding of intensive negotiations at
Naivasha, where Ali Othman Taha and myself sat for
16 months, from September 2003 to the end of
December 2004 - for the final Peace Agreement to be
reached. The Comprehensive Peace Agreement is a
truly Sudanese product, which was facilitated by an
African regional mediation effort by the countries of
IGAD, namely, Kenya, Uganda, Ethiopia and Eritrea,
with facilitation by the international community, and
especially the troika countries of the United States, the
United Kingdom and Norway, in addition to Italy, the
Netherlands and other countries. We were not
surprised, but we are delighted by out people's
outpouring of overwhelming support for the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

Accordingly, the SPLM. National Liberation
Council, which is the Movement's highest legislative
body, unanimously ratified the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement on 24 January 2005, after two days of
deliberations in Rumbek. The Government's National
Assembly also unanimously ratified the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, on 1 February 2005.
In that regard, I wish to declare, on behalf of the
parties and the people of the Sudan, that we are proud
of that achievement and that we have national
ownership of the Agreement. That is why, in the
general and fundamental provisions of the ceasefire
arrangements component of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, we said that

"The parties agree that the national
ownership of the peace process, political will and
continuous dialogue are indispensable elements
for sustainable peace. They shall collaborate to
observe and respect the ceasefire and resort to
their own wisdom to contain and solve any
problem that may arise."

In preparing to implement the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement/Army (SPLM/A) has established several
committees to work out mechanisms to transform its
various organs from organs of guerrilla warfare and
armed opposition to institutions of good governance.
We are also holding discussions with the Government
of the Sudan so that, soon after our current visit to the
Security Council, the SPLM. will send advance teams
to Khartoum, Juba, Malakal, Wau, Kadugli, Damazien
and Abyei - the areas specified in the Agreement -
for ease of coordination of the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and so that we do not
have to communicate far from each other.

Both the Government of the Sudan and the SPLM
are also currently evaluating the drafts of their
respective joint assessment missions. A final joint
document will soon be ready for presentation to the
donors conference in Oslo, hopefully next month. We
are also working jointly to produce an initial draft of
the interim national constitution, in consultation with
other political forces in the country and with civil
society groups. That draft will be presented to the 60-
member, all-inclusive National Constitutional Review
Commission for discussion, further development and
eventual adoption by the SPLM. National Liberation
Council and the Government of the Sudan's National
Assembly, hopefully within the next six weeks. It is the
interim national constitution that will constitute the
necessary constitutional instrument to launch the
Government of National Unity, the government of
southern Sudan and the other structures stipulated in
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

I would like to avail myself of this opportunity to
call on the international community to contribute
generously at the Oslo donors conference. When the
Security Council met at Nairobi, I appealed to the
international community through the Council to
contribute generously and to fulfil its obligations at the
donors conference.

Clearly, the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
presents many challenges and opportunities for the
Sudan, the region, Africa and the world at large. The
Comprehensive Peace Agreement has to be translated
into real and tangible benefits. Refugees and internally
displaced persons are already moving to their
respective homes in southern Sudan, the Nuba
Mountains, the Blue Nile region and Abyei - before
the necessary minimum social amenities are put in
place. That is creating further distress for the host
communities, which already find themselves in a
fragile situation. I take the opportunity of my visit to
the Security Council to call upon, and urge, the
international community to act speedily to help us with
the enormous tasks of the voluntary return,
reintegration and rehabilitation of returning refugees
and internally displaced persons. The parties in
general, and especially the SPLM, need a great deal of
assistance to enable them to fulfil their obligations and
to continue to fully own and implement the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

With respect to the United Nations peace support
mission for the Sudan, I would like to say that the
SPLM. welcomes, and supports in principle, the
deployment of a United Nations peace support mission
to the Sudan, as requested by the parties in the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. In that context, I
would ask that a representative of the SPLM. be placed
here so that we can discuss the details of the peace
support mission for the Sudan and so that we can
contribute ideas, as we said in the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement when we requested the United
Nations to

"constitute a lean, effective, sustainable and
affordable United Nations peace support mission
to monitor and verify this Agreement and to
support the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement as provided for under Chapter
VI of the United Nations Charter".

There are also many other issues on which we will

need to discuss and coordinate, such as the size of the

force and which countries will contribute.

In general, and in terms of the overall
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, we need to have a common concept of the
process. The United Nations is not alone on this issue.
In the endeavours to monitor and verify compliance by
the parties with their commitments under the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, we see the United
Nations acting in concert with other players within the
framework of the assessment and evaluation
commission, as stipulated in the Peace Agreement.
Those are details that we would like to discuss with the
Council if we leave a delegation here at the United
Nations.

Also in that connection, on the issue of the
United Nations peace support operation in the Sudan, I
want to point out that we, the Sudanese, have ourselves
voluntarily negotiated a unique Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, which prescribes, for lack of better
terminology, a one-country/two-systems model during
the six years of the interim period, at the end of which
the people of southern Sudan and Abyei will exercise
the right of self-determination to choose between
remaining in a new and united Sudan and opting out,
for an independent southern Sudan. We believe that
this is the best way to achieve justice and equality for
all Sudanese, irrespective of whether they are of Arab
or African origin, whether they are Muslims or
Christians: through voluntary union. And we believe
that we will achieve that goal if we implement the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and if we work in
partnership as Sudanese.
I am aware that the United Nations system is
naturally used to dealing with States, under a one-
country/one-system model. But the one-country/two-
systems model that we have negotiated in the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, to which the United
Nations was a witness at the signing ceremony in
Nairobi on 9 January, is the will of the Sudanese
people. I appeal to the United Nations system to
respect that and to reflect it in all its dealings with the
Government of National Unity and with the
government of southern Sudan, without prejudice to
the unity and sovereignty of the Sudan.

Thirdly, I want briefly to talk about peace in
Darfur and in eastern Sudan. The conflict in Darfur is
old; it did not start in 2003, as some reports appear to
indicate. It also did not come about because the armed
opposition in Darfur felt left out in the IGAD/Naivasha
peace process. The conflict in Darfur goes back to the
1980s, before the present Government came to
power - and even before that. But this is not the time
or the place to talk about the history and background of
the conflict in Darfur.

When conflict intensified in Darfur at the end of
2002, the SPLM. wasted no time in declaring that the
pursuit of military victory by either side would be
futile and would only escalate the conflict, and that the
Government of the Sudan and the armed opposition in
Darfur should seek a peaceful, negotiated political
settlement in the shortest time possible. Events since
then have vindicated our position, which we wish to
reiterate again today. The SPLM, having recently
concluded its own peace agreement with the
Government of the Sudan, feels encouraged and
optimistic that the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
will enhance the chances of a peaceful resolution in
Darfur and eastern Sudan.

First and foremost, an atmosphere sufficiently
conducive to constructive dialogue between the
Government of the Sudan and the armed opposition
must be created. The parties ought to abide fully by
their commitment to cease hostilities. The Janjaweed
militias should be reined in, and those among them
who are eventually proven to have committed serious
crimes or atrocities should be punished - after peace
is achieved in Darfur, not before, as that would be
putting the cart before the horse, in which case neither
the cart nor the horse will move and neither will go
anywhere.

Although the SPLM. is not part of the current
Government of the Sudan - and is also not a part of
the Darfur armed opposition - we have a moral and
political obligation to assist the Sudan in achieving
comprehensive peace. The SPLM. stands ready to offer
its help in finding a resolution of the conflicts in
Darfur and in eastern Sudan. That assistance can come
in two different forms. As co-architects of the
Naivasha protocols and of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, we would offer our views and suggestions
on how elements of the protocols could be adapted to
the Darfur situation in the framework of the Abuja
forum, and eventually also to eastern Sudan under
some forum acceptable to the parties. For that purpose
of providing assistance, when I learned that I was
coming to New York, before coming here I passed
through Kenya to consult with President Mwai Kibaki
and through Addis Ababa to consult with Alpha
Konare, who holds the Darfur file for the African
Union, and with Prime Minister Meles Zenawi. From
there, I went to Asmara to consult with President
Afwerki and all the Darfur groups: the Sudan
Liberation Movement (SLM) and the Justice and
Equality Movement (JEM), as well as with the Beja
Congress and the Rashaida Free Lions of eastern
Sudan. Finally, I came through Cairo, where I
consulted with Minister Omar Suleiman, because the
National Democratic Alliance (NDA) negotiations,
including eastern Sudan, are under Egyptian mediation.

As a result of those consultations and my
knowledge of the situation, I am encouraged to believe
that the Comprehensive Peace Agreement can be
successfully applied and adapted to the conflicts in
Darfur and eastern Sudan so that a comprehensive
peace agreement may be achieved for the whole of the
Sudan. I believe that the first step would be for the
parties to agree in principle - and preferably even
commit themselves in front of the Security Council -
to accept the Comprehensive Peace Agreement as the
basis for resolving the conflicts in Darfur and eastern
Sudan, and perhaps also to commit themselves to a
deadline for reaching agreement, as we did in
November 2004. The parties could then negotiate the
details on autonomy and self-government for those
areas, on power-sharing, on wealth-sharing and on
security arrangements. The SPLM. could assist them in
working out those details. Whatever permutations can
be made with respect to those parameters - autonomy,
power-sharing, wealth-sharing and security
arrangements and that would bring peace to the
Sudan and keep the country united would be a
necessary price to be paid by all the parties.

 

That is the first aspect of the assistance that we
can give. On the military and security side, the SPLM
could help contribute to the further stabilization of the
security situation in Darfur and to the protection of
civilians, if asked by parties to the conflict in that
region or by the international community with the
agreement of the parties. Last September, when I came
to New York and met the Secretary-General, I offered
the suggestion that a tripartite stabilization force for
Darfur, consisting of 10,000 troops from the
Government of the Sudan, 10,000 troops from the
SPLA and 10,000 troops from the African Union, all
with international logistics and other support, would
provide an adequate neutral and robust force for the
security stabilization of Darfur and the protection of
civilians, and thus for the creation of the necessary
environment conducive to negotiations and to the
reaching of a comprehensive peace agreement.

Now that we have signed the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement with the Government of the Sudan,
that offer makes even more sense, and I wish to renew
the offer for consideration by all concerned.

As mentioned earlier, and despite what remains a
grim picture in Darfur, there is reason to believe - and
I am optimistic - that the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement signed on 9 January has now considerably
improved prospects for the resolution of the Darfur
conflict and of the conflict in eastern Sudan. The
possibilities created by the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement should therefore be fully exploited in terms
of finding a fair and just political settlement before the
international community resorts to other measures.

Finally, I should like to alert this world body
regarding a linkage that is sometimes made between
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and resolution of the conflict in Darfur.
Some people even go to the extent of saying that there
will be no peace dividend for southern Sudan or other
areas covered by the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
unless the conflict in Darfur is resolved. That position
is flawed and counterproductive. First, it punishes two
victims of the conflict: southern Sudan and Darfur. It is
also morally wrong, as well as politically inapt.

Secondly, the logical consequence of that position
is that the situation in the south, the Nuba Mountains,
the Blue Nile and Abyei to drift back towards war,
thereby combining with the present desperate situation
in Darfur and the situation brewing in eastern Sudan.
That would lead to a scenario of a failed State in the
Sudan - the very scenario we wanted to avoid in the
first place by signing the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.
In war, as in other areas of activity, often the best
course of action is to reinforce success. The correct and
prudent course of action is therefore to implement the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement while at the same
time searching for a fair and just political settlement
for Darfur and eastern Sudan. Waiting for a solution to
Darfur before implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement would surely lead to a serious

disaster - not only for the Sudan, but also for the rest
of the region and beyond. We strongly advise against
such a linkage.

Once more I thank the Council profusely for
inviting me to address this world body. I hope the
points covered in my few remarks were useful to
members and will be useful in achieving a fair, just and
comprehensive political settlement in Darfur and
eastern Sudan so that we will have comprehensive
peace throughout the Sudan and so that we can enter a
new era of peace, stability and development.

