The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of Kazakhstan.

We thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for
his customary detailed and objective update on the
situation in the Middle East. I will focus on some salient
developments in the Middle East and North Africa.

With regard to Syria, Kazakhstan continues to
support the measures taken by United Nations Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura, as well as by the Russian
Federation, Turkey, Iran, the United States and the
international community, to bring the Government
of Syria and the Syrian opposition together. On
22 December, the eighth international meeting on Syria
in Astana concluded with the adoption of a number of
documents promoting confidence-building measures
and aimed at combating terrorism and consolidating
the political process in Syria. The meeting also adopted
a joint statement by the Astana process guarantor
States, Iran, Russia and Turkey, which decided to
appoint a working group on the release of detainees/
abductees, the handover of bodies and the identification
of missing persons, in addition to a joint statement
on humanitarian mine action in Syria that included
UNESCO's list of cultural heritage sites. Kazakhstan
intends to cooperate closely with the Syrian national
dialogue congress to be held in Sochi on 29 and
30 January, involving representatives of all segments
of Syrian society. The next high-level international
meeting on Syria in Astana will be held next month in
support of the Geneva process.

In Lebanon, the formation of a new Government and
election of a new President are positive outcomes, and
should lead to the holding of free and fair parliamentary
elections on 6 May. The signing of a decree in that
regard reflects the people's unity on the issue. It
will be important to help Lebanon consolidate its
constitution and democracy, which remain contingent
on developments in neighbouring Syria. The Lebanese
Armed Forces play a vital role in maintaining security
on the border with Syria and throughout Lebanon, and
thereby helping to prevent threats from Al-Nusra and
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

We support the decision of the Iraqi Government to
hold national and provincial council elections on 12 May,
which will help its democracy and State-building
processes and its consolidation of the Constitution. We
also believe that reducing violence, especially in the
liberated territories, will be very important politically.
Kazakhstan welcomes the inter-Iraqi agreements to
extend the ceasefire regime, which should remain in
force until there is agreement on the joint management
of the disputed territories. Kazakhstan is in favour
of preserving the territorial integrity of Iraq as a
State through a constructive dialogue between the
Government and Iraqi Kurdistan. We suggest more
meetings between the Prime Minister ofIraqi Kurdistan,
Mr. Barzani, and his Iraqi counterpart in Baghdad,
Mr. Al Abadi, such as that held on 20 January.

In Libya, we are told that fighting broke out
recently in the Tajoura district of Tripoli. Kazakhstan
calls on all parties to implement their obligations under
international humanitarian law, safeguard civilians
and civilian structures and focus on structural political
issues among the many armed actors on the ground
with conflicting agendas. Security sector reform is
essential to the political process. The fragile and shaky
status quo is not sustainable. It is therefore necessary
to amend the Libyan Political Agreement to achieve a
stable Government.

Turning to Yemen, we know that that conflict
has no military solution. It is clear that the deep-
seated contradictions in Yemen can be resolved only
through a broad-based and inclusive national dialogue.
In addition, the coalition must agree to keep all ports
open in Yemen in order to facilitate the rapid entry and
distribution of humanitarian assistance and commercial
imports across the country. We pay special tribute to
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Yemen,
Mr. Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, for his determined
support to work for peace in the country.

Kazakhstan's position on the Middle East peace
process is very clear and remains unchanged. We
support the two-State solution and call for the early
resumption of negotiations, especially in the bilateral
format and without preconditions. That should be in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
the relevant Security Council resolutions and other
mechanisms and initiatives. We support the rights of
the Palestinian people to self-determination and the
establishment of a free, sovereign and independent
State within the international borders of 1967, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. It is necessary to begin direct
talks to reach agreement on pending issues by giving
them the so-called final status through the signing of a
basic treaty. We join the call of others to fully support
the work of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which
must continue without any financial cutbacks.

We endorse the words of Ambassador Nikki
Haley that we need leaders with political will, great
vision, conviction and a commitment to peace, such
as Anwar Sadat and King A1 Hussein of Jordan. To
that list I would like to add President Yitzhak Rabin.
They stood courageously for the ideals of peace and
were unshaken in what they believed. One cannot
build peace unilaterally. It requires two sides to meet
each other in the aspiration for peace. Only last week,
in this very Chamber, my President held a briefing
on confidence-building measures (see S/PV. 8160)
and expressed our country's firm belief in trust and
confidence as the way to resolve issues of peace and
security. We therefore call on the leaders of Palestine
and Israel to come to the negotiating table and to
promote confidence-building measures that will bring
their people together to peace and security.

Finally, we reiterate the importance of reducing
violence and preventing the emergence of new
tensions in the Middle East in order to maintain global
stability worldwide.

I new resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Maldives.

