The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Kuwait.

I thank Mr. Shearer, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General; Mr. Gilmour, Assistant Secretary-
General for Human Rights; and Ms. Lydia Minagano
for their briefings.

In my statement, I will focus on three key points:
political developments, the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the
humanitarian situation.

On political developments, following the agreement
of the parties to the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan to extend the pre-transition process to November
and the return of the majority of leaders to Juba, we
hope that South Sudan will take advantage of this
opportunity to achieve security and stability. We call
for further measures to build trust among the various
political actors. In that connection, we commend the
efforts of the Holy See to gather the South Sudanese
leaders and to call on them to make further progress
in order to overcome the wounds of the past and
ensure a better future. We also commend the role of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
including the recent efforts of its Member States to
encourage non-signatory parties to the revitalized
agreement to join it.

On the Mission's mandate, our meeting today
is taking place at an important and delicate moment
for UNMISS. While the security situation remains
unchanged, the implementation of the pillars of the
Mission's mandate remains crucial for the Security
Council. We are pleased with the Mission's role in
strengthening and building institutional capacities
in South Sudan, particularly in the areas of security
and justice. We call on all parties to maintain their
cooperation with the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism and to facilitate the Mission's movement.

With respect to the humanitarian situation, we
welcome the increasing number of returning displaced
persons and refugees. We hope to see that process
continued in a voluntary, safe and dignified manner,
and that those returning will be able to access basic
services, on top of which are health and education
services. We also welcome community reconciliation
efforts in South Sudan and hope that they will be felt
at all levels.

Moreover, we reiterate our condemnation of child
recruitment and sexual violence in conflict, whoever the
perpetrator may be. We call for the Mission's freedom
of movement to be guaranteed, as provided for by the
status-of-forces agreement. We also call for its tasks to
be facilitated and for it to be allowed to accomplish its
mandate to the fullest.

In conclusion, fewer than five months remain in the
pre-transitional period, representing a crucial turning
point in the history of South Sudan. We hope that we
will be able to contribute both within and outside the
Security Council to ensuring that the friendly people
of South Sudan are be able to realize their legitimate
aspirations for the future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.

