The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Prendergast for his comprehensive briefing, keen
analysis and balanced observations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
Palestinian presidential election held on
9January 2005. It commends the credible and
fair character of the vote and congratulates the
Palestinian people, who demonstrated their
commitment to democracy by participating in the
election under challenging conditions. The
Council pays tribute to the Central Elections
Commission, which played a key role in ensuring
the successful conclusion of the election, and
expresses its appreciation for the contribution of
international observers and for the support of the
United Nations.

"The Security Council congratulates the
newly elected President of the Palestinian
Authority on his election.

"The Security Council looks forward to the
convening of the Palestinian legislative elections
in the near future and affirms the Council's
continuing support for the Palestinian people in
their democratic process.

"The Security Council supports the
Palestinian Authority and its efforts to pursue the
process of strengthening institutions.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of enhanced and expeditious
international assistance to the Palestinian people
and the Palestinian Authority.

"The Security Council stresses the need for
the full implementation of the Quartet road map,
as endorsed by the Security Council in resolution
1515 (2003), for the creation of an independent,
viable, democratic and sovereign State of
Palestine living side by side with Israel in peace
and security.

"The Security Council calls upon Israelis
and Palestinians to relaunch a genuine political
process and advance towards a just and lasting
peace in the region."

This statement will be issued as a document of

the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/2.

In accordance with the understanding reached in

the Council's prior consultations, I invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion of the subject.

The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.
