Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for your briefing today
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). I commend your leadership of
that important Committee.

Iran's nuclear programme remains a source of deep
concern for the international community. The latest
report (GOV/2013/40) of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) indicates
that the number of Iran's centrifuges and its stockpile of
enriched uranium continue to increase, in contravention
of the relevant Security Council and IAEA resolutions.

Iran is still uncooperative in resolving issues
related to the possible military dimensions of its
nuclear programme, including access to the Parchin
site. It is also disappointing that, despite 10 rounds of
talks between the IAEA and Iran since January 2012,
an agreement has not been reached on the structured
approach document.

Some have expressed hopeful expectations that
the new Government in Iran will bring positive change
to the stagnant political negotiations. However, others
have expressed concern that such expectations are
prematurely optimistic. The new Government may
need some time to meet the hopes of the international
community. Iran needs to realize the necessity of
regaining the confidence of the international community
in the peaceful nature of its nuclear programme through
credible actions.

The next round of talks with the IAEA, in late
September, will provide a timely opportunity for Iran
to show its sincerity. We hope that the new Government
will cooperate with the IAEA and make substantial
progress. We also call upon the new Government to
respond more constructively to the current proposal of
the five permanent members of the Security Council
plus Germany.

Turning to the Committee's work, we are concerned
that pending issues - such as the July 2012 ballistic
missile launches, the transfer of arms to Yemen
and military support to Gaza - still remain under
discussion without progress.

It is regrettable that the Committee has not received
any response from Iran to the letters it had sent in
April and May concerning those pending issues. As a
Member State of the United Nations, Iran should fully
cooperate with the Committee by responding to those
letters promptly and sincerely.

At the same time, the Committee must not await
such responses in perpetuity. We expect the Committee
members to discuss ways to move forward on those
matters. It is the Committee's primary responsibility to
respond to such violations. The Committee's inaction on
violations will undermine the authority and credibility
of the Council.

In the same vein, we reiterate that the Committee
should properly implement the recommendations of the
Panel of Experts. The Panel's final report (S/2013/331, annex) provides a clear picture of the sophisticated
methods that Iran uses to evade sanctions and procure
items from abroad for its prohibited programmes. The
Panel's recommendations are effective countermeasures
against those illicit activities and are designed to help
Member States better implement the resolutions.

Finally, we consider it desirable that the Committee
expand cooperation with other United Nations agencies
and international institutions. INTERPOL's special
notice system has already benefited many Sanctions
Committees, as noted in resolution 1699 (2006). We
hope that the Committee can reach a positive conclusion
on the matter.

