Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
You, Mr. President, have asked us focus our statements
on three issues at most. We will limit ourselves to
talking about just one theme, that is, working as a team
in the Security Council. It is a matter of promoting
the approach that has come to be known as the Toledo
format, in reference to the Spanish city in which
during there Middle Ages there flourished a spirit of
collaboration and exchange among the Jewish, Christian
and Muslim cultures.
While we have now served a year and a half in
the Security Council, this is in fact our fifth term in
this body. Participating in an intermittent way on the
Council has enabled us to gain a different, interesting
perspective that has shown us that teamwork is essential
in order to improve three fundamental things - the
effectiveness, transparency and impact of the Council's
work, which ought to be our collective aim.

What do I mean by teamwork? The Security Council
should not be the sum of 15 individual Member States,
and much less one of 5+10. The Council is a collegial
organ in which we all have a responsibility to actively
participate. We all have something to contribute. Spain
believes that the initiatives that have been led by various
Member States from different regions, cultures and
political perspectives all bring important added value.
I should like to refer to various concrete examples,
namely, Toledo briefings, joint statements, at both open
and closed meetings, the practice ofco-chairmanships of
Council working groups, including with co-penholders,
and the selection of the Secretary-General.

As most Council members and their assistants
are already aware, Toledo briefings have been held
with some regularity at the end of each presidency
since last October. More than a mere recapitulation
of the work of the Council over a given month, the
Toledo format is an informal meeting where a group of
Permanent Representataives respond to questions and
comments from the membership about what has and
has not been achieved during the month. I can think
of no better example of an exercise in transparency,
interaction and accountability to the rest of Members
of the Organization.

Secondly, with regard to joint statements by
members of the Council at open meetings, last October
Spain convened a debate (see S/PV.7539) similar to
today's in which we encouraged such statements - and
I must say, with some success. The goal was not just to
achieve more flexibility and effectiveness but, above
all, greater clarity and strength in the positions. Six
members of the Council spoke jointly, but Members of
the Organization did so as well. Moreover, one member
of the Council - France - decided to make a joint
statement with a Member of the Organization that was
not then a member ofthe Council, that is, with Germany.
I think that is a very clear example of success in working
together. The same philosophy could be applied to the
work of the Council in the closed-door meetings.

Thirdly, with regard to sharing leadership over work
of the Council, the Egyptian Ambassador has already
mentioned the issue, and I would associate myself with
his position. Currently, 33 of 43 penholderships are in
the hands of three members of the Council. We believe
that work of the penholder undoubtedly has added
value. Nevertheless, we think that teamwork in that
regard could benefit from the varied composition of
the whole Council by generating greater collaboration
among the various members, thereby creating bridges
over divisions.

Finally, allow me to quickly refer to the distribution
of the joint chairmanships of the sanctions committees.
Therein lies a clear example of the success of the
Japanese presidency, and I congratulate you, Sir,
on the note adopted last Friday. Under the note, for
the first time, chairmanships of subsidiary bodies of
the Council would was conducted in a spirit of full
collaboration with the participation of all 15 Council
members, under the leadership and the facilitation of
two Council members.

