Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation welcomes the convening of this
meeting by the United States presidency to discuss
human rights and the prevention of conflicts. The
Senegalese delegation would also like express its
appreciation for the opportunity to hear the statement
by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, whose
commitment to the promotion and the protection of
human rights needs no introduction, as was shown by
his very informative briefing.

The Senegalese delegation fully agrees with the
three essential points that the Secretary-General made
earlier. Your initiative, Madam, has enabled us to
relaunch this fascinating and often impassioned debate,
which has hardly been exhausted, among members
of the Security Council on the links, tenuous though
they may appear, between human rights and peace
and security, as well as on the role that the Security
Council can and must play in ensuring the respect of
human rights through prevention when necessary. It is
therefore fortunate that you have included this thematic
debate under an existing and important agenda item
of the Security Council, namely, the maintenance of
international peace and security in its connection with
human rights and the prevention of conflicts.

My delegation hopes that our discussions today will
result, ifnot in a consensus, at least in a clearer idea and
shared Vision with regard to the existing links between
security, peace and human rights, as well as the role
that the various organs of the United Nations system
must play through complementarity and synergy,
the respective prerogatives and mandates of which
have been made clearly identifiable in the Charter of
the United Nations and United Nations practices in
response to the unfortunate development of threats
and conflicts. That has become all the more possible
since, as human rights issues have been addressed for
the past 25 years, the role of the Council in examining
those issues as they relate to international peace and
security has become more clear, particularly within
the framework of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the recommendations in the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446), and resolution 2282 (2016) on the
international peacebuilding architecture, security and
peacebuilding, in particular through the Peacebuilding
Commission.

It is in such a spirit that my country, Senegal,
approaches today's meeting, bearing in mind the
premise that human rights are one of the three pillars of
United Nations activities and are mentioned seven times
in the Charter. But it is clear that we must respect the
mandates of each organ with regard to human rights, in
particular those of the General Assembly and its Human
Rights Council and those of the many committees,
without, of course, forgetting the role of the Secretary-
General through his various Special Representatives
on thematic issues, including those relating to children
and armed conflict, women and peace and security, and
the prevention of genocide.

I can also cite the United Nations Development
Group's human rights mainstreaming mechanism with
its credo "Human Rights Up Front". There are also
the 16 peacekeeping operations, of which 10 include
a human rights element that is more or less well
structured. But all of that would be ineffective, if each
of the bodies were to work in an isolated manner at a
time when everyone agrees that we need more synergies
and complementarity, as expressed in the title of the
"One United Nations" initiative. In that regard, we
anxiously await the decisions of the Secretary-General
concerning the reorganization of the Secretariat.

We note another caveat concerning respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States while
working towards the promotion and protection of
human rights.

Given all of those functional prerogatives, the tragic
turn of many internal conflicts in several areas of the
world has led the Council in the distant and recent past
to act when such situations characterized by massive
human rights violations have threatened international
peace and security, because they risk resulting in
massive refugee flows towards international borders
and consequent border violations.

We recall the terrible events that led, for
example - and there are many other examples - to
the adoption of resolution 688 (1991) on the question
of the Iraqi Kurds and resolution 693 (1991), which
established the United Nations Observer Mission in
El Salvador with an ambitious human rights mandate,
including monitoring, the monitoring, promotion and
investigation of human rights violations. In the same
year, the provisions of Article 2, paragraph 7, of the
Charter were not violated when the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights was invited to
participate in the Council's deliberations. Since then,
according to statistics, the Council has hosted 15
such briefings.
Many other resolutions have resulted from
discussions on human rights in the Council, such
as those concerning South Sudan and the Central
African Republic, as well as those concerning Liberia
and Sierra Leone. I am charting out this history to
remind members that the issue is not a new one and
that it has given rise in the past to edifying examples
of cooperation between various bodies of the United
Nations on more than one occasion, situations in which
the Human Rights Council, for example, established
a commission of inquiry and transmitted its findings
to the General Assembly, which, in turn, adopted a
resolution recommending that the Security Council
follow the advice of the commission of inquiry. That
seems to us to be the kind of cooperation that should be
encouraged, in the spirit of one United Nations.

I would also like to welcome the definition and
granting by the Council of mandates for human rights
protection in 10 of the 16 peacekeeping operations
as well as in five special political missions, which
demonstrates its resolve to contribute to respect for and
the effectiveness of these rights, in particular in times
of conflict.

Thus, aware of the gravity of the issue of human
rights protection in armed conflict, the Council has
incorporated the rights of women and children into
its work by applying to peacekeeping the concepts
of gender equality and of the preservation of the best
interests of the child. These various mechanisms are
complemented by that of sanctions, and one criterion for
sanctions designation is human rights violations. The
Council will also recall the various reports submitted
to the Security Council containing recommendations
aimed at strengthening human rights protection, which
include the one I mentioned earlier.

Let us make no mistake: these gains, remarkable
though they may be, are still fragile and must be
carefully safeguarded from the ever-increasing threats
and challenges we currently face. Indeed, the current
juncture demands that on a daily basis we consider
the links between crises, armed conflicts and human
rights violations. But even beyond such conflicts and
violations, we must also address the issues of poverty,
food insecurity, health crises, environmental problems
and climate change, which pose equally significant
threats to peace and security. It is therefore vital to take
into account all human rights, be they civil, political,
economic, social or cultural, so as to ensure an effective
international peace and security.

It is for that reason that the Council, in addition
to underlining in its decisions that the three pillars
of the Organization - peace and security, human
rights and development - are inextricably linked and
mutually reinforcing.

Concerning the increasing number of major human
rights violations, especially in conflict situations,
by both State and non-State actors - including,
unfortunately, extremist and terrorist groups - we
must work together in a concerted manner and with
greater resolve to put an end to such acts. It is therefore
important that, as independent and sovereign Member
States, we invest sufficiently in all of these different
issues, including the human rights issue, on the basis of
mutual respect and a constructive dialogue.

While one of the main objectives of United Nations
peacekeeping missions is to put an end to conflicts, it
is also vital, in our view, to prevent crises and build
peace and development on a solid foundation. That is
why my country, Senegal, would like to reiterate its
plea for better prevention based on robust, reliable alert
systems and the necessary open cooperation between
all stakeholders, in particular within subregional and
regional organizations such as the African Union, which
has its own African Charter on Human and Peoples'
Rights, and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), which has a Protocol on good
governance, the rule oflaw and electoral processes. We
would also like to underscore the commitment of
ECOWAS, which on a number of occasions has worked
together with the United Nations and demonstrated its
proactivity through good offices, as was the case with
the resolution of the crisis in Burkina Faso, or through
preventive deployment, such as in Liberia in 1990 and
Sierra Leone in 1997, and, more recently, in the Gambia.

Furthermore, United Nations human rights
mechanisms that monitor and report on human rights,
including the Human Rights Council, with its Universal
Periodic Review and organs created under international
instruments, form a basis that is useful, despite needing
some fine-tuning, for addressing human rights issues.

Therefore, the Human Rights Council could,
through the General Assembly if necessary, draw the
attention of the Security Council to situations that may
lead to conflict. Bearing in mind the importance of
the post-conflict phase in crisis recurrence, it seems
to us wise to take into account the promotion and
protection of human rights in efforts at peacebuilding
and bringing about a sustainable peace. My delegation
therefore believes that high priority should be accorded
to the right to development, given the various principles
involved, which include equality, non-discrimination,
participation, transparency and responsibility, as well
as cooperation, in particular at the international level.

Finally, human rights protection can also serve
as a confidence-building measure among parties to a
conflict involved in negotiations on the conclusion of
agreements, either peace agreements or cessation-of-
hostilities agreements. This is a clear reflection of their
relevance in terms of defining political strategies.

Human rights is a cross-cutting issue that runs
through the whole of the United Nations system,
including in the work of the Security Council. Thus
Senegal is of the View that we need to create conditions
for a stronger international cooperation on human
rights that is effective in times of conflict and times
of peace and would make better, synergetic use of the
many relevant mechanisms, in the framework of an
approach that combines universality, interdependence,
impartiality and objectivity.

