Mr. Jalang'o (Kenya): I should like at the outset
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
extremely important meeting. It is indeed an honour for
Kenya to be accorded the opportunity to address the
Security Council. My delegation is therefore delighted
to welcome the new Foreign Minister, Mr. Yusuf
Hassan Ibrahim, in our midst here today.

Kenya welcomes the comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia. The
report highlights recent political developments;
regional and other peace initiatives; activities by the
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Somalia,
Mr. Mohamed Sahnoun; the humanitarian situation;
other activities in support of the peace process; and
post-conflict peace-building mechanisms in Somalia.

Kenya has been charged by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) with the
responsibility to coordinate efforts towards
reconciliation in Somalia. The report of the Secretary-
General covers the efforts expended towards this end in
its section II, part B, under the title "Regional and
other initiatives". My delegation fully associates itself
with the highlights of the report, especially paragraphs
14 to 18.

In the debate on the situation in Africa held in
this Chamber on 30 January, I gave an update on the
efforts of IGAD in the quest for peace in Somalia
which tallies with the report before us. I will therefore
not bore the Council by reiterating aspects of those
efforts which have been adequately covered.

I would like, however, to re-emphasize that on 25
December 2001, three separate agreements were signed
in Nairobi, between the Transitional National
Government on the one hand and the United Somali
Congress/Somali Salvation Alliance (USC/SSA), the
Somalia Reconciliation and Restoration Council
(SRRC) and the Somali National Alliance (SNA) on
the other. Those agreements are a positive indication
that IGAD's efforts in the search for peace and
reconciliation in Somalia are continuing to gather
momentum.

As mandated by the 9th IGAD Summit, held in
Khartoum in January, the IGAD Foreign Ministers
Committee on Somalia met in Nairobi on 14 February
and agreed to convene a National Reconciliation
Conference in the second half of April this year, in
furtherance of the Arta process. All parties to the
conflict are expected to attend without preconditions,
and we appeal to the Council to lend its total and
undivided support.
In the course of efforts to ensure full participation
in the April meeting, Kenya has been informed that a
meeting of the SRRC was held in Dire Dawa, Ethiopia,
from 27 February to 1 March 2002. It is hoped that all
future meetings of this nature will be guided by the
IGAD Foreign Ministers Committee and its Technical
Committee.

In paragraph 61 of his report, the Secretary-
General notes that he has detected a divergence of
views among the member States of IGAD regarding
national reconciliation in Somalia. While this might
have appeared to be the case in the past, Kenya, as
coordinator, wishes to assure the Council that a lot of
progress has been made since the 9th IGAD Summit
and that increasingly we are witnessing a convergence,
rather than a divergence, of views.

To facilitate the achievement of faster progress,
the IGAD Foreign Ministers have established a
Technical Committee comprising front-line States and
the IGAD secretariat, with a secretariat in Nairobi to be
staffed on a permanent basis. That office needs the
Council's support.

IGAD member States welcome the proposal of
the Secretary-General to establish a Committee of
Friends of Somalia, to be based in Nairobi and chaired
by his Representative, as well as the setting up of a
similar Committee in New York to meet periodically
under the chairmanship of the Under-Secretary-
General. In total, it is evident that the focus on Somalia
has been heightened, and it is up to the people of
Somalia to demonstrate maturity and take advantage of
the current good will.

Kenya, as a neighbour of Somalia, will continue
to discharge her fraternal duty to assist Somalia.
Indeed, Kenya has no doubt that, as charged by IGAD,
all involved parties - the regional group, the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), the United
Nations, the IGAD Partners Forum and the Committee
of Friends - will go an extra mile to assist Somalia in
the current peace process, humanitarian assistance and
the improvement of general security.

Finally, Kenya has no doubt that the neighbours
and friends of Somalia will play an impartial and
constructive role in efforts to end the longstanding
problem of the lack of a central administration in
Somalia for the last 10 years and its attendant dangers
for the region and the international community.

