Ms. Jones (United States ofAmerica): We offer our
praise to you, Madam President, and to your delegation
for your leadership of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions over
the past two years. You have shown a steady hand in
guiding us to agreement on a number of improvements
that my delegation believes will advance the Security
Council's efficiency and transparency. Among other
innovations, we appreciate the Chair's work on the note
(8/2010/507, annex) that set forth practical measures
to improve the handover of chairmanships of Security
Council subsidiary bodies. We predict that your own
successes at the helm of the Working Group, Madam
President, will benefit from that. We hope that they
show the same energy and skill as Argentina.

I turn to the two specific topics on our agenda this
morning. Regarding sanctions, we welcome today's
discussion on how to impose and to implement such
measures in a better way. We thank the Ombudsperson
for her presentation. The Council now uses targeted
sanctions to respond to diverse threats, such as
terrorism, nuclear proliferation, the use and recruitment
of children in conflict and trafficking in conflict
minerals. Because those measures are targeted against
those most responsible for those threats, they minimize
unintended humanitarian consequences. We see today's
discussion as one part of a broader conversation on how
to improve the global implementation and effectiveness
of United Nations sanctions.

The United States has supported the past several
years of improvements in the way that the Council

imposes targeted sanctions, including enhancements
to the fairness and clarity of listing and delisting
procedures. For example, we have seen the establishment
of the Focal Point, new steps to notify listed individuals
of their status, new requirements for information
justifying designations and enhanced transparency at
all steps in the sanctions process.

With regard to the sanctions regime under the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities, the United States has been a
leader in proposing and supporting a broad range of
elements to strengthen the sanctions regime over the
past decade, from the development of the standard
cover sheet for listings in 2006 to the dynamic sanctions
regime that we have today. In 2009, the United States
sponsored resolution 1904 (2009) to create the Office
of the Ombudsperson of the 1267 Al-Qaida sanctions
regime. That mandate has been further refined and was
carefully tailored to the special circumstances of that
regime. In recognition of the unique nature and the
unique value of those sanctions, the United States has
devoted significant time and resources to supporting
the Ombudsperson's work. We will continue to do so.

Nevertheless, the Al-Qaida sanctions regime is
sui generis. Unlike the Security Council's 14 other
sanctions programmes, the Al-Qaida sanctions target
individuals and entities associated with the non-State
group who pose a global threat. The Security Council's
other sanctions programmes, such as those imposed in
response to threats in Iran, Yemen and North Korea,
occur in distinctly different and State-focused political
contexts. We therefore oppose exporting the 1267
Ombudsperson model to those other sanctions regimes.
We do, however, support a serious discussion about
how to improve procedures used in the other sanctions
contexts. We encourage the Council to identify best
practices, including for fair and clear listing, exemptions
and delisting procedures that could be standardized
across the other sanctions regimes.

Turning to the International Criminal Court (ICC),
we appreciate and welcome the participation of the
International Criminal Court Prosecutor in today's
open debate. As the Security Council has stressed, the
fight to end impunity and to ensure accountability for
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes
has been strengthened through the work on, and
the prosecution of, those crimes in national courts,
hybrid and ad hoc tribunals and international criminal
justice mechanisms, including the International
Criminal Court. The Security Council has expressed
its commitment to an effective follow-up of Council
decisions, including decisions referring situations to the
International Criminal Court. For example, with respect
to the Darfur situation, we welcome the willingness of
States to consider creative approaches and new tools to
facilitate and enable the ICC's work in Darfur, execute
outstanding arrest warrants and ensure compliance by
States with relevant international obligations.

We welcome future discussions focused on ensuring
full implementation of those Council resolutions that
include ICC referrals. We are also open to considering
an appropriate mechanism for following up on referrals
by the Security Council to the ICC, including the
existing Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals.

