The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
heads of State and Government, the Secretary-General,
the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, ministers and other representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. Their
presence is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter to be discussed.

The Security Council summit will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/473, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of Council
members' of the Council to document S/2009/463,
containing a letter dated 15 September 2009 from the
United States of America transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, the Security Council
will take action on the draft resolution before it prior to
hearing statements from the Secretary-General and
Council members. Accordingly, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam.

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1887 (2009).
I want to thank again everybody who is in
attendance, and I wish them all good morning. In the
more than six decades that this Security Council has
been in existence, only four other meetings of this
nature have been convened. I called for this meeting so
that we may address, at the highest level, a
fundamental threat to the security of all peoples and all
nations - the spread and use of nuclear weapons.

As I said yesterday (see A/64/PV.3), this very
institution was founded at the dawn of the atomic age,
in part because man's capacity to kill had to be
contained, and although we averted a nuclear
nightmare during the cold war, we now face
proliferation of a scope and complexity that demands
new strategies and new approaches. Just one nuclear
weapon exploded in a city - be it New York, Moscow,
Tokyo, Beijing, London or Paris - could kill hundreds
of thousands of people, and would greatly destabilize
our security, our economies and our very way of life.
Once again, the United Nations has a pivotal role to
play in preventing such a crisis.

The historic resolution that we have just adopted
enshrines our shared commitment to the goal of a
world without nuclear weapons, and it brings Security
Council agreement on a broad framework for action to
reduce nuclear dangers as we work towards that goal. It
reflects the agenda that I outlined in Prague and builds
on a consensus that all nations have the right to
peaceful nuclear energy, that nations with nuclear
weapons have the responsibility to move towards
disarmament, and that those without them have the
responsibility to forsake them.

Today, the Security Council endorsed a global
effort to lock down all vulnerable nuclear materials
within four years. The United States will host a summit
next April to advance that goal and to help all nations
achieve it. This resolution will also help strengthen the
institutions and initiatives that combat the smuggling,
financing and theft of proliferation-related materials. It
calls on all States to freeze any financial assets that are
being used for proliferation, and for stronger
safeguards to reduce the likelihood that peaceful
nuclear weapons programmes can be diverted to a
weapons programme.

The resolution that we passed today will also
strengthen the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. We have made it clear that the
Security Council has both the authority and the
09-52314
responsibility to respond to violations of that Treaty.
We have made it clear that the Security Council has
both the authority and the responsibility to determine
and respond as necessary when violations of the Treaty
threaten international peace and security. That includes
full compliance with Security Council resolutions on
Iran and North Korea. I would like to be clear that this
is not about singling out individual nations. It is about
standing up for the rights of all nations that live up to
their responsibilities. The world must stand together.
We must demonstrate that international law is not an
empty promise and that treaties will be enforced.

The next 12 months will be absolutely critical in
determining whether this resolution and our overall
efforts to stop the spread and use of nuclear weapons
are successful. A11 nations must do their part to make
this work. In America, I have promised that we will
pursue a new agreement with Russia to substantially
reduce our strategic warheads and launchers. We will
move forward with the ratification of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and open the
door to deeper cuts in our arsenal. In January, we will
call upon countries to begin negotiations on a treaty to
end the production of fissile material for weapons. The
non-proliferation Treaty Review Conference in May
will strengthen that agreement.

We harbour no illusions about the difficulty of
bringing about a world without nuclear weapons. We
know that there are plenty of cynics and that there will
be setbacks that prove their point, but there will also be
days like today that push us forward and tell a different
story. It is the story of a world that understands that no
difference or division is worth destroying all that we
have built and all that we love. It is a recognition that
can bring people of different nationalities, ethnicities
and ideologies together. In my own country, it has
brought together Democratic and Republican leaders
like George Schultz, Bill Perry, Henry Kissinger and
Sam Nunn, who are with us here today. It was a
Republican President, Ronald Reagan, who once
articulated the goal that we now seek in the starkest of
terms: "A nuclear war cannot be won, and must never
be fought".

And no matter how great the obstacles may seem,
we must never stop our efforts to reduce the weapons
of war. We must never stop until we see the day when
nuclear arms have been banished from the face of the
Earth. That is our task. That can be our destiny. We
09-52314
will leave this meeting with a renewed determination
to achieve that shared goal.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

I now invite the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor.


