Mr. Braun (Germany): Germany is pleased to
contribute to this important debate, which is central
to our engagement within the United Nations. I thank
Argentina for providing a platform for our deliberations
on improving due process and targeted sanctions, as
well as a better follow-up of Security Council referrals
to the International Criminal Court (ICC). I am also
grateful to ICC Prosecutor Ms. Fatou Bensouda and
Ms. Kimberly Prost for their briefings and proposals.

Due process in the context oftargeted sanctions has
been of concern to the United Nations for many years.
Among the many good reasons to ensure high standards
of rule of law and transparency in the implementation
of sanctions regimes, one of the most important is
credibility. Our sanctions regimes need to follow rules
and procedures based on the principles of the United
Nations. They must give everyone affected the means
to understand their rationale and they have to provide
possible remedies. Only then will the sanctions reach
the degree of worldwide acceptance and implementation
necessary to effectively target the challenges they were
designed for in the first place.

The Ombudsperson for the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime sets a positive precedent in that context. By
introducing an Ombudsperson, real progress in due
process was made, although there is still room for
improvement. With a view to suggesting further
concrete measures to be taken, Germany would like to
associate itself with the statement to be delivered by
the representative of Norway, on behalf of the informal
group of like-minded States on targeted sanctions,
regarding the Ombudsperson and the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime.

At the same time, there is also a need to improve due
process in other United Nations sanctions regimes. We
therefore recommend building on the lessons learned
from the creation of the Office of the Ombudsperson
and exploring the possibilities of applying procedural
safeguards to other appropriate sanctions regimes as
well. In that context, I would like to underscore the
important work that is ongoing in the high-level review
of United Nations sanctions sponsored by Australia,
Finland, Greece, Sweden and Germany. That initiative
addresses all United Nations sanctions regimes and
relevant actors. It aims to establish coherent and
transparent standards and to make United Nations
sanctions more effective, more credible and better
understood. We look forward to presenting our findings
to the wider United Nations community before the end
of this year.

Germany welcomes the referral of cases by the
Security Council to the ICC. Those mandates underscore
the central role that traditional accountability plays in
conflict resolution, but clearly it is not a one-way street.
The Security Council should assume its responsibility
by establishing a follow-up mechanism for the cases
it has referred to the ICC. What form the mechanism
may take is a topic that we should discuss in depth.
Indicative input may come from the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals. At the same time, we
may not forget that both the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda are United Nations courts, so
the working methods of the Informal Working Group
cannot be duplicated by the independent ICC.

I would like to reiterate the great importance
Germany attaches to due process in targeted United
Nations sanctions, the role of the ICC and the
improvement of the working methods of the Security
Council. In that regard, like Italy has just done, we
commend the initiatives brought forward by France and
Mexico on the use of the veto and by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group.

At the same time, we are convinced that reforming
the Security Council's working methods is not enough
to achieve greater representativeness, transparency and

accountability. Many among the States Members of the
United Nations share that view and look to the year 2015
as the year to bring about reform both in the methods
and in the structure of the Security Council, which is
at the core of securing peace and stability worldwide.

