Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): First of all, let me
join previous speakers in thanking President Urbina,
Ambassador Grauls and Ambassador Jurica for their
briefings as the Chairmen, respectively, of the Security
Council Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1540 (2004), 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001).
We would also like to express our appreciation to the
Chairmen for their able leadership of the work of the
Committees.

With respect to the briefing regarding the 1267
Committee, on Al-Qaida and the Taliban, I would like
to reassert Indonesia's commitment to promote the
effective implementation, legitimacy and credibility of
the sanctions regime established by resolution 1267
(1999). It is in that regard that my delegation welcomes
the efforts made in a number of areas to further ensure
that fair and clear procedures exist for placing and
removing individuals and entities on the consolidated
list, as well as for the granting of humanitarian
exemptions.

The issue of fair and clear procedures always
draws the attention of Member States implementing
sanctions regimes. In that connection, we have noted a
growing perception that the current procedures have
some legal deficiencies that may hinder effective
implementation at the national level. The increasing
number of legal cases in national and regional courts,
in particular following the ruling of the European
Court of Justice in the cases of Al-Qadi and Al-Barakat
on 3 September 2008, will potentially pose challenges
to the efficacy and credibility of the 1267 sanctions
regime.

Furthermore, my delegation wishes to highlight
that resolution 1822 (2008) clearly directs the
Committee, as a matter of priority, to review its
guidelines with respect to provisions of the resolution,
in particular those relating to narrative summaries of
reasons for listing and review of the names on the
consolidated list. We wish to underline the importance
of the Committee's continuing to focus its work on that
particular task.
My delegation also attaches particular importance
to the direction of the Council on the review of all
names on the consolidated list, including those
reported to be deceased. Paragraphs 22 and 23 of
resolution 1822 (2008) specifically emphasize that that

effort should be carried out in order to ensure that the
consolidated list is as up to date and accurate as
possible and to confirm that the listings remain
appropriate. We are therefore of the View that, in
reviewing its guidelines, the Committee can achieve
substantive progress by fully taking into account the
ultimate objectives of the exercise, as outlined by the
Council in the resolution.

With regard to the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
my delegation also welcomes the significant progress
made in recent months, in particular the continued
analysis of preliminary implementation assessments
(PIAs). As an innovative tool both to address the
problem of reporting fatigue and to gather updated
information on each State's implementation, the PIA
process should be further sustained. In the light of that,
Indonesia fully supports the exercise of stocktaking of
each Member State's implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). The Committee should therefore enhance
its dialogue with each State and strengthen its counter-
terrorism capacity.

Concerning the briefing on the 1540 Committee,
Indonesia continues to value the significant role that
Committee is playing in promoting the implementation
of the resolution. For its part, Indonesia will certainly
continue its active support for the Committee's work in
all areas.

We duly note the progress made by the
Committee since the last joint briefing to the Security
Council. My delegation welcomes the second report on
the status of the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) (see S/2008/493), submitted by the Committee
in July 2008. As the full implementation of the
resolution is a long-term objective and an ongoing
process, it is our hope that the report will facilitate the
Council's provision of strategic guidance to the
Committee on the promotion of and assistance in
effective implementation at the national, regional and
international levels, in particular through dialogue and
cooperation with Member States.

Finally, my delegation welcomes the continued
interaction and coordination among the three
Committees and their experts groups within the
framework of the ongoing dialogue with Member
States. We are of the View that that cooperation will not
only be crucial for the work of the Committees but that
it will also be essential for synergy and coherence in
the Council's contribution to countering the threat
posed by terrorism.

