Mr. Ivanov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today, the Security Council is discussing an
issue of paramount importance: how to further
intensify and increase the effectiveness of cooperation
in combating terrorism. This initiative by France is a
very timely development, and we welcome it. The new
wave of terrorist acts that shook the world late last year
reaffirmed with alarming clarity that the world
community continues to face a strong and ruthless
enemy. Today, that enemy poses the major threat to
international security and to the foundations of the
modern world order. That is precisely why the Council
must further intensify its active involvement in
addressing the urgent problem of fighting terrorism.

The multidimensional strategy to combat
international terrorism, developed under United
Nations auspices and defined in Security Council
resolutions, has already proved its effectiveness. That
took place when an extremely dangerous hotbed of
terrorism in Afghanistan was virtually eliminated
through a joint effort. That development should be
further strengthened. A successful outcome will depend
largely on preserving the unity of a broad anti-terrorist
coalition, which must continue to be based on the solid
foundation of the Charter of the United Nations and on
international law. We must be careful not to take
unilateral steps that might threaten the unity of the
anti-terrorist coalition.

In that context, we favour a political settlement of
the situation concerning Iraq, in strict conformity with
relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 1441 (2002), which the Council adopted
unanimously.

We must all realize that we are only at the
beginning of the difficult road of combating terrorism.
Terrorism is far from being crushed; indeed, it has
considerable financial and human potential and is
preparing to deliver new blows in various parts of the
world.

It is also alarming that terrorists are seeking to
acquire weapons of mass destruction. We cannot allow
such a catastrophe to take place. The non-proliferation

regimes for such weapons should be further
strengthened.

The recent brazen terrorist acts in Russia,
Indonesia and Kenya - and the almost daily
occurrence of such acts in the Middle East - are clear
evidence of the need for a comprehensive approach to
combating terrorism at the national, regional and global
levels.

The insidious sophistication of terrorists must be
countered by united, thoroughly considered and
decisive action by the international community. A
common understanding must prevail, including at the
level of the Security Council, that there can be
absolutely no justification for terrorist acts. We
ourselves should act accordingly. Criminals must face
punishment for what they have done.

But equally decisive measures must also be taken
against the accomplices of terrorists. Those who give
refuge to criminal gangs, finance them or in any way
assist them are themselves criminals. This basic logic
of criminal law has become an international imperative
with the adoption of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). This matter could be actively pursued by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, which since its
establishment has earned an excellent reputation due to
its dynamic, unbiased and transparent work. It is
important that the Committee not only assist Member
States in improving their anti-terrorist laws; it should
also examine how those laws are being applied in
accordance with today's requirements.

There are good prospects for cooperation between
the Committee and international and regional
organizations. Russia will continue to actively
contribute to the activities of the Committee in that
area, including through promoting working contacts
between the Committee and the anti-terrorist
mechanisms of the Commonwealth of Independent
States and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.

In broader terms, the international anti-terrorist
legal framework must be further strengthened, first of
all by making existing anti-terrorist conventions
universal. Russia is a strong advocate of expeditious
action to that end. On 27 December 2002, the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism came into force in our country.
Work is currently under way in Russia to ratify the
Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for
the Purpose of Detection.

At the same time, we are greatly disappointed
about the slowdown in the work on the draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
and the draft international convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism. The inability
to overcome political and ideological differences runs
counter to the interests of the entire international
community and raises doubts about our ability to act
effectively and responsibly in complex situations. The
time has now come to rise above differences, for the
sake of our common goals of eliminating the terrorist
threat and finalizing the work on those important
documents as soon as possible.

It is perfectly clear that terrorism is a gross
violation of human rights and freedoms, including the
fundamental right to life. That is why we have on our
agenda the task of establishing the human right to
protection from terrorism. We believe that we must
implement as soon as possible the well-known Russian
initiative to develop, under the auspices of the United
Nations, a code to protect human rights against
terrorism.

It is also very clear that the complete eradication
of terrorism will be possible only if the fertile ground
for it is removed. In particular, that ground includes
regional conflicts, organized crime, drug trafficking,
the illegal arms trade and uneven socio-economic
development.

The General Assembly unanimously adopted the
Russian draft resolution entitled "Responding to global
threats and challenges" (General Assembly resolution 57/145). We believe that this indicates that the world
community has come to understand the leading role of
the United Nations in establishing a comprehensive
approach to neutralizing terrorist and other dangerous
threats to international security. We should now start to
work together to build a global system to counter new
challenges and threats.

For Russia, strengthening international solidarity
in the fight against terrorism is not mere verbal tribute
to political rhetoric. Our President, Mr. Putin, has said
that our country is living in a virtual state of war
declared by international terrorism. Last year's large-
scale terrorist acts in Kaspiysk, Moscow and Grozny,
and the traces of Chechen terrorism in a number of
European and Muslim countries, leave no doubt that
Chechen terrorism is an integral part of the world
terrorist infrastructure, which includes Al Qaeda. We
have considerable irrefutable evidence to that effect.

Russia greatly appreciated the international
community's solidarity with our country in the
aftermath of the Chechen terrorist attacks. However, it
is important not to confine ourselves to solidarity
alone. We must learn the main lesson that all those
engaged in terrorist activities must be duly punished,
wherever they may be. It is the duty of every State not
to let them escape justice. There can be no double
standards in that regard; otherwise victory will belong
not to us, but to terrorists and their accomplices.

There is much to be done to root out the evil of
terrorism, but we can do so if we work together. For its
part, Russia will remain at the forefront of the
international community's fight against terrorism.

