Mr. Ele Ela (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to begin by expressing our
thanks to the Peruvian presidency for convening this
important meeting. I also extend a warm welcome
to the Ministers who have honoured us with their
presence today in the Security Council and to the
representatives of such relevant institutions, including
the World Bank, the African Development Bank and
the Peacebuilding Commission.

Global peacekeeping efforts need to be redesigned
to deal effectively with today's conflicts and their
root causes. The complexity and duration of existing
conflicts, as well as their links to violent extremism,
terrorism and organized crime, make it necessary
to invest in the reorganization of United Nations
architecture so as to support the efforts of countries
to strengthen peace in the world. In that regard, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea recognizes the efforts
of Secretary-General Guterres to ensure political
and operational coherence and plans to improve the
leadership, accountability and capacity of the United
Nations to support this important agenda.

We agree in particular that investing in global,
inclusive and sustainable development is the best
tool for preventing violent conflicts. We therefore
encourage the Secretary-General's efforts to guarantee
the reform of the United Nations development system.
We commend the work and the unique role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in its support for these
processes throughout the world - especially for the
African Solidarity Initiative, the Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security and the memorandum of
understanding between the African Union Commission
and the Peacebuilding Support Office - which are
actively promoting gender equality and fully respect
the principle of national sovereignty.

In recent years, the consequences of conflicts have
dragged certain countries down into political instability,
poverty, the violation of human rights, damage to
infrastructure and the weakening of institutions.
Countries emerging from conflicts and wars have
to face multiple challenges in the areas of economy,
infrastructure, reconstruction, the eradication of
poverty, the creation of employment, education, public
health and social security. In these situations, the
efforts of the international community should focus on
providing genuine assistance to the countries concerned
with the aim of achieving an economic recovery that
should prioritize industrialization, the modernization
of agriculture and the development of human resources,
in which consolidating educational programmes should
also be afforded particular importance.

It is crucial to assist countries in post-conflict
stages to design comprehensive strategies for
reconstruction and sustainable development, and
pursuant to the circumstances of each situation. There
is no single model for the construction of peace, as
many of my colleagues in the Council have pointed out.
In providing assistance, the international community
must respect the idiosyncrasies of each country and
take its views and opinions into account, as such
countries are the ones primarily concerned with their
own stability and reconstruction. We therefore call on
the international community to pay greater attention to
the socioeconomic development of post-conflict States.

The positive experiences of Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia
and Sierra Leone, to name but a few, deserve our
recognition, as they provide tangible, practical examples
oflessons learned and good practices. Countries ofother
African regions are embarking on similar processes and
we wish them every success. We invite the actors in the
various conflicts to put the supreme interests of their
nations first and do their utmost to achieve stability and
peace in their countries.

In this context, we reiterate that the United Nations
missions deployed around the world are not an end in
themselves, but rather a tool at our disposal to support
and accompany peace processes in countries affected
by conflict. Therefore, the ultimate goal of intervention
must be to build peace. When the time comes to
Withdraw, this must be done in close collaboration with
the local Government, with an orderly and well-defined
handovers of responsibilities and tasks to local bodies
and forces.
To conclude, we believe that the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission provides a holistic and
comprehensive vision of the challenges arising from
wars and conflicts. The Peacebuilding Commission,
as the coordinator of all multilateral efforts, will
undoubtedly strengthen cooperation between parties,
including United Nations organs and agencies,
Member States, national authorities, United Nations
missions and country teams, regional and subregional
organizations, international financial institutions,
civil society, women's groups, youth organizations
and, where appropriate, the private sector and national
human rights institutions.

Such coordination is vital if we want to address
these situations in a broad and inclusive manner that
addresses questions of cooperation for development.
In that regard, Equatorial Guinea believes that closer
contact and interaction between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council are a priority. To
that end, we underscore the usefulness of interactive
meetings such as today's and the need for more frequent
contact between that body and this organ.

