Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
Polish presidency for organizing this open debate
and for the concept note (S/2018/444, annex). We also
thank the Secretary-General and the other briefers for
highlighting some key areas of concern from conflict
situations around the world - from Palestine to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We see merit in
efforts to identify good practices in compliance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law
in armed conflicts, as well as in the call upon Member
States to develop national policy frameworks on the
protection of civilians. We would be willing to explore
such initiatives further in the context of our own
national international humanitarian law committee.
The latest Rohingya humanitarian crisis has
once again revealed to us the total abdication by the
authorities of the State concerned of their responsibility
to protect civilians irrespective of their status or
treatment. For months together, the world witnessed
the forced expulsion of a persecuted minority, which
the authorities of the State concerned continue to claim
as the work of a fringe extremist group. Even if that
narrative were to be accepted, it would mean that the
State concerned has acknowledged its inability or
unwillingness to discharge its responsibility to protect
all civilians on its territory.

That is why, during her address during the general
debate of the seventy-second session of the General
Assembly (see A/72/PV.14), our Prime Minister, The
Honourable Sheikh Hasina, urged creating safe zones
in Myanmar's Rakhine state to protect civilians under
the auspices of the United Nations or the relevant
regional partners. In the absence of such safeguards,
the forcibly displaced Rohingya in Bangladesh continue
to remain in sheer uncertainty about the prospects for
their voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return
to Rakhine state. To further compound the situation,
humanitarian access has remained restricted and the
Rohingya who ventured to stay behind have been denied
of food supply and medical care. Despite some verbal
assurances, there has been no credible investigation
or prosecution by the national authorities concerned
for the alleged atrocity crimes committed against
the Rohingya.

The reason we highlight those issues yet again is
not to level criticism against a neighbouring country,
but only to reiterate the fundamental yet complex
issues that need to be addressed in order to create a
situation conducive to the safe and dignified return of
the Rohingya and other displaced communities to their
homes in Myanmar.

Guided by the unfolding Rohingya crisis, we wish
to take this opportunity to stress five points, which
have also been made by many other delegations.

First, there needs to be greater emphasis on
strategic analysis and assessment by the United Nations
and other independent actors on the ground of threats to
civilians. The United Nations field management should
develop the capabilities to detect early-warning signs
and a sense of accountability to report on palpable
threats to civilians. The Organization's enhanced
role in conflict prevention and sustaining peace can
be best exemplified through its evidence-based and
unvarnished reporting of facts, including through
consultations with the national authorities concerned.

Secondly, safe and unhindered passage for
humanitarian personnel and supplies for civilians in
need must be ensured by all parties to armed conflicts.
Medical facilities, educational institutions, especially
schools, and places of worship should be kept out
of harm's way in the planning and carrying out of
hostilities. Respect for humanitarian assistance and
medical care in armed conflict needs to be promoted
both during peace and conflict.

Thirdly, Member States have a responsibility
to ensure that arms and ammunition transferred to
any other national authorities are not used for the
commission of atrocity crimes against civilians or other
grave breaches of international humanitarian law. Those
with influence over State authorities concerned and
other conflicting parties should work towards resolving
the conflicts instead of further instigating them, while
giving primacy to the protection of civilians. There
needs to be a shared commitment to avoiding the use of
explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated
areas, considering their dire humanitarian impact.

Fourthly, the global norms for ending violence
against women and children in armed conflicts need to
be translated into action. The Rohingya humanitarian
crisis has brought to the fore the issue of children
born as a result to sexual violence. There is also a
pronounced need to take account for missing persons
and detainees, and address trauma among family and
community members affected by sexual violence,
illegal detentions, enforced disappearances and other
human rights violations.

Fifthly, ensuring accountability and justice for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law is crucial for enhancing their
compliance and for shattering a culture of impunity
for the commission of atrocity crimes against civilians.
The Security Council should make appropriate use of
the tools at its disposal to that effect, including through
duly considered options for imposing sanctions and
referrals to international criminal justice mechanisms.

As a lead troop- and police-contributing country,
Bangladesh takes a pragmatic approach to the
protection-of-civilians mandate in both practice and
preparedness while adhering to the principles of
peacekeeping operations. As part of most of the highly
challenging United Nations peacekeeping missions, we
have seen the relevance of the protection-of-civilians-
mandate at first-hand on the ground and, in a number of
cases, tackled it with professionalism and some degree
of creativity - even when the mandate was not laid out
in clear and specific terms. We remain committed to
further mainstreaming the protection of civilians into
the peacekeeping training programmes designed for
our troops and police.

We reiterate, however, that protection-of-civilians
mandates need to be backed by viable strategies and
adequate resources so that they do not fall through when
faced with belligerence from the parties to the conflict
or the lack ofwill or capacity ofthe host Governments to
cooperate. The Security Council has a responsibility to
ensure that the protection-of-civilians mandates given
to peacekeeping missions are vigorously supported by
meaningful political processes to prevent conflicts and
sustain peace.

