Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Madam President, for
inviting me to address the Security Council on the
situation in Somalia. At the outset, let mejoin Mr. Swan
in congratulating you, Madam President, upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.

Since my previous briefing of the Council (see S/PV.8533), Somalia's political and security landscape
has remained encouraging, despite recurrent instances
of commotion and political uncertainty. In the past
three months, the country has witnessed political,
security and economic developments that, if sustainably
harnessed, will have a healthy impact on our concerted
effort to help end the war in Somalia, bring about a
return to peace in the country and build a better future
for all its people.

During the period under review, we witnessed
efforts by the Federal Government of Somalia to seek
to comply with its commitments and milestones on
peace, stability, development and inclusive politics,
in particular in relation to the preparations for the
state-level elections in Galmudug and Jubaland.
In Galmudug state, remarkable progress towards
reconciliation was recorded, including inter- and
intra-clan reconciliation, as the basis for a long-
term approach to stability. Prime Minister Hassan
Khayre's stay in Galmudug, which lasted more than a
month, led to the triggering of a process whereby Ahl
Al-Sunna Wal-Jama'a and Habar clan forces are being
integrated into the Somali national security forces.
The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the European Union, the United Nations and
bilateral partners were invited to witness the unveiling
of the Prime Minister's initiatives on force integration
and on preparations for the Galmudug reconciliation
conference in Dhusamareb and the preparation of the
ground for Galmudug state elections later in the year.

The delegation met with some of the integrated
Al-Sunna recruits and was afforded an opportunity
to meet and discuss with the reconciliation committee
their composition and mission, the communities they
represent and their level of representativeness. The Prime
Minister's efforts need to be supported in all aspects,
as they provide a unique opportunity to deliver on the
establishment of a united Government and functioning
institutions in Galmudug, lasting reconciliation among
the 11 clans that make up the population of that state and
the much-needed peace and stability that is essential for
any meaningful development there.

With regard to Jubaland, in the course of preparations
for upcoming elections, AMISOM. held several separate
meetings with the Federal Government of Somalia,
Jubaland state leaders, presidential candidates from the
opposition, traditional elders and representatives of the
international community to review the deteriorating
political situation in Jubaland state, with a View to
mitigating the far-reaching ramifications and potential
escalation of tensions among the stakeholders. The key
outcome of those engagements was the stakeholders'
agreement on AMISOM's role as elaborated in resolution
2472 (2019) to help create a secure environment in the
run-up to elections, including beefing up the security
of Kismaayo and its environs. An elaborate plan for the
envisaged free, fair and inclusive elections was agreed,
and an intelligence committee was put in place.

Together with AMISOM. and IGAD, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM),
under the leadership of my colleague, Mr. James
Swan, went into Kismaayo and, on behalf of the
international community, made efforts to reach out to
the stakeholders, the Jubaland Independent Electoral
and Boundaries Commission and the administration
in Kismaayo to address key concerns raised by the
parties. These efforts are ongoing, and, despite the
late hour, it is our hope that the parties will come to
an understanding that will produce inclusive, credible
and peaceful elections that strengthen the unity of the
people of Jubaland.

On the 2020 and 2021 elections, the key highlights
during the period under review were the further
development of the electoral rolls whereby political
decisions on the electoral system were considered, with
a review of the political party law, voter registration,
public outreach and election security. The National
Independent Electoral Commission has yet to finalize
the pre-voter-registration preparations, including the
identification of voter-registration locations that can be
secured with the support of AMISOM.

In line with the decision of the African Union
Peace and Security Council and resolution 2472
(2019), the African Union Commission and AMISOM
sponsored and organized a multi-stakeholder workshop
in Kampala on electoral security and an electoral
dispute-resolution mechanism directed to the 2020
and 2021 general elections in Somalia. A draft election
plan on electoral-security planning was developed
during the workshop, which envisages, among other
key interventions, the establishment by the Federal
Government of Somalia of an electoral-security task
force that will develop the electoral-security concept
for the 2020 and 2021 elections. Meanwhile, AMISOM
has proactively put together internal election-security
cells throughout the regions comprising its own police,
military and civilian components.

On the Constitution review process, mandated
bodies held discussions with President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo on the progress realized
so far. Public consultations and civic engagement within
the states have been planned and agreed, and work
towards their implementation is in progress. AMISOM
is ready to contribute to these efforts by supporting the
Somali security forces, which have been given the task
of providing security to the different teams that will be
implementing this programme in the regions.

The Somali economy continues to recover, and this
year's growth is estimated to strengthen to 3 per cent
from 2.8 per cent last year. Inflation declined from
3.2 per cent to 3 per cent, according to information
obtained from the Governmental authorities. The
Government is implementing the fourth and last
staff-monitored International Monetary Fund (IMF)
programme designed to attract soft loans from the IMF
and the World Bank and strengthen opportunities for
debt relief. We believe that effort needs to be recognized
and supported.

Al-Shabaab remains a serious threat to security
and stability across Somalia. To face this challenge,
AMISOM. maintains a presence in the sectors as set
out in its 2018 to 2021 concept of operations, and,
in collaboration with the Somali security forces, we
continue to protect population centres, secure the
main supply routes and provide convoy escorts to
ensure the safe movement of peoples and goods, the
distribution of humanitarian assistance and the exercise
by the Government and federal member states of their
governance functions. We undertake combat patrols
and conduct targeted operations against the enemy.

To sustain and enhance current operational
coordination among AMISOM, the Federal
Government of Somalia and their partners, AMISOM
convened several operational coordination meetings
at its headquarters, and significant progress has been
recorded in the areas of consultation, joint planning and
joint operations. In that regard, in support of efforts by
the Somali security forces aimed at implementing the
Somali transition plan, AMISOM. conducted targeted
offensive operations in Coscore and Dar es Salaam
in Sector 2 with a View to disrupting and degrading
Al-Shabaab. In this context, significant progress was
made in the implementation of first phase activities of
the Somali transition plan, including combat readiness,
mentoring and assisting the 53rd, l43rd, Eagle, 27th and
reconnaissance battalions of the Somali National Army.
AMISOM. and the Somali National Army conducted
joint operations that, apart from Sabiid, Janaale and
Bariira, calmed areas that were liberated in April and
May. Thesejoint operations also led to the capture from
Al-Shabaab of the towns of Ceel Sallini, Ceel Gelow,
Awdhagle in the Lower Shabelle region between June
and August 2019.

Our interaction and collaboration with the United
Nations Mine Action Service is vital and indispensable.
It is getting tighter and stronger as we progress deep into
enemy territory. Thanks to the work of this important
United Nations agency, many lives of our soldiers are
saved and their physical wholeness safeguarded. This
is also important in mitigating the threat posed by the
improvised explosive devices.
I also want to highlight the important collaboration,
cooperation and support that AMISOM. is getting from
the United Nations Support Office in Somalia. This
support is what makes us move and achieve what we
are achieving. I wish to express my recognition and
thanks to Ms. Filipetto for her proactive, receptive and
amicable handling of business with AMISOM.

In terms of reconfiguration, AMISOM. has been
reconfigured in space and forces. In this regard, due
to operational tempo, AMISOM. has established new
forward operating bases in Ceel Sallini, Ceel Gelow
and Awdhagle. On the other hand, AMISOM. Sectors 1,
2 and 3 have already established mobile forces that have
proved to be very effective in keeping the enemy on its
toes and far away from the main population centres.
Relatedly, AMISOM. police has mentored 3,251 Somali
police personnel deployed in 31 operational police
stations in Somalia on various policing themes and
provided operational support to enhance the delivery
of professional, responsive and robust policing services
across the country.

Similarly, in line with the Somali transition plan,
AMISOM. provided capacity-building support to the
Somali Police Force through the conduct of refresher and
specialized training, including courses on community
policing and human rights, community policing and
de-radicalization, and the training of trainers to
enhance policing skills as part of efforts to facilitate
the gradual transfer of security responsibilities to the
Somali security forces.

In a bid to support the protection of the rights
of vulnerable persons, AMISOM. police officers
co-located with the Somali police gender focal point
officers for mentoring and sensitization. A total of
970 Somali Police Force and federal member states
police force officers were mentored and sensitized
on numerous themes related to sexual and gender-
based violence. AMISOM. maintains civilian-sector
teams in Kismaayo, Jawhar, Beledweyne and Baidoa,
carrying out the Mission implementation plan for
2019 and engaging with the leaders of federal member
states, civil society organizations and key partners,
including United Nations agencies, in support of the
military and police in stabilization efforts aligned with
Somalia's transition plan and in the implementation of
stabilization programmes.

As we do those things, we strive to ensure that
our operations are conducted in strict compliance
with applicable international humanitarian law,
international human rights law and the United Nations
human rights due-diligence policy. To that end, during
the period under review, AMISOM. conducted a series
of predeployment and in-mission trainings for all
uniformed personnel on international humanitarian
law, international human rights law, child protection,
the protection of women, tracking civilian casualties,
analysis and response cells, sexual exploitation and
abuse, conduct and discipline, and conflict-related
sexual violence. In the period under review, professional
development trainings were conducted for AMISOM
troop-contributing countries - Uganda, Burundi,
Kenya and Sierra Leone - while various in-mission
induction trainings were carried out in Mission areas.

The Council may recall that, after the capture of
the city of Mogadishu, AMISOM. forces embarked on
the liberation of regional capitals and main population
centres in the rest of central and southern Somalia.
To preserve those gains and ensure that life evolves
normally in the liberated areas, AMISOM. has had
to establish a continued presence in those towns and
population centres to hold and secure them and foil
all attempts by Al-Shabaab to take them back. As the
number of towns captured from Al-Shabaab increased,
so too did the number of forces required to hold them.
The number of troops approved for AMISOM. was put
under pressure in the presence of the growing population
demand for AMISOM. protection and security.

To solve that problem and to continue to take
towns from Al-Shabaab while holding on to the
already captured towns, AMISOM. created dedicated
mobile forces, but that approach came with another
challenge - who would hold the newly liberated towns
and preserve the accumulated gains? That question did
not have a satisfactory answer, as our Somali brothers
were not yet in a position to generate a sizeable, properly
trained, integrated and equipped force with adequate
and dependable logistical support. That inability of the
Somali forces to hold and build on the newly liberated
population centres posed a much more delicate
question - what is the use of AMISOM. continuing
to liberate more cities and towns, at immense cost in
lives and equipment, just to see those same towns and

cities being retaken by Al-Shabaab because of the lack
of forces to hold them?

That aspect of the challenge faced by AMISOM. in
the theatre of operations was never properly understood
by the wider international community, which preferred
to cling to its assumed position - that AMISOM. was
not carrying out offensive operations as it once did. The
recent developments in Sabid, Bariire, Ceel Sallini, Ceel
Gelow and Awdheegle have provided the right answer
to that question, which has eluded us for many years.
The Somalis are now producing properly trained and
integrated battalions capable of taking on Al-Shabaab,
liberating towns and holding them, and allowing the
Government to come in, attend to the population and
provide services.

That is one of the most salient achievements during
the period under consideration. To sustain that and
allow for the consolidation of the accumulated gains
and the transition of the security responsibilities from
AMISOM. to the Somalis, we must continue supporting
the generation of troops in Somalia, training and
equipping those armed forces and protecting and
enabling them to take and continue to hold cities
and towns.

