Ms. Sison (United States of America): I wish at
the outset to thank Special Representative Haysom for
his briefing.

Afghanistan continues to demonstrate resilience
in confronting significant security, governance and
economic challenges. We recognize and welcome the
gains made in Afghanistan over the past 15 years, and
we all share an interest in preserving and building on
these gains. We see three key themes as necessary for
the continued development of Afghanistan: security,
reconciliation and reform.

First, with respect to security, the conflict continues
to exact a significant toll on the civilian population with
record high numbers this year, with almost a third of
the victims being children. In April, the United Nations
reported nearly 2,000 casualties in the first three
months of the year, a 2 per cent increase compared with
the number of civilian casualties in 2015. Just yesterday
we saw attacks by the Taliban and anti-Government
forces continuing to take place in civilian-populated
areas. We also remain deeply concerned by the terrorist
activities of the Haqqani network, Al-Qaida and the
Islamic State in Afghanistan, as well as the threat that
improvised explosive devices continue to pose to the
civilian population.

In that regard, we commend the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for
facilitating a high-level dialogue on civilian protection
this past May that brought together representatives of
the Afghan Government, the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces, the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission and the NATO-led Resolute
Support Mission. All participants reaffirmed their
commitment to the prevention and mitigation of civilian
casualties, and the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission signed a memorandum of understanding
with the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of the
Interior and the National Directorate of Security, to
strengthen the accountability and transparency of
Afghan security institutions.

We also recognize that the Afghan forces are
fighting courageously to defend threatened populations,
especially in Helmand and in parts of Baghlan and
Kunduz. There is no question that Afghan forces have
become more capable and professional. They have
demonstrated the commitment to staying and fighting
and, when control over territory is lost, to working
tenaciously to regain it.

The United States remains committed to assisting
Afghanistan and the Resolute Support Mission. We will
maintain 9,800 troops in Afghanistan through most
of this year and 5,500 thereafter, located at a small
number of bases, including at Baghlan, Jalalabad in the
east, and Kandahar in the south. We will also continue
to provide financial support for the Afghan forces.
We encourage all other donors to the Afghan security
forces to do the same.

Afghanistan has requested donors to renew their
funding for the Afghan forces at or near current levels
through 2020. We urge donors to do so at, or ahead of,
next month's NATO summit, in Warsaw.

Turning to reconciliation, in January Afghanistan
and Pakistan, with support from the United States
and China, launched the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group on the Afghan Peace and Reconciliation Process
to synchronize cooperation for the initiation of direct
talks with the Taliban. The Quadrilateral Coordination
Group has met five times since its formation in January
and has endorsed key principles, terms of reference and
a road map, which serve as a guiding framework. The
Group is committed to exploring all avenues to bring
the Taliban to the negotiating table. The strike against
Mullah Mansoor should serve as a clear signal to the
Taliban that we are prepared to take action against
those who plan to potentially harm United States
personnel and who continue to oppose peace. It is not,
however, indicative of a change in policy and does not
foreshadow a new military initiative.

TheUnitedStatesremainscommittedto encouraging
the peace process between the Afghan Government and
the Taliban, and we view such a process as the only
avenue for ending the war. There is no military solution
to the conflict. The Taliban must understand that they
can achieve their goals, including the withdrawal of
international military forces, only through a peace
process that leads to a negotiated settlement.

Now I should like to make a few points about
reform. The security of Afghanistan is inextricably
linked to the nation's economic and political stability
and progress. It is important to recognize some of the
significant, though largely unheralded, progress that the
Afghan Government has made. Despite the economic
challenges facing Afghanistan, the Afghan Government
successfully completed the International Monetary
Fund's (IMF) staff-monitored programme on 13 April,
meeting a series of IMF-designated benchmarks of
progress towards improving Government revenues,
strengthening the banking system and building a track
record for a future IMF financial arrangement. We
welcome the current negotiations with the IMF on a
modest new programme with new benchmarks.

We alsonotethatPresident Ghaniis takinginitiatives
to root out corruption. He has worked to recover Kabul
Bank assets and is reopening criminal cases against
those who stole this money from the Afghan people. He
has removed corrupt judges and other public officials.
We all recognize, however, that countering corruption
is a long-term process. President Ghani, though, asked
that we hold him to his commitments at the London
anti-corruption summit last month. We applaud his
promises to establish a High Council on governance,
the rule of law and anti-corruption, and to establish an
anti-corruption justice centre, among other steps.

The Afghan Government is making tangible
progress on self-reliance through Mutual Accountability
Framework indicators. Already 15 of the 39 goals
under the Framework have been achieved, including
the successful completion of the IMF's staff-monitored
programme and the filing of asset declarations by
senior officials.

As we approach the conference on Afghanistan
to be held in Brussels in October, we encourage the
Afghan Government to continue to deliver on its reform
commitments under the Self-Reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework and to make progress on
electoral reform, private-sector reform and women's
issues. Of course, the United States remains committed
to working with UNAMA, which stands as a symbol
of the world's commitment to the Afghan people.
UNAMA must continue in its important efforts to
help Afghanistan with governance, development and
promoting respect for human rights, as well as to
coordinate humanitarian assistance, donor support and
counter-narcotics efforts and to support reconciliation.

Finally, let me join others in thanking Special
Representative Haysom for his tireless and exemplary
efforts. The United States is truly grateful for his
service, and we know that UNAMA will continue its
work to build on the strong foundation he has laid. We
all wish him well as he takes on new challenges.

