Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to also speak on behalf of the European Union
and those countries that have aligned themselves with
this statement. I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this debate and thank
Mr. Kai Eide and Mr. John Holmes for their briefings. I
also welcome the participation of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and Pakistan.

The European Union welcomes the international
conference on support to Afghanistan held 12 June
2008 in Paris. Allow me to reiterate here the continued
full commitment of the European Union to the final
declaration of the conference, published under the
auspices of the Presidents of France and Afghanistan
and the Secretary-General. The European Union
welcomes the identification of priorities in the report
of the Secretary-General and recalls in this regard the
key political messages that were announced in Paris.

The first of those is the strengthening of
democracy, through competent, transparent and
representative Afghan institutions. In that regard, the
European Union underlines the importance of
preparations for the elections in 2009 and 2010.

Second is the support of the international
community to the Afghan National Development
Strategy and the guidance that the Afghanistan
Compact continues to give to the Afghan Government
and the international community acting in its support.
Approximately $20 billion were pledged to finance the
implementation of the National Strategy. Emphasis has
been placed, in that context, on the importance of
improving aid effectiveness so that it specifically
benefits Afghans. That is an essential aspect.

The Paris Declaration also prioritizes
strengthening the presence of the Afghan Government
in provinces, fighting corruption and safeguarding
democratic achievements, such as freedom of
expression and respect for human rights in
Afghanistan, including the promotion of gender
equality.

Finally, I want to underline before this Council
the commitments made by Afghan authorities at the

conference in terms of the fight against drugs, an issue
on which the Council has not remained idle, with the
adoption of resolution 1817 (2008) on the control of
the precursors of heroin, submitted by Afghanistan and
other countries. We must now work towards
implementation of its provisions by Afghanistan, but
also by neighbouring, transit and producer countries.

Afghanistan is a priority for France and the
European Union. That is true of European Union
member States engaged in the International Security
Assistance Force and the civilian missions. It is also
true of the European Commission, which has already
committed 3.7 billion euros to the reconstruction of
Afghanistan since 2002 and provides, in its assistance
strategy for 2007-2013, for a commitment of
610 million euros until 2010.

The commitment of the European Union is
reflected, finally, by the European Police Mission in
Afghanistan (EUPOL), which has just completed its
first year of operations, and at this stage comprises 170
international personnel, deployed in Kabul and in the
north, west and south and covering 14 provinces in the
country. The European Union has decided to double the
size of that mission.

The Paris Conference has brought about an
expression of shared responsibility by the international
community and the Afghan authorities to strengthen
the efficiency and quality of aid. Every Afghan should
have access, in their daily lives, to the benefits of the
aid provided.

On the one hand, the international community
must provide more coherent and coordinated
assistance, including through an increased coordination
role for the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). That assistance should
increasingly be channelled through the national Afghan
budget and mobilize human resources from
Afghanistan. On the other hand, the Afghan
Government has pledged to expand reforms to make
government structures transparent and accountable.
Having heard the statements of Mr. Holmes and
Mr. Eide, I should like to emphasize the importance
that we attach to the strengthening of security, which is
one of the first priorities of Afghans themselves. In that
regard, the European Union expresses its grave concern
about the unprecedented increase in acts of violence
perpetrated by insurgents. I should like to vigorously
reiterate that the European Union condemns in the
strongest terms terrorist attacks against civilians, such
as the reprehensible attack against the Indian embassy
in Kabul, which the Council has condemned, as well as
attacks against humanitarian personnel and convoys,
which deprive people of the urgent assistance they
need. The European Union reiterates its belief in the
need to maintain an environment in which
humanitarian activities can take place, and reminds all
parties that they must ensure the protection of civilians
and respect all their obligations under international
law, especially international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, I would like once again to thank
the Secretary-General for his report and Special
Representative Kai Eide for his briefing. The report
and the briefing both offer important recommendations
regarding the future of UNAMA and its reconfiguration
following the Paris Conference. The Secretary-General
and his Special Representative can count on the
support of the European Union in putting those
recommendations into effect.

