Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Like others, I
would like to thank the Monitoring Group, as well as
Ambassador Mufioz, for the detailed presentation to the
Council this morning. We attach the utmost importance
to the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), as well as to that of the
Monitoring Group, both of which we consider
complementary to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC).

I am very pleased to inform the Council that on 9
July 2003 Liechtenstein deposited the instrument of
ratification for the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism.
Liechtenstein has thus ratified all 12 relevant
international conventions and protocols and is currently
in the last stage of the process of amending its
legislation in order to implement the Convention, in
particular in the field of criminal and administrative
law. Liechtenstein is determined to make all efforts to
prevent abuses of its financial centre for terrorist
activities and appreciates the cooperation with
international bodies in that area, such as the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the 1267 Committee.

We commend the remarkable steps the Security
Council and the Committee have taken to improve the
effectiveness and the precision of the sanctions and to
address humanitarian concerns, as well as concerns of
transparency and due process. The Committee
guidelines for the conduct of its work, which were
revised in April this year, are an important tool in this
respect. We particularly welcome that the guidelines
now include rules for the work of the Monitoring
Group with respect to its role in updating the sanctions
list.

We believe that such rules are crucial not only for
the effective work of the Committee and the
Monitoring Group, but also for the cooperation with
Member States and the protection of the rights of
individuals. At a time when the Security Council is
increasingly making decisions that have a direct impact
on the rights of individuals, we believe that it is
important to provide for avenues that allow individuals
to address concerns stemming from such decisions.

That also holds true for the work of the
Committee and the Monitoring Group, which are
increasingly focusing their work on concrete cases and
individuals, thereby improving the effectiveness of the
sanctions regime but also expanding the need for
dialogue and cooperation with national authorities. We
therefore encourage the continuation and the widening
of the process of rule-making in the interest of
improved cooperation and flow of information between
the Committee and the Monitoring Group and the
Member States, with a View to strengthening respect
for human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of
law in the fight against terrorism. The suggestions
made by the representative of Germany this morning
could go a long way in assisting the Council in that
respect.

As the example of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee shows, a well-structured reporting dialogue
between a Committee and Member States can
considerably enhance the implementation of the
Security Council resolution. Liechtenstein has
submitted a comprehensive report pursuant to
resolution 1455 (2003), and we hope that all States will
soon fulfil their reporting obligations in accordance
with that resolution. We are aware that such reporting
requirements place a considerable burden particularly
on small administrations. At the same time, however,
they are not only designed to monitor the compliance
of States with Security Council resolutions; they can
also provide a basis for concrete progress through
engaging in a dialogue with Member States and in
particular, where needed, through the provision of
technical assistance. That is another area where the
1267 Committee could draw from the experience and
the expertise of the CTC.

In conclusion, I would like to stress once again
our unequivocal commitment to international
cooperation in the fight against terrorism. We look
forward in particular to enhanced cooperation and
dialogue with the Committee and the Monitoring
Group.

