Mr. Bellemare: "Terrorism is never justifiable on
any ground... It hurts all nations - large and small,
rich and poor. It takes a toll on human beings of every
age and income, culture and religion." Those are the
words of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. Those
words act as a constant reminder for the members of
the Commission over which I have the honour and the
privilege to preside.

This is my first appearance before the Security
Council since I took office last January. I would like to
thank members for the opportunity to brief the Council
on the progress made by the International Independent
Investigation Commission.

It is my honour to present today the tenth report
of the Commission. As requested, it outlines progress
made since 28 November 2007 in the investigation of
the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri
and the 22 others who were killed during the attack,
and of other attacks that fall within the mandate of the
Commission. Since this is the first time I am
addressing the Council both as Commissioner and as
Prosecutor Designate, I would like to take this
opportunity to share a few thoughts on how I approach
my role.

The mandate that the Council gave the
Commission in 2005 is particularly challenging. Not
only is the investigation objectively very complex, it is
also being conducted in a politically charged climate
and in an extremely volatile environment.
Unfortunately, the establishment of the Commission
has not had an immediate deterrent effect on terrorists.
Bombings have continued, with two more deadly
attacks that have been added to the Commission's
mandate since the last report.

Our investigation involves a series of terrorist
attacks which have killed 55 people and injured over
420. The magnitude of the attacks, their continuing
nature and the fact that investigations are conducted in
an environment dominated by ongoing security
concerns add to the challenges facing the Commission.

Members may rest assured, however, that the
Commission will not be deterred by the prevailing
violence. On the contrary, each attack increases the
resolve of the men and women of the more than 60
countries that have answered the call for help and are
08-29745
fully committed to bringing an end to impunity in
Lebanon.

My mission's overarching principle is to ensure
that justice is done. With that in mind, the Commission
will yield to no pressure, political or otherwise, and the
identification of suspects will be based on sound legal
standards supported by concrete evidence.

Acting under the flag of the United Nations, it is
against that uniquely challenging backdrop that the
Commission advances its mandate in a neutral and
objective manner. In doing so, the Commission must
continue to keep an open mind and not presuppose the
outcome. As Carla del Ponte once said, "facts are
pieces of truth on the way to justice". In its search for
truth and justice, applying basic principles of fairness,
neutrality and impartiality, the Commission must be
guided by facts and evidence. Everything else is
irrelevant. To act otherwise would be to fail the
international community and, in particular, the people
of Lebanon.

The Commission is an independent body. It was
created to help put an end to impunity in Lebanon by
making sure that the perpetrators of the attacks falling
within the mandate of the Commission have no safe
haven and that they are eventually brought to justice.

Independence, however, does not mean isolation;
nor does it mean that the Commission operates in a
vacuum. Quite the contrary, because the Commission is
acting under the flag of the United Nations, it is also
acting on behalf of Member States. Member States
have provided assistance to the Commission when their
assistance was sought. I thank them for their support.
Indeed, Member States should continue to ask
themselves whether and how they can assist the
Commission. In doing so, they can be forthcoming and
proactive; their assistance does not have to be
predicated on the existence of specific requests made
by the Commission.

Members of the Security Council are familiar
with the constraints faced by the Commission
regarding the disclosure of its findings. The
Commission has to constantly find a delicate balance
between its reporting obligations and the need to
preserve the confidentiality of the investigation. The
need for confidentiality is obvious; it is necessary to
maintain the integrity of the process. Indeed, the
Commission cannot ignore the fact that the perpetrators
are watching every move it makes.
08-29745

However, we have every intention of being
transparent, to the extent possible, without jeopardizing
the security or the safety of those who want to
cooperate with us - and who may eventually be called
upon to appear before the Tribunal - and the security
and safety of our staff. Transparency is essential to
maintain the confidence of the public in the
Commission as an institution and the trust in its
operations.

Public expectations are high. That is
understandable. The many steps taken towards the
creation of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon may have
created an impression that the conclusion of the
investigation was imminent. In addition, public
speculation on the timing of possible indictments may
also have fuelled the rising expectations.

Regrettably, we cannot prevent speculation, but
public expectations must be addressed. That is why it
is both useful and important to send the clear message
that the search for justice cannot be rushed - it must
follow its course. Any illusion of immediacy must be
dispelled. Our progress is neither slow nor immediate -
it is deliberate. With that in mind, let me now update the
Council on the progress made in the past four months,
including new developments in the Commission's work
and challenges ahead.

First, in relation to the investigation of the Hariri
case and the 22 others who were killed during the
attack, the Commission can now confirm, on the basis
of evidence, that a network of individuals acted in
concert to carry out the assassination of Rafiq Hariri
and that this network - which has been referred to as
the "Hariri network" - or parts of the network are
linked to some of the other cases within the
Commission's mandate.

It is probably useful for me to pause at this time
and to clarify two points. First, let me say a few words
about the use in the report of the words "criminal
networ ". Those words should be read in the context of
the whole report, which clearly refers to a terrorist
investigation. The direction of the investigation has not
changed, and the Commission is still investigating
crimes that are politically motivated. Secondly, while
previous reports have referred to the hypothesis of a
network, what is new this time is that we now have the
evidence of the existence of such a network and of its
links.
3

The Commission has also gathered evidence that
the Hariri network existed before the Hariri
assassination; that it conducted surveillance of
Mr. Hariri before his assassination; that it operated on
the day of Mr. Hariri's assassination; and that at least
part of the network continued to exist and operate after
Mr. Hariri's assassination.

Our priority is now to gather more evidence about
the Hariri network, its scope, the identity of all of its
participants, their links with others outside the network
and their role in the attacks. In relation to the other
attacks that fall within its mandate, the Commission
has continued to assist the Lebanese authorities in
providing a number of measures of technical
assistance, ranging from forensic analysis to reviewing
imagery materials. The Commission has continued to
investigate possible links between those cases and the
Hariri case.

The technical assistance provided to our
Lebanese hosts is not only meant to support the cases
at hand; it is also designed to allow the Lebanese
authorities to build capacity for the future. In that
regard, the Commission would like to note, however,
that the sooner its assistance is requested, the more
likely that technical assistance can be meaningful.

The mandate and the work of the Commission are
ground-breaking. Methods of investigations used in a
traditional domestic setting have to be adapted to the
existing environment. Operational imperatives or
administrative challenges like staff recruitment and
retention must be addressed with creativity. The
Commission's needs and requirements may often
stretch the limits of existing United Nations policies.
Off-the-shelf solutions are not necessarily suited to the
pursuit of a precedent-setting mission like ours. Every
day we must adjust, invent and create new ways to
advance our operations.

Much is said and written about the Tribunal. As
Prosecutor Designate of the Tribunal, I will only state
that the filing of eventual indictments will not be
immediate after the establishment of the Tribunal. The
admissible evidence will have to be carefully and
objectively considered in light of the applicable
prosecution threshold. No one can predict or dictate
how long this process will take.

As Louise Arbour said when she was Prosecutor
at the ICTY:
"An independent Prosecutor must be able to stand
apart from national politics, the interests of
individual States and the goals of any particular
foreign policy. Indeed, not only must the
Prosecutor stand apart from such considerations,
he or she must stand above them, and be fully
prepared without fear or favour to contradict
them or to challenge political pressures which
may seek to influence the course of justice."

That being said, however, ideally the time
between the establishment of the operations of the
Tribunal and the eventual filing of indictments should
be as short as possible. That is the reason why the
progress of the investigation becomes such a crucial
element in determining when the Tribunal will
commence its operation.

As a result, while the preparatory steps for the
establishment of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon are
continuing, I would request this Council to consider
extending the Commission's mandate beyond the date
of 15 June 2008. That would give the Commission the
needed time to continue its investigation. It would also
provide a desirable measure of stability and
predictability for our staff.

In conclusion, let me say that any unnecessary
delay in finding the truth and bringing the perpetrators
to justice must be avoided. But, as I have mentioned
before, the search for justice must be allowed to follow
its course. In saying so, I understand and share the
frustration of the surviving victims, the families of the
deceased and the people of Lebanon who expect quick
results. Though legitimate and understandable, that
frustration must not be allowed to undermine the trust
and the confidence that members of the international
community and the people of Lebanon have placed in
the Commission and in its process.

With the continued assistance of Member States
and the ongoing support of the Lebanese authorities, I
can assure the Council that no effort will be spared to
expedite the process as much as humanly possible.

