Mr. Gutierrez Reinel (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like at the outset to highlight the fact that the
Security Council scheduled this open debate on post-
conflict peacebuilding shortly after the recent
submission of the report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) to the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission and, in particular, shortly
after the conclusion of the high-level Conference on
the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its
Impact on Development.

That timing is significant because Peru believes
that, in the current context of financial crisis, we must
make efforts to prevent peacebuilding processes from
being affected. We must do everything possible to
ensure that early recovery processes in post-conflict
States are maintained and, in this context of crisis,
even strengthened. It is well known that those
processes face a range of problems that hamper their
implementation, such as the lack of infrastructure in
countries benefiting from cooperation and the lack of
trained cooperation personnel owing to the working
and security conditions in post-conflict countries, as
well as the slow distribution of funds.

From that perspective, my delegation considers
that there are a number of steps that should be taken
immediately to strengthen the current peacebuilding
processes. These include placing priority on improving
the institutional capacity of Governments. That is
fundamental, because national actors are the real
protagonists in developing the work and the
implementation of peacebuilding processes.

With regard to the very nature of conflicts,
notwithstanding certain similarities in the economic

and social factors that may be observed in some, every
conflict has its own internal and external dynamics, as
well as its own ethnic, tribal, constitutional or
historical referents. That means that no two cases or
relevant groups of actors are alike - hence the
complexity and great sensitivity of the management
and design of strategies for peacebuilding processes.

Therefore, such processes require designs that
improve the division of labour so as to promote
effective management in the implementation of
projects, the greater involvement of women as
important actors in any process, and a diffusion of
decision-making throughout the structures of
cooperating organizations in order to ensure better
effectiveness in project implementation.

Such clear and concrete measures would
strengthen the management capacities of all actors
involved in peacebuilding processes. In particular, they
would help to attain an objective that is an integral part
of peacebuilding processes - strengthening the
institutionality of the State. As we have seen, that is a
process whose aspects are two sides of the same coin
and thus interconnected. Therefore, actions should be
aimed at promoting both the peacebuilding process and
the State-building process, not only simultaneously but
in parallel.

In such an exercise, it is important, in the light of
the prognosis set out in the report of the Secretary-
General, that a series of actions be taken to effectively
bridge the strategic gap between weak institutional
capacities and delayed project financing, without
neglecting work in three areas that have a direct
bearing on the peacebuilding and the State-building
processes - governance, security and development -
seeking a fair balance that avoids giving one area pre-
eminence over another.

With respect to international cooperation, my
delegation believes that, as a matter of priority, it
should be channelled towards strengthening the
political system and conflict settlement, the training of
civilian teams and the design and implementation of
projects that will have a swift social impact, which is
crucial in order to gain the support of the local
population. To that end, financial institutions,
including the World Bank in particular, are natural
allies in peacebuilding efforts and essential to their
success.

All of this involves a medium- and long-term
commitment, with the participation of the international
community and the full agreement of the State
concerned. It may be of several years' duration, in
many priority areas and, in some cases, quite far-
reaching. A strategic vision of the peacebuilding
process is required to that end. It is thus essential to
build an alliance among the political, social,
educational and economic powers of the State and the
relevant international actors.

To the society involved in peacebuilding
processes, it should be made clear that international
cooperation is aimed at strengthening the exercise of
its sovereignty, with full respect for international law
and the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
but that such cooperation has a time frame and must
follow an agenda with clearly defined objectives and
specific goals that will ensure its viability.

I should like to conclude by highlighting the
important work accomplished thus far by the
Peacebuilding Commission, by reaffirming Peru's
constructive support for the leadership of the United
Nations and the Commission in the work being done in
peacebuilding processes, and by emphasizing my
country's full readiness to contribute decisively to
those efforts.

