Mr. Touray (Gambia): The situation in Afghanistan
is of grave concern to my delegation. The recent re-
emergence of hostilities in the northern region of the
country poses a serious and growing threat to the already
fragile peace and security situation in the region. Those
offensives are further exacerbated by the increasingly
ethnic and sectarian nature of the conflict, resulting in an
increase in refugee flows, the forcible displacement of
persons and wanton destruction, thus exacerbating the
misery and sorrow of an already despondent society.

My delegation was extremely disappointed when we
learnt of the capture of the Consulate-General of the
Islamic Republic of Iran. We vehemently condemn this
act of blatant disregard for international law. We join
others in demanding that all parties to the conflict do
everything possible to ensure the safe and dignified
passage out of Afghanistan of the personnel of the
Consulate-General and other Iranian nationals missing in
Afghanistan.

Another matter of grave concern to my delegation is
the attacks on United Nations personnel. We condemn
those acts and join others in calling on the Taliban to
investigate them and bring those responsible for these
heinous crimes to justice. We also demand that the parties
to the conflict do everything possible to ensure the
security of United Nations personnel and of international
and other humanitarian workers.

The war in Afghanistan is very fluid and for that
reason we believe that there is no military solution to this
extremely complex conflict. The international community
has expended a lot of resources, time and energy to help
the Afghan factions out of this undesirable situation, but
the factions remain stubborn. The belligerents must
realize that the patience of the international community
will soon run out.

In this context, we take this opportunity to call on all
the factions to lay down their arms and return to the

 

negotiating table. We believe that with a firm commitment
among the factions and with the assistance of the United
Nations, a negotiated settlement accommodating the
interests of all the Afghan factions can be reached.

My delegation has studied the draft resolution before
us. We believe that it is a very balanced one. It states in no
uncertain terms the demands and position of the
international community. We are in support of it and will
vote in its favour.

