Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We thank you, Sir,
and your delegation for having organized this
important meeting. My delegation wishes also to join
in thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Abou Moussa, for his
comprehensive briefing on the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). We also thank the
Permanent Observer of the African Union (AU) to the
United Nations, Ambassador Tete Antonio, and the
Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), Mr. Sylvain-Goma,
for their comprehensive statements. My delegation
welcomes the participation of the Permanent
Representative of the Central African Republic and the
representative of South Sudan in this debate.

Allow me to focus my statement first on the
report of the Secretary-General on the activities of
UNOCA (S/2011/704). We welcome the fact that
UNOCA has become fully operational, and are pleased
to learn of the extensive consultations that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has carried out
with the States of the region, regional bodies, civil
society formations, UN-Women and relevant United
Nations agencies since assuming his duties. South
Africa is encouraged by the level of cooperation
between the three United Nations offices, including the
exchange of staff between UNOCA and the United
Nations Office for West Africa. We thank the
Government of Gabon for the support it continues to
provide to UNOCA.

The challenges confronting the Central Africa
States - such as piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, drug
trafficking, the proliferation of illicit weapons and the
continued threat of the LRA - are transnational in
nature. The role of UNOCA will therefore be crucial in
assisting the United Nations in developing a regional
approach and strategy for the Central Africa States.
Given the nature of the socio-economic and security
challenges, the role of UNOCA in collaborating with
individual United Nations missions and country teams
will be important in developing complementarities for
the United Nations entities in the region and for
addressing the development and security challenges
confronting the region.

One of the key mandates of UNOCA is to build
institutional capacity and harmonize subregional
approaches to peace and security. We are of the View
that UNOCA has a critical role to play in contributing
to peace and security in the region through mediation
and the provision of good offices, among other things.
We welcome the working relationship established
between UNOCA and ECCAS. We further welcome
UNOCA's assumption of the secretariat functions of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa. The convening of
the 33rd ministerial meeting of the Committee on 5 and
6 December will be an important platform for
developing a regional geopolitical approach to
security-related developments in the subregion.

Turning to the LRA, my delegation continues to
be concerned about the devastating effects of that
armed group and its ongoing activities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, South
Sudan and the Central African Republic. The brutality
of those activities continues to haunt thousands of
innocent civilians, including women and children.
UNOCA's plan to devote increased attention to and
focus on the peace and security challenges faced by
women and children is a welcome step towards the
resolution of the challenges. In that regard, UNOCA
has an important mandate to work with the United
Nations peacekeeping missions in the affected areas,
the United Nations Office to the African Union and the
African Union itself in order to facilitate cooperation
and counter the threat posed by the LRA.

South Africa welcomes the ongoing military
cooperation between the countries affected by LRA
activities in addressing this challenge. In particular, my
delegation welcomes the regional strategy developed in
June at the African Union 2nd Regional Ministerial
Meeting on the Lord's Resistance Army. The strategy
includes the establishment of a regional intervention
force, a joint operations centre and a joint coordination
mechanism. In that regard, we welcome the call made
by the African Union Peace and Security Council on
27 September for the Commission to provide a report
on the implementation modalities for this regional
cooperation initiative so as to enable it to authorize the
envisaged cooperation. We welcome the decision of the
AU to appoint a special envoy for the LRA.

We further recall the request of the AU Assembly
in July for the United Nations and other AU partners to
provide timely financial and logistical support.
Important in that regard is the decision made at the
2nd Regional Meeting that "support should be
coordinated by the AU Commission but should not be
prejudicial to any existing bilateral arrangements
between the countries concerned and partners".

My delegation welcomes the readiness and
commitment expressed by the Secretary-General to
support the regional strategy of the AU through the
United Nations presence in the region. We are of the
View that the United Nations peacekeeping missions,
including the good offices of the Secretary-General,
have an important role to play in building the
capacities of States of the region through training, the
provision of logistical support and information-sharing.
To that end, this approach will deliver more effective
support to dialogue and peacebuilding efforts on the
ground. South Africa wishes to underscore that the
military operations against the LRA should be part of a
broader strategy that includes, inter alia, the granting
of amnesty, policies for facilitating defections and
reintegration, and the arrest of LRA commanders
indicted by the International Criminal Court.

Finally, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation for the work done by Special
Representative Abou Moussa and his team, and wishes
him well in his ongoing endeavours. If UNOCA is to
be able to implement all these plans and programmes
for the region, it is important that it be allocated the
resources it requires. My delegation supports the
presidential statement to be adopted by the Council
later today.

