Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month. I also thank the
Ambassador of India and his team for their important
contribution to the smooth conduct of the Council's
work last month.

I also wish to thank Ambassador Osorio for his
report on the activities of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) over the past
90 days, and to commend the many activities that the
Committee has carried out under his leadership. China
has always attached importance to the work of the
Committee, and will continue to provide active
support.

Meanwhile, we also expect the Panel of Experts
to continue to carry out its work under the leadership
of the Committee, as mandated by resolution 1737
(2006), in an objective and prudent manner in order to
truly facilitate its comprehensive and effective
implementation. China has consistently believed that
dialogue and negotiations are the only way to achieve a
comprehensive, lasting and appropriate settlement of
the issue of Iran's nuclear capabilities and to meet the
common interests of the international community. We
hope that all parties will move towards each other,
address difficulties, intensify their diplomatic efforts,
use innovative thinking and adopt new measures to
foster mutual trust and create the conditions for the
appropriate settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue.

China notes the latest report of the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) on Iran's nuclear issues. China has always
believed that, as a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Iran enjoys the
right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy and should
fulfil its international obligations. At the same time,
China hopes that Iran and the IAEA can maintain and
strengthen their dialogue and cooperation and achieve
effective solutions to the relevant problems, with a
View to strengthening the international community's
confidence in the peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme. In the current circumstances, it is more
important than ever to continue to work steadfastly
towards dialogue and negotiation in order to arrive at a
proper solution to the Iranian nuclear issue, since that
will contribute materially to the maintenance of peace
and stability in the Middle East.

China is confident that, so long as all parties
concerned display belief and patience, take a flexible
and pragmatic approach, work on bringing positive
elements to bear and take the initiative to build up
mutual trust, progress will be made in the conduct of
dialogue and negotiations.

