Mr. Elisaia (Samoa): It is my honour to address
the Council on behalf of the members of the Pacific
Islands Forum group of countries that maintain
permanent missions in New York, namely Australia,
the Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, the Republic
of the Marshall Islands, Nauru, Papua New Guinea,
Palau, New Zealand, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Vanuatu and my own country, Samoa.

The countries of the Pacific Islands Forum group
reaffirm our unequivocal condemnation of terrorism in
all its forms and our continuing determination to fight
it by all means possible, consistent with human rights
and the rule of law.

Recently we have witnessed once again the
horror of terrorist atrocities - in Beslan, in Jakarta
and elsewhere. Those attacks underline the fact that
while terrorism may transcend national borders, its
indiscriminate nature means that no people or country
will ever be immune to the threat of terrorist violence.

Terrorism is now more than ever a threat that
must be confronted by a collective international
response. It is clear that if we are to effectively
eliminate this global threat, we must take action at the
national, regional and international levels.

Pacific Islands Forum members are committed,
individually and collectively, to the international
campaign against terrorism. In the 2002 Nasonini
Declaration on Regional Security, Pacific Forum
leaders

"underlined their commitment to the importance
of global efforts to combat terrorism and to

implement internationally agreed anti-terrorism

measures, such as United Nations Security

Council resolution 1373 (2001) and the Financial

Action Task Force Special Recommendations".

Subsequent communiques by Forum leaders have
reiterated Forum members' commitment to combating
terrorism.

The Pacific Islands Forum continues to support
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
established under Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). We also welcome the recent adoption of
resolution 1566 (2004), which further endorses the
work of the United Nations committees responding to
terrorism and establishes a working group to consider
further measures which could be taken. In our most
recent statement on this issue in March 2004, we
welcomed the report of the CTC on its revitalization
and the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), aimed at
improving the ability of the CTC to monitor the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We look
forward to cooperating closely with the CTED in
identifying and providing the capacity-building needed
most by small developing countries.

Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)
introduced important new multilateral counter-
terrorism obligations. It set out clear requirements and
called on States to implement specific measures to
meet them and then to report back to the CTC on their
actions taken in that regard. For Pacific Islands Forum
members, the focus to date has been on cooperation to
improve our capacity to meet international counter-
terrorism obligations. Pacific Islands Forum members
are continuing to cooperate bilaterally and regionally,
in both political and technical spheres, to implement
resolution 1373 (2001).

Progress is being made. In May 2004, New
Zealand hosted a Pacific round table on counter-
terrorism. It brought officials from around the Forum
region together to take stock of the range of current
and imminent counter-terrorism obligations, canvass
impediments to implementation by Pacific island
countries and to review current and future capacity-
building programmes.

At the Pacific Islands Forum meeting in Samoa
this year, leaders called for enhanced cooperation on
counter-terrorism and endorsed a number of practical
initiatives proposed by round-table participants. Those
included establishment of a network of central contact
points, a counter-terrorism working group in advance
of the 2005 meeting of the Forum Regional Security
Committee, further work on extradition and mutual
legal assistance and coordination of views on the
possibility of holding a regional counter-terrorism
contingency planning exercise. Leaders also welcomed
the establishment of the Pacific Transnational Crime
Coordination Centre (PTCCC) in Suva, Fiji, which will
harness and enhance the law enforcement intelligence
generated by national transnational crime units.

Those regional efforts underscore the willingness
of Pacific Forum States to play a responsible and
meaningful role in the global fight against terrorism.
But for those initiatives, including the PTCCC, to be
fully operationalized, financial and technical support
will be required from the international community to
complement the region's own resources.

While Pacific Islands Forum members remain
firmly committed to the international campaign against
terrorism, I would like to emphasize that the Pacific
Islands Forum group consists primarily of developing
States, many of them small island States. We note that
small developing countries do not always have
opportunities to provide input into the process of
developing international counter-terrorism standards.
As a result, such standards may not adequately reflect
or make allowances for the challenges that many of us
face in implementing them. Compliance with the raft
of international counter-terrorism standards -
particularly those introduced since 9/11 - has been
challenging; meeting reporting requirements, including
to the CTC, is equally so.

It is not a lack of will, but more often a lack of
resources and technical expertise, that prevents us from
fulfilling our commitments. Thus we welcome and
encourage consultation between Member States and the
CTC that aims to extend assistance to small and
developing States and that are focused on devising
practical solutions to those challenges - solutions that
help reduce the burden on smaller developing States
but that will also ensure that the important CTC
reporting requirements can be met. For example, we
would encourage the CTC to consider whether a
Pacific regional report, submitted by the Pacific Islands
Forum Secretariat on behalf of and in close
cooperation with its member countries, might provide a
possible option to assist those small island countries to
meet their reporting obligations to the CTC.

We live in a time when terrorism is a threat to us
all. As we strive to meet that threat and as we work to
implement the letter and spirit of resolution 1373
(2001), the Security Council and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee can be assured of the continuing support of
the members of the Pacific Islands Forum.

