Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Article 1 of the United
Nations Charter stipulates that one of the purposes of
the United Nations is to bring about the settlement of
international disputes by peaceful means and in
conformity with the principles of justice and
international law. After 58 years, this purpose is still a
very important one for this Organization. Indeed, the
role played by the United Nations is all the more
important now that there is an increasing need, as
globalization advances, to address a variety of
international problems that transcend national borders.

In the international community, where no
integrated government exists as yet, there is no
legislative or judicial organ with enforcement
authorities. Treaties require the consent of participating
States to become binding. International courts also
need general or specific agreement by the parties for
disputes to be referred to them.

However, States tend to hesitate before subjecting
themselves to legally-binding agreements and decisions
that restrict their latitude on many issues, including
such wide-ranging matters as the environment, human
rights and trade and investment, which are complex
and greatly affect national interests.

In the present international community,

establishing the rule of law, while important, is not an
easy task. It is essential first of all, therefore, to create
a framework for agreements in which as many States as
possible will participate. Merely pursuing ideals will
not produce effective results if the participating
countries are limited in number. In this sense, given the
Organization's comprehensive membership, the law-
making functions of the United Nations system - in
which extensive discussions are conducted to promote
understanding among Members - is extremely
important. In addition, the Security Council is
authorized under Article 25 of the Charter to make
legally-binding decisions in the area of the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Council is making an increasing number of critical
decisions, particularly in the post-cold war era.

The Japanese Government attaches great
importance to the United Nations role in this area. In
this context, we welcome the initiative of the British
Presidency this month to place this issue on the agenda
of the Security Council. I would like to take this
opportunity to touch upon the views of my Government
regarding some recent developments related to this
subject.

First, as regards developments in international
criminal justice, it is unjust to allow those who have
committed serious crimes to go unpunished; such
inaction renders society and the State corrupt. When
society or the State, alone, cannot bring such criminals
to justice, it is important for the international
community to shoulder its responsibility and contribute
to the creation of a post-conflict order and a base for
economic and social development, as well as to the
achievement of universal justice. It is also in the
interest of the international community, as it will serve
to deter similar crimes in the future.

In the 19905, the Security Council established
International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia for Rwanda. This represented a great
advance in the development of international criminal
justice. The Special Court for Sierra Leone was also
established, based on a request by the Security Council.
Japan supports such a role for the Council. We share
the concern expressed by Foreign Secretary Straw in
the Council meeting last week, however, that the
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda are
proceeding slowly and at considerable financial cost.
We request the Security Council to conduct rigorous
monitoring, so that those Courts conduct the trials
efficiently and that they complete their mandates
expeditiously.

The United Nations should also make an
important contribution to the Khmer Rouge trials. The
Government of Japan, together with France, have put
forth initiatives for the adoption of the relevant
resolutions in the General Assembly. We hope that the
court would begin its activities without delay and
thereby contribute to the achievement of justice in
Cambodia.

It may be said that the most important recent
development in international criminal justice is the
birth of the International Criminal Court (ICC). The
Government of Japan has consistently supported the
establishment of the ICC and welcomed it when the
Rome Statute came into force. In order for the ICC to
be effective and universal, it is necessary for a large
number of countries to be able to regard the Court as
their own. We therefore consider it crucial that the ICC
meet the expectations of as many countries as possible
in conducting its activities.

Secondly, there is the task of combating terrorism
and ensuring the safety of United Nations and
associated personnel. The eradication of terrorism is a
challenge to the international community as a whole.
The United Nations is playing an important role
through its championing of international conventions
and protocols to ensure that terrorists are brought to
justice and through its measures to prevent terrorism.

The international community was shocked by the
terrorist attack on United Nations headquarters in
Baghdad, which caused so many casualties. We
welcome resolution 1502 (2003), adopted by the
Security Council after the attack, as an important step
for the protection of humanitarian personnel and the
United Nations and its associated personnel. We
consider it necessary to conduct further discussions on
this matter, including the expansion of the scope of
protection in our deliberations, with a clear
understanding of the existing Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel.

Thirdly and lastly, placing importance on justice
and the rule of law is an essential element in promoting
human security and furthering economic and social
development. Where no justice or rule of law exist,
frustration and bitterness will accumulate, and a society
that is supposed to be united for development will
instead become fragmented and divided, and descend
into a vicious circle of conflict and poverty.

In this context, assistance from the international
community for legal system-building in post-conflict
periods is critically important, because it will
contribute to the establishment of the rule of law and
the prevention of future conflict, as well as to the
creation of a base upon which to promote nation-
building and development. It is from this point of view
that the Japanese Government has been extending
assistance of various kinds to Cambodia, Timor-Leste
and other countries, in areas such as the formulation of
basic laws and the development of human resources for
judicial institutions.

We are also encouraged to see that contributions
in this area have been strengthened in the peace
operations of the United Nations. Moreover, the United
Nations Asia and Far East Institute, which was
established by agreement between the United Nations
and Japan, has been contributing for 40 years to
capacity-building in crime prevention and criminal
justice by conducting activities that include the training
of experts in the Asia-Pacific countries. We would like
to request that the report to be provided by the
Secretary-General on today's discussion include an
evaluation of the assistance provided to date by United
Nations organs, including the Security Council, and by
Member States, respectively, and recommendations
regarding the kinds of assistance that might be
provided in the future.

I hope that today's meeting and the one held on
the 24th of this month will provide guidance for the
future work of the United Nations, and I look forward
to the report of the Secretary-General.

