Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
for his informative briefing, and to reiterate once again
the total support of Uruguay for his work.

Uruguay appreciates the submission of the third
report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
We reiterate our interest in ensuring that such reports,
like all other reports submitted to the Security Council
on the topics that form part of our work's agenda, be
circulated in writing before meetings in a manner that
enables members to analyse and comment more in
detail on their content.

We are concerned at the lack of progress in the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, which has humanitarian,
political and security implications in both countries
and the region as a whole. In the nine months since the
adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), little progress has
been made in its implementation, with announcements
by Israel of expanding construction of settlements in
the occupied territories. We reiterate that settlements
are illegal under international law and constitute a
serious obstacle to peace and the two-State solution.

August will also be remembered, unfortunately, by
100 children and their families as a time when three
schools in the West Bank were demolished or damaged
by the Israeli authorities on the orders of the Coordinator
of Government Activities in the Territories. The Jubbet
al-Dhib school, which lies east of Bethlehem and which
was paid for by the European Union and completed
three weeks earlier, was demolished on the same day
that school began. A kindergarten in the Bedouin
community of Jabal Al-Baba was also demolished and
a primary school room in Abu al-Nawar lost its only
source of electricity, solar panels. Such actions clearly
do not contribute to de-escalation. Additional measures
are necessary.

Until a few days ago, the parties had taken no
steps to reverse the trends threatening the two-State
solution, according to the latest report of the Middle
East Quartet. In that context, we appreciate the
announcement made last week by Hamas, offering the
Palestinian Authority the resumption of control of the
Gaza Strip after a decade. The tragic and worrisome
situation of the 2 million inhabitants of Gaza, who are
permanently on the verge of a serious humanitarian
crisis, constitutes a serious threat to peace and carries
the risk of provoking another armed conflict.

The reunification of Palestine under a single,
legitimate and democratic Government is essential
in order to address the aspirations of the Palestinian
people. Such reunification could substantially improve
living conditions in that area. If that agreement is to
be successfully implemented, it will be essential that
measures be accompanied by agreements on security,
the disarmament of Hamas and the renunciation of both
violence and the destruction of Israel as a declared
objective.

On every occasion that the Security Council has
met to consider the Palestinian question, we have
insisted on the need to abandon the rhetoric of hatred
and incitement. Peace will come through negotiations
we reiterate that getting on the path of negotiation will
come through gestures. In addition to moving away
from hatred, we must humanize relations between the
two contenders. Additionally, dead enemies on both
sides must be returned. For example, the families of
Hadar Goldin and Oron Shaul have been waiting since
2014 to be able to give them a dignified burial.

As Secretary-General Guterres expressed during
his recent visit to the region, Uruguay understands
that there are no alternatives to the two-State
solution. Uruguay maintains its strong support for the
establishment of two independent States and the right
of Israel and Palestine to live in peace within secure
and recognized borders and within a renewed field of
cooperation that is free from any threats or acts that
breach peace, including acts of terrorism. Agreements
must be reached with respect to Jerusalem and other
issues, such as equitable access to drinking water and
respect for sacred sites.

It is time to reinvigorate a political outlook that will
bring the parties back to the negotiating table, which
is a process that must be supported by economic and
social measures that will improve the living conditions
and development of the Palestinian people. To that
end, it will be necessary for the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities to make every effort to avoid unnecessary
provocations that would increase tensions and violence,
which hamper all the efforts of the international
community to bring about the resumption of bilateral
negotiations.

In conclusion, as we have been doing since 1947, we
wish to reiterate Uruguay's unwavering commitment to
peace in the Middle East. In order to achieve this long-
sought-after goal, the parties need to resume direct
bilateral negotiations with a view to achieving a two-
State solution, which is the only option that will allow
for the peaceful coexistence of Israel and Palestine, an
end to the long and illegal occupation, and the well-
being and security of their peoples.

We are just two months from the seventieth
anniversary of the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 181 (II), which established the partition of
Palestine and the creation of two States, one Arab and
one Jewish. This solution was decisively supported
by Uruguay, out of the conviction that it would make
it possible for Israel and Palestine to live together in
peace and with secure borders. Yet despite constant
efforts, this process unfortunately remains unfinished.
The international community continues to hope that the
leaders of Israel and Palestine will take every measure
to move this process forward towards a genuine and
lasting peace.

