Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): I would like, Mr.
President, to express to you my delegation's
appreciation for your having convened this open debate
on the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and on the proposal for its revitalization. Before
I go further, let me express my Government's
commitment and determination to combat terrorism,
and its support for the work of the CTC.
The report of the CTC's Chairman (S/2004/ 124, annex) has described the main problems encountered in
the effort to fully comply with resolution 1373 (2001).
The report has advanced a package of measures aimed
at overcoming those problems and mitigating the
procedural and substantive difficulties already
identified.

The rationale for the CTC's revitalization has
been its need for a more proactive role in dialogue with
Member States, in order to further facilitate technical
assistance and to promote closer cooperation and
coordination with other relevant international
organizations. In recognizing such a need, we believe
that the current challenges faced by the CTC in
implementing its mandate, contained in resolution 1373
(2001), will have to be addressed comprehensively. In
this case, the proposal for the establishment of a

Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate- and the appointment of an executive
director as its head - need to be considered and

judged in the context of strengthening the CTC's
effectiveness and efficiency in combating terrorism.

My delegation believes that although the rationale
for revitalizing the CTC is valid, it must nonetheless be
considered in the context of other important issues
which have equal validity and need to be approached in
a balanced manner.

We are gratified to note that the task of
revitalization, including the establishment of the
Executive Directorate within the existing United
Nations structure, will not become a burden or set a
precedent. It will also be subject to review by
December 2005, with a sunset clause set for December
2007. Based on those considerations, my delegation
endorses, in principle, the revitalization of the CTC.

Finally, I would like stress Indonesia's conviction
that terrorism is a problem facing every nation and that
we can best fight and vanquish that menace through a
comprehensive approach that includes addressing the
root causes of terrorism and, ultimately, its eradication.
Development is among the other issues that need to be
approached in a balanced manner, so as to ensure that
terrorism has nowhere to hide and is defeated.

