Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I wish to thank you, Sir, for
organizing today's meeting and Ambassadors Ellen
Margrethe Loj, Cesar Mayoral and Mihnea Motoc for
their in-depth and substantive reviews of the work of
the Committees which they chair.

We are pleased to note that, today, we have a
clear definition of the sphere for practical interaction
between the related Committees, including an increase
in the reciprocal exchange of information, cooperation
among the expert groups, and the coordination of
planned visits to Member States. We have taken steps
to develop coordinated working methods aimed at the
timely submission by States of their national reports on
their compliance with obligations under the relevant
resolutions. It is important in principle for us that the
Security Council committees focus on close
cooperation with international and regional
organizations and that they use their experience and
potential to strengthen their dialogue with States.

I take this opportunity to thank Ambassador Ellen
Margrethe Loj and other speakers for their favourable
assessment of the 10-month Russian chairmanship of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).
Thanks to joint efforts, the CTC has made
important progress in the reform of the Committee,
pursuant to resolution 1535 (2004), and in organizing
new forms of dialogue with States. The Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) has now been
established and is working. Procedures and
methodologies have been developed that have allowed
us to launch the process of country visits. We have
implemented new methods for expert assessments of
States' needs for technical assistance, with the active
involvement of potential donors. Finally, we have laid
the basis for the qualitative expansion of the dialogue
and practical interaction of the CTC with international
and regional organizations.

We welcome the Danish chairmanship's focus on
the ongoing further development of those approaches
in the CTC's work. At the same time, we share the
concerns regarding the delay in the staffing of the
CTED. That unfortunate situation, as we see it, is due
ostensibly to a number of reasons, but it must be given
particular attention. The staffing of CTED will
determine, to a critical extent, how effectively we will
be able to implement all of the plans scheduled for that
body.

The Russian Federation attaches great importance
to the work of the 1267 Committee on sanctions
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban. We favourably assess
the work of the analytical support and sanctions
Monitoring Team. We believe that its second report
generally establishes a positive basis for the
Committee's ongoing work and will enable us in the
near future to prepare a new draft resolution under
paragraph 3 of resolution 1526 (2004). It is important
that we all share the general understanding that we
cannot underestimate the scope or degree of the threat
that Al-Qaida still poses to peace and stability.

The year that has passed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1540 (2004) has confirmed
the timeliness of that initiative. An important step was
taken towards strengthening the international legal
basis in that area on 13 April, when the General
Assembly adopted the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. We
favourably assess the work of the 1540 Committee,
which currently enjoys all the requisite authority and
expert capabilities for the resolution's implementation.
We attach great significance to the establishment of
contacts and cooperation between that body and the
CTC and other international non-proliferation and
expert oversight mechanisms.
We believe that the practice of holding such
Security Council meetings as today's on the work of its
subsidiary counter-terrorism bodies must be pursued.

We are taking only the initial steps to coordinate
the work of the Committees. The Council's ongoing
attention will be instrumental for overseeing and
facilitating this important process.

I note that my statement took exactly five
minutes.

