Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I should
like to extend, on behalf of my delegation, our
congratulations to you, Sir, on the assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February, and to wish you every success in guiding the
work of the Council to a fruitful conclusion. We should
also like to express our appreciation to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation, for the able leadership
demonstrated during the month of January. We thank
Mr. Alvaro de Soto for his briefing and for his
participation in today's meeting.

Based on the initiative put forth by His Majesty
the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, King
Abdullah bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, and under his
auspices, a dialogue on Palestinian national
conciliation was held last week. The dialogue
culminated in a successful agreement between the
leaders of the Palestinian people. We thank Saudi
Arabia for this valuable effort and we also thank all the
other Arab leaders who have contributed to this
success. In this regard, the agreement endorsed the
cessation of any and all internal strife among
Palestinians and approved the speedy formation of a
national unity Government. The importance of national
unity was reaffirmed in order to achieve the legitimate
national goals of the Palestinian people. As such,
peaceful dialogue will now serve as the sole basis for
solving political differences among Palestinians.

The leaders of the Palestinian people pledged
their commitment to the agreement in letter and in
spirit and pledged to devote their efforts to eliminating
the Israeli occupation and regaining the national rights
of the Palestinian people. Moreover, key issues, such
as occupied East Jerusalem, the Palestinian refugees,
the prisoners and detainees, and the continuation of the
illegal construction by Israel of its wall and settlements
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, will be given top priority.
Furthermore, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Executive Committee of the Palestine Liberation
Organization and President of the Palestinian National
Authority, President Mahmoud Abbas will commission
Prime Minister Ismail Haniyeh to form the next
Palestinian Government in the next couple of days.
The President will call on the prime minister of
the next Government to abide by the interests of the
Palestinian people, to protect their rights, to preserve
and develop their achievements and to work towards
achieving their national goals as ratified by the
resolutions of the Palestine National Council, the Basic
Law, the National Conciliation Document and the
resolutions of Arab summits. Accordingly, President
Abbas will also call on the prime minister of the next
Government to respect Arab and international
agreements signed by the Palestinian Liberation
Organization.

It is certainly our conviction that the future
formation of a national unity Government based on the
above-mentioned principles should provide for the
lifting of the financial blockade imposed against the
Palestinian people by some in the international
community after democratic elections were held in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, in January last year.

The success of the Palestinian leaders in placing
the larger issues facing the Palestinian people before
political disagreements produces a constructive
environment for the upcoming meeting, to be held on
19 February 2007, between President Mahmoud Abbas
and Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, under the
auspices of United States Secretary of State
Condoleezza Rice. The meeting will have two different
elements. The first part will be of a practical nature: to
discuss issues such as the release of prisoners, the
release of taxes belonging to the Palestinian Authority,
the implementation of the 2005 Agreement on
Movement and Access and the lifting of restrictions on
the movement of Palestinian persons and goods in the
West Bank, as well as extending the ceasefire to the
West Bank. Nearly all of these issues were discussed at
the last meeting between President Abbas and Prime
Minister Olmert; many of them have yet to be
implemented.

The second element will be regarding the overall
political process. President Abbas will reiterate the
readiness of the Palestinian side for talks on the final-
status issues to commence at once. This will be based
on the termination of the Israeli occupation and the
establishment of an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State, based on 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and reaching a just solution to
the refugees issue in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948. If that meeting
proves to be a success - and we hope it does - it will
greatly influence the success of future meetings,
including the upcoming Quartet meeting to be held this
month in Berlin.

The international community has repeatedly
reiterated its call for Israel to end its occupation, which
started in 1967, and has voiced its support for the
vision of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace and within secure borders. Hence, what
needs to happen for this to transpire is for a specific
timeline to be established, with a mechanism of
monitoring, in order to finally reach a just and
comprehensive agreement. In this regard, an
international conference could provide a way to
accomplish these objectives.

The Palestinian side has spoken. We are ready.
We have unified our people and the ranks of our
leadership. President Abbas, as Chairman of the
Executive Committee of the PLO, the sole and
legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, has
the mandate to negotiate peace based on international
legitimacy, including United Nations resolutions, the
Road Map and the Arab Peace Initiative. Now the
question that presents itself is whether Israel is ready
for real and genuine talks to commence, which will
forever terminate its occupation of the territories
occupied since 1967.

It is apparent that we are faced with a historic
moment which must be seized by all parties interested
in a genuine and long-lasting peace. However, recent
developments have continued to dash hopes of peace
among the Palestinian people. These include the
condemnable and outrageous decision taken by the
Israeli Government on Sunday, 11 February 2007, to
continue with the politically motivated and extremely
explosive construction and so-called excavation work
under the Al-Burag wall in the holy Al-Aqsa mosque
compound. This illegal action by Israel, the occupying
Power, is indeed endangering the sanctity, integrity and
foundations of the holy Al-Aqsa mosque compound.
Moreover, this has sparked serious alarm and clearly
presents an indication that the intentions of the Israeli
Government are not to promote peace but rather to
agitate the Muslims and Christians in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Such
measures also enrage the peoples of the Arab world
and Muslims and Christians throughout the world.
In a scene reminiscent of the incidents that led to
the outbreak of the Al-Aqsa intifada on 28 September
2000, on Friday, 9 February 2007, Israeli occupying
forces stormed the holy Al-Aqsa mosque compound in
occupied East Jerusalem, using excessive force against
Palestinian worshippers and wounding dozens of them.
Has Israel not learned from previous dangerous actions
it has taken, including the infamous visit of Ariel
Sharon to the holy shrines of East Jerusalem, which
ignited the second intifada - the Al-Aqsa intifada?

It should be recalled that the Old City of
Jerusalem and its walls are protected by the 1972
Convention Concerning the Protection of the World
Cultural and Natural Heritage and are inscribed on the
United Nations World Heritage List and the List of
World Heritage in Danger. In a recent statement on this
matter, UNESCO called on the Israeli Government to
halt its illegal actions and stated that the distinctive
character of the Old City of Jerusalem derives, in
particular, from the close relationship between the
historical and religious buildings and the peoples living
with them and noted that interfering with the delicate
balance among the symbols of the three monotheistic
religions would entail running the risk of undermining
respect for sacred beliefs.

It is also important to remind the Council that the
afore-mentioned action by Israel has been committed
in violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention, of 1949,
and The Hague Regulations of 1907 and in blatant
defiance of relevant Security Council resolutions. In
numerous Security Council resolutions, the Council
has affirmed the applicability of the Fourth Geneva
Convention to all the occupied territories, including
East Jerusalem, and has repeatedly declared that all of
the measures and arrangements taken by Israel,
including legislative and administrative ones, aimed at
changing the legal status, demographic composition
and character of the city are null and void and without
any legal validity whatsoever.

This is the immediate responsibility of the
Council, in accordance with the United Nations
Charter. If the Council were to succeed in fulfilling
those obligations and halted and reversed Israeli
actions in this regard, it would indeed have played an
extremely crucial role, a role not only in addressing
this perilous situation and in upholding international
law, including international humanitarian law, but also
in creating the necessary environment favourable for
enabling the peace process to move forward and in
order for a final agreement to be reached between the
two sides. We sincerely hope that this will be achieved.

Moreover, the rest of the international community
also has an obligation to the parties and must ensure
that no unilateral measures are taken that endanger the
fragile prospect of peace we now are presented with.
Illegal actions such as those taken by Israel in occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in
addition to Israel's continued settlement activity and
the construction of its wall, could prove to be a catalyst
for this historic moment to slip away. This cannot be an
option. The Palestinian people have invested more than
a decade on initiatives that have promised them a
world of change. The time has now come to offer real
and genuine proposals that promise a just and lasting
peace: one in which a Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, will be established. That will
guarantee freedom, peace and security for all.

