Mr. Al-Eryany (Yemen) (interpretation from Arabic):
I would like to thank you, Sir, for giving me the
opportunity to address the Security Council on such a very
important question for our region. At the outset, I would
like to offer you my warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. Allow me to express my hope that the work of
the Council will be crowned with success under your wise
leadership. I would also like to pay tribute to your
predecessor for the excellent manner in which he conducted
the work of the Council during the past month.

The Security Council meets today to discuss very
complicated and dangerous developments in the Middle
East. Recent tragic events have led to the explosion of the
situation in Jerusalem and other Palestinian cities and
towns, and the situation continues to evolve as we speak.
All this has come about as the result of the oppressive,
unjust practices of the Israeli authorities against the
Palestinian population and their continued attempts to
change the features of Jerusalem. The latest such attempt
was the opening of an entrance to the tunnel, which
threatens the integrity of the Al-Aqsa Mosque and other
holy sites. In recent days, the Israeli army has used live
ammunition and other weapons against defenceless civilian
Palestinians. These clashes have led to the death and injury
of hundreds of innocent Palestinians. We condemn and
denounce the measures taken by the Israeli authorities and
Israel's repeated aggression against Palestinians and
Palestinian officials in Arab Jerusalem and other Palestinian
cities and towns.

These oppressive measures represent blatant
violations of human rights and of resolutions of
international legality, as well as the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War. This dangerous situation could aggravate
tensions in the area and return it to a cycle of violence
that might threaten peace and security in the Middle East.
We view the Israeli practices in Jerusalem as a clear
and flagrant violation of the Israeli-Palestinian accords,
which provide for negotiations on these territories to
determine their final status. These violations threaten the
peace process and the Israeli Government bears the
responsibility for these dangerous developments. The
Security Council must adopt all the measures necessary to
stop Israeli practices against the defenceless, innocent
Palestinians. We call upon the international community,
and the permanent members of the Security Council, and
the two sponsors of the peace process in particular, to
intervene promptly and urgently to stop the bloodshed and
the killing of defenceless civilians; all measures and
practices which desecrate holy places; all oppressive
measures adopted by Israel against the Palestinian people;
the confiscation of property and land belonging to the
Islamic and Christian awqaf; and the attempt by Israel to
change the features and demographic composition of
Jerusalem.

Based on the Yemeni Republic's ongoing
commitment to a comprehensive, lasting and just peace in
the area based on resolutions of international legality and
legitimacy and the principle of "land for peace", we wish
to reaffirm the importance that we place on the need for
Israel to respect the accords signed and all resolutions of
international legality and legitimacy, particularly Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425
(1978).

