Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Terrorism is one of the
most serious threats to global peace and security today.
It affects all of us. May I, therefore, join all of those
who have extended their condolences to you, Sir, over
the sad deaths of the Egyptian policemen who were
killed by terrorists while performing their duty.

Since the beginning of the year, more than 4,000
lives have been lost in more than 40 countries to
terrorist attacks. As many as 1,000 people have lost
their lives since the Council last met, one month ago,
to discuss the issue of terrorism (see S/PV.7670). We
therefore support the President's initiative to discuss
ways to address this common challenge in today's open
debate on countering the narratives and ideologies
of terrorism.

Terrorism thrives on and is sustained by
transboundary networks for its ideology, recruitment,
propaganda, funding, arms, training and sanctuary.
No one nation alone can tackle that menace decisively.
Tackling terrorism demands extensive coordination and
effort. The fight against terrorism has not known success
so far owing to insufficient international cooperation.
The Hydra-like monster of terrorism continues to
spread across continents, in developing and developed
countries alike, aided by targeted propaganda of hatred
disseminated over ever-growing social media networks
that were designed to bring people together.

The rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant is drawing foreign terrorist fighters of vastly
varying ethnicities, social backgrounds, education and
economic status from distant continents, demonstrating
the immense complexities of the push and pull factors
involved. It is increasingly clear that no single path or
set ofpaths exists to define the process ofradicalization,
thereby ensuring that the task of mounting a counter-
narrative will be difficult. One of the common threads
is that the overwhelming proportion of foreign fighters
are males between the ages of the mid-teens and the
mid-twenties. That may be an indication of a possible
way to address the issue.

The ideological framework that guides terrorist
groups is their real strength. It is built upon very
specific and extreme arguments. The fight against
terrorism is not a confrontation targeting any religion.
It is a struggle between the values of humanism and the
forces of inhumanity. It is also a battle that must be won
through the strength of our values and the real message
of religions.

A concerted effort is needed to deny any space for
the spread of extremist ideologies and narratives and
to launch specific counter-narratives. The counter-
narratives must address theories of victimhood,
conspiracy and the denial of inconvenient facts that are
contained in the terrorist ideologies. It requires building
a wider social consensus against the inhuman activities
and crimes committed by the terrorist groups. The
active engagement of local community and religious
leaders may be necessary in order to disseminate more
moderate and mainstream teachings challenging the
radical and motivated interpretations.

Since the phenomenon of radicalized foreign or
homegrown terrorists defies any easy generalizations,
it is important to identify the nature of the perceived
individual or group grievances that push them towards
membership in such extremist groups. Radicalization
can be prevented only ifyoung people develop a stake in
their mainstream sociopolitical and economic milieus.
Providing long-term care for the de-radicalized is also
an important aspect in convincing the possible recruits
of alternatives available to them.

Moderate views can be spread effectively through
the education system, civil society, opinion-makers
and domestic political leadership. The powerful
role of media - print and electronic - cannot be
underestimated in this debate. The misuse of social
media to disastrous effect by terrorist groups needs
to be monitored carefully and countered, with due
safeguards for respecting the freedom of expression. At
the same time, positive and balanced narratives about
the fallacies of extremist ideologies and the successes
of peaceful coexistence need to be disseminated
more widely.

Countering the narratives of terrorism is a long-term
preventive endeavour. Equally important is effective
counter-terrorism through monitoring and intervention,
which requires close international collaboration.
Narrowly perceived interests have often prevented
the framing of legal frameworks for international
cooperation and even the effective implementation of
sanctions that could restrict possible threats. We hope
that countries realize that the threat is serious, knows
no borders and requires a more coordinated response.
The effort should start, with renewed vigour and
determination, here at the United Nations.

