Sir Brian Urquhart: Mr. President, I am greatly
honoured - and somewhat unnerved, I must say - by
your invitation to speak today in the Security Council.
I attended the first meeting of the Council, in London
in January 1946, and in the succeeding years I spent
hundreds of hours in this Chamber sitting behind
successive Secretaries-General, writing reports and
sometimes trying to implement the Council's decisions
in the field. I still believe that, for all the ups and
downs of its first 57 years, the primary responsibility
of the Security Council for international peace and
security is as essential a concept as it was in 1946. As I
left the Secretariat 18 years ago, my remarks will
inevitably be of a rather general nature, which is
probably just as well.

During the cold war period, Chapter VI, "Pacific
settlement of disputes", was the preferred chapter of
the Charter, and Chapter VII - with one or two
exceptions - was largely in abeyance. Chapter VI was
the basis for most of the important activities of the
Council and for all sorts of experiments and
improvisations. The list of techniques in Chapter VI -

negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional
agencies - has been progressively built on and

extended. Among such extensions are peacekeeping -
sometimes rather glibly referred to as being under
"Chapter VI and a half" - a very large expansion of
the role of the Secretary-General, United Nations
presences, special representatives of the Secretary-
General, Security Council commissions, friends of the
Secretary-General, and so on. At present, there are, I
believe, some 33 special representatives of the
Secretary-General engaged in pacific settlement
missions in different parts of the world.

As members of the Security Council know better
than I do, there are many obstacles to useful
international action and the Council has always
suffered from the dichotomy between the noble
responsibilities imposed on it in the Charter and the
conflict of the national policies of its members and the
reservations of national sovereignty. Given these
limitations, I think that the record of the Council -
indeed, of the United Nations in general - in pacific
settlement is a good deal more impressive than is
generally admitted. The very existence of the Council
and the continuous diplomatic and other exchanges that
go on in and around it, combined with the ceaseless
peace-seeking activities of the Secretary-General,
constitute an essential, ongoing worldwide peace
process that is hard to evaluate or to quantify, but is
nonetheless extremely important. Without it, I believe
that the world would be a much more dangerous and
unpredictable place. The Council's role as a last
resort- a place where restraint, concession and
compromise are a virtue rather than a sign of weakness
or a loss of face - has always been a major resource
for peace.

Pacific settlement can be a long and untidy
process. It is seldom newsworthy, especially when it is
successful. A war prevented is not usually news. As
Secretary-General U Thant said of the successful good
offices mission over the contested future of Bahrain,
the best of such missions

66'

is one which is not heard of until it is
successfully concluded or even never heard of at
all."

Much of the Council's and the Secretary-General's
work in pacific settlement remains unpublicized. It is
no less important for that.

Situations that defy settlement have sometimes
been contained by peacekeeping missions or other
United Nations instruments, so that violence and the
threat to the wider peace are reduced. Some of these
missions go back many, many years. This is another
activity that attracts little attention unless, of course,
the containment mechanism fails and conflict results.
In the cold war period, the universal fear of a nuclear
confrontation between East and West lent urgency and
support to the Council's efforts to contain regional
conflicts and to keep them out of the cold war orbit.
The cold war political situation also demanded that
instruments such as peacekeeping be strictly under the
auspices of the United Nations. That incentive and that
constraint no longer exist and the instruments of
pacific settlement have correspondingly diversified.
Sometimes now they are outside the United Nations
framework altogether.

Pacific settlement is not an exact science and
different problems call for different approaches. The
active element and the method will vary according to
each situation. In 1949, for example, the Security
Council-appointed mediator in Palestine, Ralph
Bunche, was able to negotiate the armistice agreements
between Israel and its four Arab neighbours in almost
complete independence and secrecy, although the
authority of the Council was at all times the basis of his
mission. In 1955, on the other hand, when Dag
Hammarskjold negotiated the release of 17 American
airmen in China - a situation that had become a
serious threat to world peace at that time - he was
accepted in Beijing solely in his capacity as Secretary-
General. Over the years, the Council has shown great
flexibility and imagination in devising for each pacific
settlement mission the instrument best suited to the
particular demands of the problem.

In the last 15 years, the Council has often been
called on to deal with problems within the borders of a
single State, and it seems likely that this will continue
to be one of its main challenges. This is not what the
technique of peacekeeping was originally designed for
and it is not surprising that many difficulties have
arisen. When dealing only with conflicting
Governments, the authority of the Council and the
support of its members usually give remarkable
strength to relatively small and lightly-armed
peacekeeping forces. Dealing with non-governmental
groups and factions, violent in their very nature and
which have little knowledge of - or, indeed, respect
for - the Security Council, is a very different matter.
We have seen this problem in a number of cases,
especially since 1990. It has always seemed to me that
in such situations it is essential for the Council to have
some reliable and highly-trained capacity for rapid
reaction and deployment - the capacity to quell mere
brush-fire violence before it develops into conflict or
genocide. I know this is an extremely controversial
issue, but I have to say - and I have noticed this more
since I left the United Nations - that impressive-
sounding decisions followed by sluggish or ineffective
action both make bad situations worse and also
undermine the reputation of and public confidence in
the United Nations itself.

There are thousands of studies on the techniques
of pacific settlement, but the key elements for success
are and have always been the authority and standing of
the Security Council, its ability and willingness to take
prompt action, and the skill, ingenuity and
determination of those who implement its decisions in
the field.

At the beginning, the Council, buoyed by the
expectations and the longing for peace of a war-torn
world, occupied an almost Olympian position in world
politics. Maybe that original optimism and enthusiasm
were unrealistic, but in those haunted days the effort to
establish an international system that would be an
alternative to the arms races, the military alliances, the
threats and the aggressions that had always led to war
in the past seemed like a blessed, if belated, piece of
common sense. That original experiment, pushed aside,
diluted and outmoded by revolutionary changes in
politics and technology, is still, in the long run, an
important concept and pacific settlement under the
authority of the Security Council is at the heart of it.
The other essential elements of that original vision -
disarmament, for instance - have so far fared far less
well.

Everyone knows that in its present form the
Security Council is the product of another, very
different historical period. So far, substantial reform
has proved impossible, but that does not detract from
the importance of the Council's position and authority
and it is extremely important to maintain it. Dag
Hammarskj old once referred to

"those who seem to take special delight in
blaming the storms on the ship instead of the
weather."

When, as happened recently, the disagreements of its
members - which are, after all, nothing new - are
blamed on the institution of the Council itself, the
Council's standing in pacific settlement and in other
matters is inevitably diminished.

Even in the pristine enthusiasm of 1946, only
very few dedicated acolytes believed that the Security
Council would immediately work exactly as the
Charter prescribed. Most of us saw it as a blueprint for
achieving peace in the world that would take
generations of trial and error before it became a solid
reality. The world was a dangerous, suffering and
disorderly place in 1946 and, in a different way, it still
is. The United Nations - and I make no apology for
quoting Hammarskjold again - is, in his words,

"a venture in progress towards an international

community living in peace under the laws of

justice." (A/PV.690, para. 68)

That is still a very distant objective, but a worthy one.
An essential prerequisite for moving forward in this
infinitely complex venture is the growing effectiveness
of the pacific settlement of disputes. Few activities are
more important for the future.

