Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my congratulations to
you, Madam President, for assuming the presidency
of the Council for this month, the professional manner
with which you are steering the Council's deliberations,
and your initiative to devote this meeting to the human
cost of the illicit transfer, destablilizing accumulation
and misuse of small arms and light weapons. I would
also like to extend our thanks to Jordan for its wise
leadership of the Council last month. We also wish
to extend our thanks to the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, as well as to
Mr. Diakite for their briefings to the Council.

The trafficking, proliferation and trade in small
arms and light weapons constitutes one of the alarming
situations that face societies and the international
community. Looking at the adverse consequences
of that phenomenon, which affects the security and
economies of States, victims of such weapons are
primarily civilians, the elderly, women and children.
That reality has no doubt led to the submission of
international resolutions, conventions and initiatives to
grapple with the illicit trade in all such weapons in all
their aspects.

In the current global environment, the international
community is at a decisive and delicate crossroads
given the crimes perpetrated by terrorist groups and
organized crime networks, and the exacerbation of
internal and regional crises. That makes it necessary for
us to cooperate, redouble our efforts and demonstrate
sincere political will to curb the indiscriminate
proliferation of small arms and light weapons (SALW)
and to prevent the illicit trade in those weapons, which
are no different from the weapons of mass destruction
in their disastrous consequences.

Iraq realizes the need for continuous and serious
work to counter both the phenomenon of the illicit trade
in SALW, as well as their adverse effect in many areas
and regions of the world, especially in the Middle East.
This threatens to undermine international peace and
security, victimizes people and destabilizes societies.
Iraq welcomed the relevant international conventions
that introduced monitoring measures to combat the
proliferation of these weapons. We accord special
attention to these weapons, for we suffer from their
use in the hands of the terrorist group Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria and other such groups that acquire
these weapons and use them to attack civilian and
military sites indiscriminately, destroy infrastructure
and educational services and burn libraries and cultural
heritage sites, thereby annihilating the civilization of
Mesopotamia.

In the light of this, the Security Council adopted
a number of resolutions to prevent that entity from
continuing its crimes. I would like to take this
opportunity to call upon the Council to urge all States
to abide by their provisions by stopping the recruitment
and transit of terrorists, as well as ceasing to arm
and smuggle all these terrorist groups. Since 2013,
when the Security Council, in the course of an open
meeting (see S/PV.7036) at the margins of the General
Assembly at its sixty-eighth session, tackled that matter
and adopted resolution 2117 (2013), the Government of
Iraq has adopted legislative and practical measures at
different levels to curb this grave phenomenon. This
has included acceding, on 23 May 2013, to the Protocol
against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking
in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and
Ammunition, which supplements the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
to which Iraq acceded on 17 May 2008. We have also
drafted national legislation to curb the adverse effect
of these weapons, including gun silencers. We have
set up oversight mechanisms, modernized detection
and monitoring tools and improved storage facilities.
We are also finalizing our end-user certificate and are
disseminating it in accordance with United Nations
resolutions and the United Nations Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects.

We urge international partners to make further
efforts to build the capacities of developing countries
at their request. In that regard, we look forward to the
efforts of the pertinent organs of the United Nations.
We emphasize their important role in improving
the harmonization of States' needs in line with their
relevant mandates.

We realize that raising cultural awareness among
citizens is very important in eliminating the adverse
effects of SALW. Our relevant institutions are
providing the necessary guidelines and information
to help alleviate the suffering caused by the use of
these weapons. They are also emphasizing the need for
exercising strong control over the SALW trade and its
production, as well as reporting to the authorities any
violations or detections of illicit military stockpiles.

In conclusion, we would like to emphasize our
support for the efforts of the United Nations and all
international organizations concerned, in addition to
our support to international and regional initiatives
aimed at curbing the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, their misuse and illegal transfer.

