Mr. Tanin: The members of the Security Council
have before them the latest quarterly report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/98l), and today I will share
with them my assessment of the situation, as well as
an overview of the recalibrated work priorities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).

When I last briefed the Council in May (see S/PV.8254),the situationreflectedadegreeofuncertainty
with regard to the prospects for decisive progress in the
European Union (EU)-facilitated political dialogue.
However, after leaders from Belgrade and Pristina met
in June and July, prospects for renewed negotiations

began to be explored. At the European Forum Alpbach
in Austria in August, both sides advocated for a new
framework for a comprehensive agreement, including
the possibility of territorial exchange. The addition
of that new dimension has generated new impetus, as
well as apprehension, among political actors and the
populations on both sides, as well as within the region
and among the international community. Regardless of
the underlying challenges and concerns, the discussion
has opened space for debate and consideration. Last
week in Brussels, President Vucic' and President Thaci
met and confirmed their mutual intention to continue
the dialogue and work towards a settlement, within the
EU-facilitated process.

The political talks in Brussels took place against
a situation still dominated by frequent adversarial
actions on the ground, many of which carry real
consequences for the populations. Actions that attempt
to pre-empt agreement are not conducive to achieving
political compromise. Whether on larger or smaller
issues, one-sided actions carry the constant potential of
influencing the situation on the ground.

I refer to a number of broad areas, including
infrastructure, energy and the economy. Individuals
continuetofacechallengesinexercisingtheirbasicrights,
including the rights of freedom of movement, religious
practice and equal access to economic opportunities. In
a recent development, the announcement by the Kosovo
Government that a 10 per cent tax would be imposed
on Serbian and Bosnian goods further increased
tensions between Pristina and Belgrade and created
instability for business and people. The Government
of Serbia denounced the measure as damaging to the
normalization of relations and a Violation ofthe Central
European Free Trade Agreement.

I would like to underline that the much-needed
reform of Kosovo's rule-of-law institutions has been
undermined by ethnic tension and political agendas.
The resignation of a Kosovo Special Prosecutor over
alleged threats connected to the investigation of
major cases led to public protests and harmed public
confidence in the strength and impartiality ofthejustice
system. Naturally, protecting the independence of the
judiciary and fighting organized crime and corruption
require continuous and strenuous effort, in Kosovo
as well as everywhere else. The European Union and
the United Nations continue to place resources at the
disposal of the authorities to help in that difficult but
essential endeavour.

The wider context of the political dialogue process
between the parties may sometimes be overshadowed
by this array of unresolved problems, posturing and
jousting. The European perspective itself continues to
provide a significant source of motivation for political
leaders on both sides and, in doing so, helps promote
continued peace and stability. Support and assistance
from the European Union is essential to strengthen
capacity across Kosovo's public institutions and, on
19 July, the European Commission took a momentous
step in affirming that benchmarks had been met for
Kosovo's road map on Visa liberalization, proposing
that the European Parliament and the European Council
lift Visa requirements and allow visa-free travel for
residents of Kosovo.

With all the focus on possibilities for a new political
compromise, let me underline that we should not fail to
account for the advances made since April 2013 and
the central tenets of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations signed at that
time, including the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities. Those
tenets and their full implementation are crucial to
progress on the ground.

The Assembly of Kosovo's recent approval of three
draft laws on the Kosovo Security Force, aimed at
significantly enhance the strength and responsibilities
of the Force, has caused renewed tensions. The matter
needs to be handled with the utmost care to ensure
that the steps taken are the result of a fully inclusive,
fully representative political process that respects the
relevant legal frameworks.

Any political negotiation process, ifit is to succeed,
requires the full engagement and buy-in of societies,
as well as leaders and political representatives. Top-
level commitments that may be reached via political
negotiations, no matter the strength of international
and regional support, are unlikely to stand unless
they are backed by full understanding and confidence
among communities and individuals across society. I
am confident that leaders on both sides, as well as the
facilitators of the dialogue, have that firmly in mind.

With that in mind, UNMIK continues to prioritize
trust-building in Kosovo, particularly at the grass-
roots level, whenever and wherever possible, in close
cooperation with all international partners on the
ground. I have set engagement, empowerment and
creativity as core objectives of our interaction and work
with Kosovo society.

As I previously highlighted to the Council,
UNMIK has re-aligned its focus and priorities towards
promoting longer-term reconciliation at multiple levels
in Kosovo. Without societal reconciliation - involving
people, communities and civil society - progress
can falter, regardless of the best efforts and work of
political stakeholders. Trust-building requires patience
and persistence to raise and empower the voices of
understanding and compassion that may help shape a
future different from divisions and conflict.

Following the United Nations Kosovo Trust-
Building Forum held in Ljubljana in May, we have
worked systematically to identify, support and empower
change-makers across Kosovo and facilitate the
implementation of initiatives outlined by participants
in the Forum. In collaboration with the United Nations
Kosovo team and other international partners, UNMIK
is focused on realizing the recommendations from
the Trust-Building Forum, which include a number of
concrete measures for this year and beyond. The action
plan encompasses a series of important measures,
ranging from involving all segments of Kosovo society
in an informed debate about the future to influencing
the agendas of local and international partners in the
areas of intercommunity trust and cooperation.

Other key objectives of the Mission's ongoing work
include promoting the use of innovative communication
technologies to support constant interaction among all
groups and communities across Kosovo and addressing
outstanding issues within the framework of justice,
human rights, the women and peace and security
agenda and the youth, peace and security agenda.
I would like to emphasise that the UNMIK strategic
frameworks on women and youth represent a bold step
towards supporting the empowerment of women and
young people in Kosovo.

Those efforts are designed to encourage an
environment conducive to peace and reconciliation,
healing historical mistrust and building bridges
of common interest among communities. That is
fully in line with the Secretary-General's Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and may offer an important
example of how to tap into the potential of people and
partnerships to create the necessary conditions for
sustaining peace.
Our international partnerships remain vital in
this effort. During the year, the Mission reinforced
its functional collaboration with the EU Office, the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Kosovo Force, the Council of Europe and other
international presences, together with our core partners
in the United Nations Kosovo team. Besides any
regular consultations in Belgrade, Pristina and regional
capitals, I have made particular efforts to share our
perspective and experience with stakeholders in Europe
and beyond.

In each of the areas of the Mission's recalibrated
work, as I have described today, UNMIK is working in
line with the core principles of the Secretary-General's
reform agenda and the guidance of the Council. Our
efforts are aimed at helping to boost the conditions for
peaceful negotiation and societal reconciliation.

At the same time, we are working to remain at the
forefront of understanding, help the Council and share
our understanding and work with all partners in the
service of a lasting peace. I thank the members of the
Council for their continuing support.

