Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to congratulate Ambassador Arias and to
thank him for his report (S/2004/124, annex) and for
his stewardship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. I
would like to associate myself with the remarks to be
made subsequently by Ambassador Ryan on behalf of
the European Union.

I take this occasion to offer condolences to the
families of all those killed or injured in recent terrorist
attacks, from Baghdad to Karbala, from Quetta to
Moscow and in the Middle East, to name but a few.
There is a long list. Those chilling attacks are a
sobering reminder of why we are here this morning,
having this discussion. Those attacks show that
terrorists know no boundaries; they do not distinguish
between race, religion or geography, and they are
united in their disdain for life. That is a risk that affects
us all, and we need to face it together.

The fight against terrorism needs to be sustained,
effective and efficient. Combating and defeating
terrorism requires concerted and Wide-ranging action.
Military action may be necessary. Better intelligence is
required; defensive systems need to be improved; some
organizations need to be proscribed; and we have to
tackle the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Financial flows to terrorists have to be cut off. Perhaps,
above all, we need to do better in tackling the
resentments that encourage terrorism, but can never
justify it. That is why we need a multilateral response,
and why the United Nations and its agencies have a key
role. Today we are addressing part of that role: the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).

In our View, the Committee has been successful
in four main ways: by maintaining unity; by
establishing and delivering momentum; by establishing
accountability; and by providing guidance to Member
States. In terms of unity, the Committee has helped to
ensure that Member States and the international
community have remained united and worked together.
Momentum has been established by keeping terrorism
high on the international agenda. The accountability
stems from the way in which the Committee has
examined Member States' domestic legislation and
practice, helping to identify weaknesses and gaps.
Lastly, it has provided guidance through a system to
facilitate the provision of technical assistance to
Member States.

But there is no room for complacency. As the
representative of Algeria said earlier, we now need a
new dynamic. It is essential that the Committee be
strengthened and given the support it needs to help
Member States to implement resolution 1373 (2001).
The United Kingdom therefore very much welcomes
the proposal for the revitalization of the Committee.
That proposal will, in our View, give greater focus to
long-term goals. It will help the Committee to adopt a
more proactive communications strategy, and the
Committee's expertise will be enhanced and properly
coordinated.

The goal is simple. It is to help Member States
implement resolution 1373 (2001) and ratify the United
Nations counter-terrorism conventions. That would
retain accountability, while providing greater guidance
on the complex range of issues which have emerged
since the Committee was first established.

But the proposals should not be misinterpreted.
They are simply a means to enhance and reorganize the
support structure of the Committee to help it better
achieve its objectives - objectives which we are all
signed up to. It is not about change for the sake of it,
and the proposals specifically do not seek to alter the
structure of the United Nations or to undermine the
Secretariat. In its deliberations, the CTC has taken care
to ensure that the revitalization is consistent with
United Nations rules and regulations and with previous
Security Council practices. As the representative of the
United States emphasized, the proposals have been
discussed at length, and thoroughly, with the
representatives of the Secretariat, whose views have
been taken into account.

I have a very simple vision of the proposed
Directorate. It will work with and for the Committee. It
will offer guidance and help to implement the
Committee's wishes. Does that mean a degree of
responsibility to the Committee? Yes. Does it mean
that, in policy terms, the Committee will be directing
the work of the Directorate? Yes. In the View of the
United Kingdom, anything less would run counter to
any sensible delineation of responsibilities and would
undermine the efficiency of the Committee.

Let me stress that the overall substance and
working methods of the CTC would remain unchanged.
The Committee would retain the hallmarks that have
contributed so much to its success: cooperation,
transparency and even-handedness. The Committee's
mandate - resolution 1373 (2001) - would remain
unchanged. The new structure is not intended to be
permanent. There will be a comprehensive review by
31 December 2005, and a completion date of 31
December 2007.

If terrorists are indefatigable in their endeavours,
then the United Nations and the Security Council must
match them. The Committee must be given the means
to continue and sustain the fight against terrorism, to
maintain the unity, momentum and accountability
which have been created and to provide guidance to
Member States to enable them to comply with
resolution 1373 (2001).

The United Kingdom urges all Member States to
be supportive of the revitalization proposals, because
they can contribute in no small measure to a more
effective effort to actually make the world a safer and
more stable place.

