Mr. Mohammad Kama] (Malaysia): Like
previous speakers, I would like to thank Mr. Hedi
Annabi for the comprehensive update on the situation
in East Timor which he has provided us this afternoon.

Malaysia continues to believe that the United
Nations mission in East Timor continues to be a very
difficult one. We recognize the daunting task that the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and the international community
face and the frustration that is exacerbated by, among
other things, the very high expectations of the East
Timorese people. UNTAET is, of course, doing
excellent work and enjoys our full support. In this
regard, we would like in particular to commend Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello and his staff for the high level
of professionalism that they have demonstrated in
implementing the difficult mandate assigned to them.

We note the recent developments in East Timor in
laying the foundation for the future development of the
country. Among these was the successful broadcast of
the first programme on UNTAET television on 18 May.
We also note that the draft of the broadcast media
regulation was introduced in the National Consultative
Council on the same day. At the same time, we
welcome the reopening late last month in Dili of the
East Timor Postal Service, which is part of the ongoing
reconstruction of East Timor. These developments are
further steps towards creating a sense of ownership
among the people of East Timor.

We wish to express our appreciation to UNTAET
for its prompt response in dealing with the recent
emergency in West Timor as a result of the extensive
flooding there. We note that UNTAET dispatched two
helicopters on 18 May to evacuate the flood victims
and to deliver humanitarian relief supplies. In this
regard, we would like to underscore the goodwill
displayed by the Indonesian Government in its
cooperation with United Nations agencies to alleviate
the hardships caused to the East Timorese refugees and
to facilitate the coordination of relief efforts due to the
floods in East Nusa Tenggara.

We further note that, despite some remaining
difficulties, we are gratified to have just heard from
Mr. Annabi that the overall security situation in East
Timor is stable and that militia activities in the border
areas have declined. However, we remain concerned at
continuing reports of violence and crime in East Timor,
and we find this situation unsettling. In particular, we
wish to express our deep concern about reports of
religious violence and the harassment of ethnic and
religious minorities in East Timor, as Mr. Annabi just
mentioned in his briefing. We call on UNTAET to take
all necessary measures to protect these minorities. We
urge the East Timorese leaders to prevent the
recurrence of such violence and harassment, to work
assiduously towards national reconciliation among the
East Timorese and to inculcate the spirit of tolerance,
trust and harmony among the population.

We are encouraged by UNTAET's decision to
declare a policy of zero tolerance for individuals
carrying objects that could be used as weapons, after
the violent disturbances in late April in Dili. We also
wish to welcome the holding of a two-day meeting in
Jogjakarta on 24-25 May between the representatives
of the Indonesian Government and UNTAET to discuss
issues related to assets claims and liability, archives
and other outstanding issues from the last round-table
negotiations, such as pensions, border issues and the
establishment of a joint border commission.

We note the strain the refugee crisis is putting on
the local population in terms of overcrowding and
occupation of land in West Timor. Malaysia believes
that one of the most viable solutions to the refugee
crisis must include the possibility of repatriation. We
welcome the decision of the Government of Indonesia
to improve the distribution of food rations and basic
services in the camps in West Timor. We also wish to
welcome the opening of the first land border crossing
between East Timor and Indonesia on 3 May, which is
another positive step towards normalcy.

In conclusion, it is our firm belief that the
Council must continue to regularly follow
developments in the situation in East Timor and to
continue this format of open briefing, which my
delegation firmly believes will also benefit the larger
membership of our Organization on this very important
issue.

