Mr. Nobilo (Croatia): At the outset, Mr. President, I
should like to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of July
and to assure you of my delegation's full support and
cooperation on the many important issues involving our
region and other matters now before the Security Council.

Allow me also to express my delegation's sincere
congratulations to the delegation of the Federal Republic of
Germany for the exemplary way in which they led the work
of the Council last month.

I should like first of all to reiterate the words of my
Foreign Minister and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who joins us today,
as expressed in their letter to you this morning, that the
peace process in the region has become deadlocked by,
first, the refusal of the Serbs in Pale to accept the Contact
Group plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina; secondly, the
refusal of the Serbs in Knin to accept the mandate of the
United Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia
(UNCRO) and, thirdly, the intensified interference by the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) in the affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Croatia.

It is the strong position of our two Governments that
the only way out of this impasse is for the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to
recognize not only the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but also the Republic of Croatia, and for the
international community to establish the Security Council-
mandated effective border closure of the relevant borders
of Serbia and Montenegro with Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Croatia, and the relevant borders between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia. The present situation in the
region does not bode well for the peace process in
general, for the continued presence of the United Nations
peace-keepers in the region, and for the necessary end to
renewed hostilities in some parts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

The peace process has also been derailed by the
unfortunate devaluation of the Security Council mandate
for the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia (ICFY) border mission on the Serbia and
Montenegro/Bosnia and Herzegovina border. The ICFY
has clearly reinterpreted its mandate to mean partial
closing of the border, and not effective closing, as was
originally envisaged by the Security Council. The ICFY
report concerning 688 incidents of border crossings by
military personnel for the period, which do not indicate
whether these involve one soldier per incident or an entire
bus-load, best illustrates the depreciation of the mission's
mandate and effectiveness.

My Government has given ample evidence that the
relevant border is not effectively closed. My Foreign
Minister wrote to the Security Council on 28 June, giving
concrete and detailed evidence on how and where the
border had been violated. The Minister's letter was
followed by numerous independent reports, even including
reports from the independent media from Serbia and
Montenegro, effectively confirming the evidence
presented by my Government.

The Croatian Government therefore considers the
present ICFY border mission report and certification
erroneous and factually wrong, and therefore null and
void. We call on the Security Council thoroughly to
review the work of the ICFY mission and to clarify
whether its mandate means partial or effective closure of
the border. If the Security Council decides that its
mandate is indeed for a partial closure of the border, my
Government will have to re-evaluate its position in the
peace process and its position on the likelihood of the
successful implementation of the UNCRO mandate that
also calls for border control - in this case, between

 

Croatia and Serbia, and the relevant borders between
Croatia and Bosnia.

