Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Our meeting today is devoted to the very
important topic of the effective transition from efforts
to settle a conflict within the framework of a
peacekeeping operation to the stage of peace-building.
The timeliness of raising this question is
unquestionable, inasmuch as, without a comprehensive
approach, one can hardly hope for the establishment of
a lasting peace in a post-conflict country.

In the view ofthe Russian Federation, the process
of peace-building can successfully develop only in
strict compliance with a peace agreement or other
document settling a conflict. An important and integral

part of this stage is the implementation of programmes
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of former combatants.

Parallel with this is the need to focus efforts on
eradicating the root causes of conflicts. As a rule, such
causes underlie social and economic problems, which
are sometimes compounded by religious, ethnic and
other disagreements. There can be no single recipe
here, but experience has shown that the most
widespread solution provides for the conduct of far-
reaching reforms in the area of the ownership of land
and other types of property, in taxation and so forth, all
of which promote the establishment of new and fairer
rules ofthe game.

Certainly no less important are the political
aspects of a settlement, designed to ensure that armed
conflict is replaced by the more civilized campaign of
ideas. In this connection, we cannot limit ourselves
only to the holding of honest and fair elections, since
this expression of will cannot in and of itself safeguard
social peace. In many situations, what is required is a
partial or fundamental restructuring of the entire
political structure in a country that has experienced
conflict, as a result of which conditions are established
for the activities of new political forces personified in
the ex-combatants and their political movements.

In the final analysis, all of these efforts must be
directed towards the establishment of a society of
political pluralism with strong State and social
institutions. This, of course, may require legislative
reforms, including the introduction of amendments to
or the adoption of a new constitution.

Another very important area is that of efforts for
national reconciliation. For this purpose, in many
recent cases a so-called commission to establish
historical truth has been set up. Steps taken in this area
are directly linked to the functioning of the court
system, the independent activities of which must
remain one ofthe safeguards of reforms under way in a
country; therefore, the existing structure might also
require reform.

The next key aspect is the activity of law
enforcement bodies, security services and the army. As
a rule, this aspect also requires close attention both in
terms of the renewal or even re-creation of those
institutions and in ensuring their non-interference in
the nation's political life.
The last, but hardly least important, aspect of
post-conflict development is the establishment of good
relations with neighbours and the integration of the
post-conflict country into existing regional political
and economic structures.

To be sure, the world community and its major
international Organization, the United Nations, must
play an adequate role by lending assistance to post-
conflict building. In this connection, we believe it is
exceedingly important to respect strictly the post-
conflict nation's sovereignty and to bear in mind its
national circumstances. The Security Council must
play an important role here, especially in the transition
from peacekeeping to peace-building, after which the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the specialized agencies of the United Nations
system should assume the primary one.

