Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): We
are pleased to address the Security Council as part of
the open debate under the Luxembourg's outstanding
presidency, with a view to contributing constructively
to the consideration and discussion of a topic of such
importance that touches such a sensitive chord at
the Organization: the situation of children in armed
conflicts.

While the exploitation of any human being is
reprehensible, it is all the more so when children are
involved. The use of minors in conflicts by armed
organized groups violates ethical standards and
international legal principles. Besides being a merciless
practice, it is an unforgivable violation of human rights.
Innumerable defenceless innocents should not be used
as human shields. It is inconceivable that they should be
forced to place or deactivate mines, thereby endangering
their precious lives. That makes it imperative that
States today take a greater responsibility to support
the efforts, processes and mechanisms at the United
Nations to prevent the recruitment and participation of
girls and boys in armed conflict and to ensure that they
are protected from hostilities.
We are not unaware of the fact that progress has been
made over the past two decades. In 1993 the General
Assembly called on the Secretary-General to deal with
the issue, commissioning Graca Machel to conduct a
study of the impact of armed conflict on children. The
recommendations of her report (A/51/306) led to major
initiatives such as the creation of the position of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
the rights and protection of children trapped in armed
conflicts, who has done major work in recent years and
today has undertaken a campaign, together with the
UNICEF, to put an end by 2016 to the recruitment and
use of children by the security forces of Governments
in such situations.

Nevertheless, as has been noted, the greatest
responsibility for abuse and violations included in
the lists of the Secretary-General falls on non-State
armed actors. The recommendation recently made to
the Office of the Special Representative to promote the
approval and application of action plans against such
agents is appropriate, as well as is identifying how to
hold accountable those who commit crimes against
children.

It is commendable that, since 1998, the Security
Council held debates and adopted resolutions
contributing to the current monitoring and detailed
reports by countries and promoting diplomatic
initiatives and humanitarian initiatives intended to put
an end to the barbarous infraction of using children as
hostages in armed conflicts. The Council has also aimed
at strengthening the agenda in all member countries
by strengthening national legal capacity, measures to
prevent recruitment and programmes of rehabilitation
and reintegration into civil society. Indispensable in
that regard is the assistance of regional organizations
and the support of donors to implement action plans
and provide all the information needed for the general
public. But that is not enough.

Central America has not been removed from the
scourge of armed conflicts that affected the region in
the 1980s. Since then there has been modest progress to
reach peace and security through democracy and social
investment for development. Even though these are
major achievements, they are not enough to respond to
the new challenges we face. It is inevitable that nations
with limited resources and so many needs in precarious
situations find children to be the first victims of
imbalance. That is not just a problem of the lack of
security but also of seeking the social and economic
causes ofthis insecurity aggravated by the vulnerability
of a territory that is easily used as a bridge for the
trafficking of illegal substances and of people where
the arsenal of clandestine weapons conspires against
peace. That is a cocktail of precarious circumstances
that leads to explosive results. The violence drags in
many minors, who are subject to all kinds of abuse.

While those situations do not fit into the specific
cases of armed conflict and do not figure on the lists
of the Secretary-General submitted to the Council, we
believe that they are both tragic and pertinent. This
phenomenon should be studied in depth as a priority.
To that end, we respectfully call with great energy for
the Organization to provide the attention needed. In
the same way that it responded to the problem of child
soldiers, it should find the initiatives, mechanisms and
recommendations needed to protect the young people
in our region who are trapped in equally disquieting
conflicts. Each of their stories is a moving one; their
repercussions and the ability to contain them goes
beyond our domestic capacity, while the terror they
entail goes beyond our national borders. Together they
threaten international peace and security.

My country is making herculean efforts to defend
itself against the growing infrastructure of organized
crime and criminal groups. We have begun to reverse that
pernicious trend - more through our own efforts than
as a result of assistance - but the levels of insecurity
continue to be unacceptable. The roiling violence drags
in hundreds of girls and boys, either as victims or as
bullies. It does not matter what terminology we use.
Quite simply, they are victims. Any expectation for the
future of the country is unfortunately being lost.

In terms of the number oflives being turned upside
down there are less damaging wars, as compared to the
violence that is eating away at our societies. The harm
of this scourge is not measured necessarily by the drugs
distributed in the markets but, rather, by the horror and
pain caused by so much death. The unrestricted use
of children recruited by gangs to serve as "mules" in
criminal activities such as extortion is an abominable
practice that, in the worst of cases, turns children
into hired killers. Beyond family disintegration and
economic exclusion, which makes them easy prey for
organized crime, is the impossibility of escaping from
it once they are identified or recruited.

In those circumstances, my delegation believes that
the situation of young people and children subjected to
social environments of violence, insecurity and extreme
vulnerability should be studied in a broader framework
including not just child soldiers or those enmeshed
in conflicts but by adding another dimension to the
worldwide effort to protect children and give them the
security and opportunities they deserve.

This is nothing more than a respectful call to the
Security Council and the international community to
take the steps that conscience dictates. There is no
doubt that we can draw closer to the peace we long for
if work together for a global society that is increasingly
more fair and equitable.

