Mr. Barry (spoke in French): I should like at
the outset, Mr. President, to congratulate you, on
behalf of all of my colleagues from the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month and
for having convened this important meeting devoted
to considering the report of the Secretary-General
on the G-5 Sahel Joint Force (S/2019/371). I take this
opportunity to congratulate Germany on its presidency
in April and France on its presidency in March, the
month when the Security Council visited Burkina Faso
and Mali.

Following the report that the Assistant Secretary-
General has just presented to us, I would like, on
behalf of all of my colleagues from the G-5 Sahel,
to congratulate the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio
Guterres, on the high quality of his report. The relevant
recommendations therein are evidence, as if such
evidence were still necessary, of his backing for and
determination to find ways and means of setting up a
support mechanism for the Joint Force.

For two years now, the Heads of State of the G-5
Sahel, based on their deep wisdom and sense ofrealism,
have deemed it necessary to equip themselves with
a force that can counter the attempts made by armed
terrorist groups to destabilize our States. The Council
has understood this and lent its support owing to its
conviction that the threat of destabilization looming
over the G-5 Sahel is a serious one and poses a genuine
threat to international peace and security.

We note with satisfaction that in the two years of
existence of the Joint Force, although it is still a long
way from having reached its full operational capacity,
some progress has been made. The Joint Force is now
in existence and is 90 percent operational in Sector
West, in terms of the battalion component; 74 per cent
in Central Sector; and 75 per cent in Sector East. It has
gone from the concept phase to the implementation
phase and has a number of major operations under its
belt. Since the beginning of 2019, the Force has already
carried out seven operations, two in Sector East, three
in Central Sector and two in Sector West. The technical
cooperation agreement between the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the Joint Force has allowed the Force to
successfully carry out Operation Sanparga, parts I and
II, in Central Sector since January 2019.

Through these operations, the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force has created an optimal operational cycle aimed
at setting in motion a dynamic that can neutralize
terrorist and criminal groups of all stripes. Of course,
these actions are undertaken with full respect for the
compliance framework through mechanisms aimed at
safeguarding respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law.

Here I wish to commend the active solidarity
expressed by the Security Council with regard to the
G-5 Sahel countries, notably through the adoption of
resolution 2359 (2017), which authorized the deployment
of the Joint Force, and of resolution 2391 (2017), calling
for the conclusion of a technical agreement between the
United Nations, the European Union and the G-5 Sahel
States, with a view to providing specific support to the
Joint Force in its operations on the territory of Mali.

Despite this encouraging progress, the situation
remains worrisome and continues to deteriorate. Even as
we speak, the Sahel is still experiencing the shockwaves
from the attack perpetrated this past Sunday against a
church in north-central Burkina Faso, which caused six
deaths, including that of the priest conducting mass.
The latter was specifically targeted and gunned down
in cold blood by a group of terrorist attackers who had
entered the village. Yesterday we learned of the attack
against a column of the Nigerian army that killed 28
people. Exactly two weeks previously, a Protestant

church in the north of Burkina Faso was attacked,
taking the same grim death toll of six lives, including
that of the pastor of the church. During the night of
13 to 14 May, an imam and his son were killed in cold
blood. In between these killings, we saw the abduction
of French tourists in Benin. Although Benin is not in
the Sahel, the destination of the abductors and their
hostages, before they were stopped by a coordinated
military intervention between French forces and those
of Burkina Faso, makes clear that this is the work ofthe
same terrorist groups that are breaching the peace in
the Sahel. There have also been numerous other attacks
in Mali, in the Niger and other countries - proof ofthe
persistent terrorist threat in the Sahel.

Just the day before yesterday, on 14 May, the
Nigerian army, as I mentioned earlier, once again
faced a large-scale attack resulting in the deaths of 28
military personnel on the border with Mali. Likewise,
12 Fulani civilians were killed Monday in the Segu
region, in central Mali. Terrorist groups financed by
artisanal gold mines or various forms of trafficking
remain strong and are exerting great pressure upon
our States. The threat is gaining traction everywhere.
It is no longer contained within the north of Mali,
in Sahelian Burkina Faso, or far from the borders of
Mauritania; it is spreading and taking other forms
whose consequences are equally tragic.

The Sahel today is seeing dozens of Victims every
month, killed in ambushes, abductions, targeted or mass
killings, or attacks using improvised explosive devices.
Community conflicts and killings are the primary
consequence of that situation. The worst extremes of
horror have been surpassed by the community killings
in Inates, in the Niger; Yirgou and Arbinda, in Burkina
Faso; and Koulognon and Ogossagou, in Mali. Since the
beginning of 2019, at least 300 people have died as a
result of community conflicts alone.

The Sahel today is also seeing attacks on schools in
the form of arson, the looting of buildings and threats
against teachers. We are seeing attacks on State symbols,
looting of markets and cattle theft, and on top of that the
killing of teachers. As a result, public administrations,
health clinics and schools have been closed, depriving
thousands of children of education and causing massive
population and refugee displacements.

In Mali and Burkina Faso combined, more than half
a million Children are now without schooling, while
about 150,000 people have been internally displaced in
Burkina Faso and 600,000 in Chad. Along the borders,
thousands of refugees have joined the tens of thousands
of Malian refugees who have fled to Burkina Faso and
Mauritania since 2012.

As we can see, the Sahel countries are facing a
humanitarian situation that is spiralling out of control.
I would like to thank all our partners who are helping us
to cope with the humanitarian emergency, starting with
the United Nations. Given the magnitude of the crisis,
however, we need assistance on a much larger scale.

In addition to the humanitarian emergency, it
appears that the security challenge will also remain a
major emergency for a long time to come if we are to
avoid the failure of our States and prevent widespread
chaos on our continent, with many foreseeable
global repercussions.

To meet that security challenge, the G-5 Sahel States
have invested heavily in security. Security expenditures
account for 18 to 32 per cent of the national budget,
depending on the country - a tremendous burden
on our economies and a drain on our basic social
services, whose portion of the State budget diminishes
significantly every year. It is in the context of all
those emergencies and enormous challenges that we
appeal to the Security Council and all our partners to
further support the invaluable efforts of the G-5 Sahel
member States.

Such support should lead to the full
operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force as soon
as possible. The Force is up and running today, but it
is still being equipped. Although it has mounted some
operations, the lack of equipment, particularly heavy
equipment, remains a real handicap for the Force to
reach its full operational capability.

In addition, it should be noted that the technical
agreement among the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
the European Union and the G-5 Sahel Joint Force,
which helps support the Force's operations on the
ground, covers only operations on Malian territory.
The support provided under the agreement therefore
benefits only two of the seven established battalions.
However, as has already been demonstrated, the threat
exists throughout the Sahel.

We therefore welcome and take note of the
recommendation of Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres to the Council to explore the possibility of
providing support through MINUSMA to all battalions
operating within the framework of the Joint Force,
on the condition that the latter or other partners take
responsibility for the delivery of assistance in their
areas of operation, that is, outside Malian territory.

On behalf of the G-5 Sahel, I ask the Security
Council to accede to our current request, endorsed
by the Secretary-General, to establish a new United
Nations approach to support the Joint Force and thereby
enable it to better respond to the security challenge,
which otherwise risks creating a dangerous situation in
the Sahelo-Saharan strip and well beyond.

The fight against terrorism in the Sahel is a
struggle for the survival of the G-5 Sahel States. There
is a real threat of its expansion to coastal regions,
or even the destabilization of the entire region. The
recent abduction of two French nationals in northern
Benin is a serious warning about the risk of such an
expansion, because Benin is not in the Sahel. And that
dangerous environment, owing to the terrorist threat,
could potentially increase the incidence of risky and
clandestine migration.

The fight against terrorism and other related
criminal activities in the Sahel region is a collective
responsibility and should be handled with the same
resolve that was shown in other countries and regions,
such as Iraq and Afghanistan. Given the urgent nature of
the actions that must be taken, the member States of the
G-5 Sahel cannot succeed on their own. It is therefore
time for the international community to consider the
creation of an international coalition to further tackle
the phenomenon of terrorism in the G-5 Sahel area and
throughout the Sahel.

It is also time for the international community to
take a clear position on the resolution of the Libyan
crisis. Libya remains a safe haven and breeding ground
for terrorists and criminals of all kinds and therefore
the main factor of destabilization in our region.

