Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report, and
Mr. Annabi for his introductory remarks this morning.
The report is a very useful one. It contains some good
news and some frustrations. It also reports a tragedy.

To start with the good news, the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
has made excellent progress in building the
administration of East Timor. Most important, the
Mission has taken real steps to involve the East
Timorese people in the running of their territory. We
praise Mr. Vieira de Mello for the establishment on 14
July of the National Council, and we congratulate
UNTAET on the steps it has taken to reorganise itself,
thus increasing the direct participation of the East
Timorese. These steps are not only important in terms
of accountability and legitimacy; they are also a crucial
contribution to capacity-building for self-government
in East Timor. They should be strengthened in the
coming months.

Another welcome development was the East
Timor donor conference held in Lisbon from 21 to 23
June. The United Kingdom is very encouraged by
UNTAET's efforts to simplify its procedures. But we
are in no position to be complacent. UNTAET and the
donor community should step up their efforts to ensure
the delivery of practical benefits to the East Timorese
people. As the Secretary-General's report makes clear,
the need is great. An essential first step in this regard
would be the establishment by UNTAET and by the
World Bank of measurable performance indicators; this
would allow them to judge their progress in the coming
months. UNTAET and the World Bank should also
provide regular reports on what they have achieved.

The third piece of good news in the report was
the work that is being done on East Timor's future
defence and security needs and on their practical and
financial implications. The United Kingdom is very
pleased to have been able to provide funding for this
valuable work. The final decision will be for the East
Timorese people themselves, not for UNTAET or the
international community. We encourage the East
Timorese people to have the broadest possible debate
on the options before them.

One of the key voices in that debate will be
Falintil. As one of the main forces in East Timor's
independence movement, Falintil could reasonably
have expected to have benefited in the same way as the
military wings of successful independence movements
elsewhere have benefited. But because the United
Nations is the administering power, they have not so
benefited. Neither has their role been given the
recognition it deserves. Their forces remain cantoned,
with nothing to do and with no role to play, 11 months
after the ballot. The provision of $100,000 from the
UNTAET budget to meet Falintil's immediate
humanitarian needs is a welcome first step. We need to
consider carefully what more the United Nations could
do to address this problem. I would welcome the views
of the Secretariat on this point.
The section of the report on the refugee situation
makes for enormously frustrating reading. Why is it
that so many refugees remain in camps in West Timor,
11 months after the ballot? Why is it that those camps
remain largely under the control of the thuggish pro-
integration militias? And why have we allowed their
acts of violence and intimidation against personnel of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) to reach the level they have, to
the point that UNHCR was forced to postpone
indefinitely the vital effort to register the refugees and
to determine whether they wanted to return to East
Timor or to be resettled elsewhere?

This situation is deplorable. It cannot be allowed
to continue. The registration process must be
completed quickly to enable the repatriation or
resettlement of the remaining refugees before the next
rainy season. With this in mind, UNHCR has set the
Government of Indonesia a deadline of 31 October. By
that date, they must restore law and order in and
around the camps. They must arrest those who are
attempting to sabotage the resettlement process for
their own sinister reasons. We expect the Government
of Indonesia to take determined, concrete and effective
measures to meet that deadline, and to meet it in good
time.

The continuing failure to resolve the issue of
militias in West Timor has a destabilizing effect on
East Timor itself. The Secretary-General's report
shows a period of sporadic but continuing cross-border
incursions. These culminated in the tragic murder on
Monday this week of Private Leonard William
Manning. We have all expressed our most profound
sympathies to Private Manning's family and to the
Government and the people of New Zealand. But
sympathy is not enough. We must together show our
determination that such an outrage will not happen
again. We have a duty to Private Manning and to his
colleagues, because they were sent to East Timor to
implement the Security Council's resolution, resolution
1272 (1999).

First, we hope that the Secretary-General will
conduct a thorough investigation of the incident and
will report to the Council on his findings as soon as
possible. Secondly, the United Kingdom expects the
Government of Indonesia to redouble its efforts to
cooperate with UNTAET on the problem of cross-
border incursions. They must disarm and disband the
militias. And they must hunt down those responsible
for Private Manning's killing and for other militia
activities, and bring them to justice.
My delegation believes that this report by the
Secretary-General provides a good point at which the
Council can take stock of the situation in East Timor.
We have therefore distributed a draft presidential
statement which, with the assistance of our colleagues,
we hope the Council will adopt as soon as possible
next week. The statement will need to reflect the good
news, the frustrations and the tragedy of which I have
spoken. But we hope that the statement will also look
forward. We should not forget that Private Manning
died serving a wider goal. That goal was the
implementation of the will of the East Timorese
people, so unequivocally expressed on 30 August last
year. UNTAET has made good progress in
implementing the result of the ballot during this year.
We look forward to renewed efforts to drive forward
this Vital agenda in the coming months.

