Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to take the opportunity of the presentation
of the twenty-third progress report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (S/2010/15) to share with the Council the
latest developments in the implementation of the
Ouagadougou Political Agreement.

However, first allow me to express, on behalf of
the Ivorian Government and the people, our most
heartfelt condolences to the families of the United
Nations personnel who were killed last week in the
earthquake that has devastated Haiti. I would
particularly like to evoke the memory of Mr. Hedi
Annabi, who did so much to restore peace in Cote
d'Ivoire. During all those years, he contributed
significantly to the success of the Ivorian peace
process. Allow me also to express the compassion of
10-21493
the Ivorian authorities to all troop-contributing States
that have lost men and women in that tragedy.

Finally, allow me to express once again our
greatest sympathies to the Haitian Government and
people and to assure them of our solidarity in their
terrible ordeal. Moreover, the Ivorian Government has
decided to donate $1 million. That gesture is the
Ivorian contribution to the chain of international
solidarity for Haiti.

As noted in the report of the Secretary-General,
the overall situation in Cote d'Ivoire remains stable
and significant progress was made during the last
quarter of 2009. The publication of the provisional
electoral list, the launch of the election appeals period,
and the validation of candidates for the presidential
election confirm the success of the process to end the
cr1s1s.

Ivorians are keen to go to the elections, but I
would like to make it clear that they are keen to go to
transparent and credible elections. For the Ivorian
Government, conditions conducive to holding a
transparent and fair presidential election are linked to
drawing up a credible electoral list above all suspicion,
and also to organizing the vote in a secure
environment.

Concerning the electoral list, the news in Cote
d'Ivoire has of late been marked case of fraud by the
President of the Independent Electoral Commission. In
that regard, it must be said that it is true that the
President of the Independent Electoral Commission
acted irregularly, which has cast doubt over that body
and rightly resulted in denunciations and appeals for
greater control of its activities.

That is why Prime Minister Guillaume Soro, after
consulting all Ivorian political parties and the
Facilitator, President Blaise Compaore', has established
a monitoring committee responsible for strengthening
the Commission's capacities and for restoring the
confidence of Ivorians in that body, which has a central
and leading role in the process of ending the crisis.
This incident, taking place in the course of the final
phase of the electoral process, may obviously give rise
to a minor disruption of the timetable adopted at
Ouagadougou on 3 December 2009 for the holding of
the presidential election.

All these efforts would be wasted if the
presidential election were to take place in an insecure
3
environment. To that end, and to mitigate the low
numbers of Blue Helmets and mixed brigades of the
Integrated Command Centre, President Laurent
Gbagbo and the Facilitator for direct dialogue,
President Blaise Compaore, have requested the prompt
deployment of a military contingent from Burkina
Faso.

That request has been submitted to the Security
Council, with the favourable recommendation of the
Secretary-General. Those troops will take part in
securing the electoral process and will be under a
United Nations mandate for three months. Through me,
the Ivorian Government requests the support of the
Security Council for the effective deployment of that
contingent.

I wish to conclude my remarks by reiterating that
the Ivorians are certainly eager to go to the elections
but not to any election, in particular not an election that
would bring them back to square one, that is to say,
another conflict. The Ivorians are eager to go to
transparent and credible elections with a reliable
electoral list, in accordance with the certification
criteria set by the United Nations. That is what the
Prime Minister is resolutely and swiftly seeking to do,
with the support of the Facilitator, and for which the
support of the Security Council is required.

