Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): Burkina Faso wishes to echo the words of the
President and the other Security Council members in
conveying our gratitude to Ms. Norma Chan. Our
delegation has benefited from her availability and
professionalism, and together we are profoundly
grateful to her. We wish her a peaceful retirement - in
any case, more peaceful than life in the Council - and
great success in her life after the Council.

I thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his briefing. I welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and thank him for his
important contribution.

Burkina Faso welcomes the holding of
presidential and provincial elections in August, which
enabled the Afghan people to take control of their own
destiny. The organization of the elections was itself a
real challenge, and the difficulties encountered during
the electoral process once again show the necessity and
urgency of true national reconciliation, an
indispensable prerequisite for all development efforts.
It is our hope that the audit and recount process of
electoral results will take place rapidly and in a
credible manner in order to ensure that the final results
are accepted by all.

The new Government faces many arduous tasks
and numerous and difficult challenges. Once more, we
call upon the international community to continue and
enhance its support for Afghanistan, in particular in the
priority areas identified as benchmarks in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2009/475).

We commend UNAMA for its work alongside the
Afghan people. Its efforts to ensure greater aid
effectiveness and improve national reconciliation at the
local level and its support in the political and,
especially, human rights spheres deserve our
recognition. We welcome the 19 July signing of the law
on the elimination of violence against women and the
strengthening of Afghan legal and crime-prevention
capacity. Since these are essential components of
international efforts on the ground, we firmly
encourage the Mission to do everything in its power to
attain the objectives of resolution 1868 (2009). To
enable it do fulfil its mandate effectively, it is crucial
that it be granted adequate resources.

Turning to economic and social development,
there has been progress in follow-up in the area of
financing for development. But the reduced funding for
the Afghan Reconstruction Trust Fund and the
tendency to focus on donors' preferences continue to
increase the Government's dependency on the
international community. We call upon donor States to
honour their pledges and to work with the Government
to forge a common strategy for sustainable
development owned by the Afghan people.

We hope that present trends will continue with
regard to reductions in opium poppy cultivation and
drug production and their replacement by legitimate
crops, as well as with regard to strengthening the fight
against corruption. Here, we welcome the support
provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the national and international security
forces, in coordination with neighbouring countries.

Clearly, the prerequisites for progress in
Afghanistan remain the strengthening of State
institutions, the extension of State authority throughout
the national territory and, above all, the political will
of all actors to achieve these things. In that regard we
share the View of the Secretary-General on the need for
infrastructure to make it possible for public institutions
to function, to enhance public administration capacity,
the establishment of a judicial system that is credible
and accessible to all citizens, the enhancement of the
public revenue collection system and the promotion of
youth employment on the basis of merit.

Yet none of those goals will be met without
security. That is why we support an increase in the
number of well trained and fully operational police and
military personnel. In that regard, we take note of the
quality of the new tactical approach employed by the
International Security Assistance Force, based on
protection of populations and improvement in the
conditions under which operations take place, along
with development of the Afghan forces to whom
responsibility for security will gradually be transferred.

This, to be sure, is a difficult long-term
endeavour, but it is the path we must follow if we want
peace and prosperity in Afghanistan.

In conclusion, we fully support the proposal that
an international conference on Afghanistan be
convened. We hope that this opportunity will give rise
to specific initiatives for the sake of peace and social
and economic development in that country.

