Mrs. Mladineo (Croatia): I wish to thank Mr. Jan
Eliasson, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Darfur, and Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for the
detailed, precise and frank reports that they presented
to the Council today.

In principle, we believe that true progress on the
political track represents the essence of a sustainable
solution. The volatility of the security and
humanitarian situation in Darfur, where a simple spark
could ignite a full-size inferno, makes the need for a
tangible result on the political track even more obvious
to all. In that sense, we commend and fully support the
work of the United Nations and African Union Special
Envoys.

We have been listening carefully to the
assessment and comments made by Mr. Eliasson and
cannot but be concerned by what can be described as
the modest developments achieved so far. Despite his
and Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim's praiseworthy efforts and
the progress achieved so far, we see that much more
time is needed in order to launch meaningful and
substantial negotiations.

Having said that, we recognize that there are
somewhat encouraging steps on the technical level. In
that sense we reiterate our full support for the path
taken by the Special Envoys. We hope that their low-
key approach, including workshops intended to create a
positive atmosphere and their preference for Arusha-
style meetings, will result in a favourable outcome.

However, we feel that at this point we need a
clear demonstration of political will from all parties in
order to put the process on track. In that sense we
highly value the assistance of the regional and other
partners in encouraging the parties to the conflict to sit
and negotiate around the table.

We echo Mr. Eliasson's words that there cannot
be real progress on the political track in the midst of a
hostile environment. We join his calls for an immediate
ceasefire and for all parties, in particular the
Government, to take responsibility for improving the
security and humanitarian situation in Darfur. We share
the urgency expressed, not only around this table or
exclusively among Security Council members, when it
comes to the full deployment and operability of the

African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). Mr. Guehenno's forthright
briefing, however, leaves little room for optimism.

Nevertheless, we find the engagement of the
Sudanese Government in recent talks with UNAMID
encouraging. We hope they will deliver on the
promises, in particular those related to the signing of
the status-of-forces agreement. Furthermore, we are
entitled to expect the speedy solution of all outstanding
issues relating to the development and effective
exercise of the UNAMID mandate, namely accepting
the proposed list of troop-contributing countries,
granting flight clearances and facilitating the access of
UNAMID to land and water and its freedom of
movement. Finally, we hope that the Sudanese
Government will fully embrace the View that the
mission's mandate is solely to the benefit of the
Sudanese people.

My delegation continues to believe in the three-
track approach covering political, humanitarian and
security matters. However, the rule of law should not
be forgotten. Thus, we see the judicial dimension as
not only complementary but also mutually reinforcing
and intrinsic to the above-mentioned three-track
approach. In that respect, we express our grave concern
about the possibility of the culture of impunity taking
firm root in the Sudan.

We also express our deep concern about the high
level of grave violence and abuse committed against
women and children in the Sudan, including rape and
other forms of sexual violence, mostly committed
against girls. These outrageous practices must be
stopped.

Finally, allow me to conclude with a remark on
the indivisibility of peace in the Sudan. Darfur, in our
View should not be addressed in isolation from the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

Those that are standing outside the peace
process - and there are several - need to see that
there is a cost to them in doing so. We agree that all
sides must commit themselves to and honour a
cessation of hostilities agreement that can be
effectively monitored by UNAMID. We believe that
the Envoy's proposal for the appointment of a single
joint United Nations-African Union mediator is a good
one and that it should be taken forward promptly.
The third track is the ongoing humanitarian
emergency in Darfur. We share the concerns expressed
by others. It is deeply worrying that, after all the
efforts over so many years, the humanitarian situation
continues to worsen and attacks on aid workers
continue to rise. The result is less protection for the
most vulnerable people. Access for humanitarian
assistance is again under threat. It is essential that we
see full implementation of the agreements reached
under the joint humanitarian communique between the
Government of the Sudan and the United Nations.

The fourth track is impunity. I share the concerns
of several colleagues and their dismay at the total lack
of progress in holding to account those indicted by the
International Criminal Court for war crimes and crimes
against humanity in Darfur. Those indictments will not
go away. Justice will be an integral part of lasting
peace in Darfur. The appointment of Musa Hilal, who
was sanctioned by the Security Council under its
resolution 1672 (2006), to a Sudanese Government
position is a further concern. It will not advance the
peace process.

Allow me to conclude with two points about the
situation beyond Darfur, which are nonetheless critical
to resolving the crisis in that region. First, in Chad, the
Council made clear on Monday the urgency of all sides
ending the fighting (see S/PRST/2008/3). I would like
to underline that Council members also called on States
to end any support to armed groups in the Sudan and
Chad; that appeal is directed primarily at the
Governments of those two countries.

Finally, Council members will return to the issue
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement later this
month, when we hear from Mr. Qazi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan.
But in any consideration of the Sudan, we have to bear
in mind that implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement is fundamental to future peace across
the country, including in Darfur. That is a goal to
which my Government is totally committed.

