Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to associate myself with the statement to be
delivered later by Ambassador Ryan on behalf of the
European Union, with the comments of all those who
have called for an end to violence and with those who
have expressed sympathy for the victims and their
families. And like others, the United Kingdom
welcomes very much the presence of the Secretary-
General and the two Ministers at this very important
debate.

Yesterday was a very bad day for Kosovo. As the
inter-ethnic violence spread, so the clock was turned
back. The truth is that Kosovo has too much history.
There has been too much inter-ethnic bloodshed in the
province. Instead, Kosovo has no choice but to move
forward. In the short term, its leaders must not only
condemn violence; they must use their influence
actively to work with the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
KFOR to restore order.

This is the time to encourage calm, not the time
for rhetoric or irresponsibility. It is the time for
measured, considered action, not impetuosity. It is the
time to show solidarity between the different
communities, not to increase division. And it is the
time for democratic credentials to be burnished, not an
opportunity for anarchy and riot. Lastly, I think it is a
time for a continued and strengthened dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade.

At the request of the Secretary-General of NATO,
the United Kingdom is at this moment deploying a
spearhead battalion into Kosovo. It is the Operational
Reserve Force, and it will be there from tonight. It will
start to deploy to help stabilize the situation on the
ground.

But looking forward, resolution 1244 (1999)
charts a future. It sets a clear vision for Kosovo. It
gives an opportunity to Kosovo leaders. The
international community has invested very
substantially in that future and in that vision of a
tolerant, multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo. UNMIK,
Special Representative Holkeri and KFOR enjoy the
full support of the British Government in trying to help
achieve those goals.

That is why the Council has endorsed the
"Standards for Kosovo" paper and the review
mechanism. That remains the only way forward for
Kosovo. Those attempting to derail the process will not
be allowed to prevail, nor will the perpetrators of
violence succeed in speeding up final status
negotiations - quite the reverse. The international
community is entitled to expect and require the
implementation of those standards, to demand an end
to violence and to insist that Kosovo, its institutions
and all its people renew their commitment to the rule of
law, to the tolerant coexistence of communities and to
establishing a real democratic future for the province.

