We would like to thank the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for the latest report of his Office on the political, security and humanitarian situation in the country (S/2020/345, annex). The work of his Office remains invaluable for the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and of the region. At the outset, South Africa lauds the efforts of all sides to respond to the coronavirus disease pandemic and hopes that this will be seen as an opportunity to realize unity of purpose even beyond its containment. With respect to measures taken to address the pandemic, South Africa concurs with the assessment of the Office of the High Representative that all efforts must be well devised, properly targeted and closely coordinated in order to improve their success. The lack of progress in the dialogue process remains an issue of concern. We therefore call on all parties to remain seized with the objectives of the country's dialogue and to refrain from actions that could undermine its prospects, thus stalling reconciliation and durable peace. The existing agreements and mechanisms remain relevant to taking the dialogue process forward and we urge all stakeholders to work within their parameters and in good faith in support of that objective. More importantly, we wish to emphasize that national ownership of the peace process resides with all Bosnia and Herzegovina stakeholders. The ongoing disagreements between the political parties continue to negatively impact the fulfilment of the agenda of five objectives and two conditions established by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation. In addition, provocative, divisive and nationalistic rhetoric could undermine stability in the country and threaten the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the State. On a positive note, we welcome the appointment of the Chair of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers. We believe that this will assist in paving the way for dialogue and cooperation. Nonetheless, other outstanding appointments, including those of the Constitutional Court judges and other entities, continue to hamper the effective functioning of the State. Accordingly, we encourage all parties to expedite the conclusion of these important processes. In closing, let me reiterate my delegation's call for constructive dialogue among all entities, as well as among the various Bosnian structures and the High Representative. It is only through dialogue and compromise that a political settlement can be reached that will bring peace and stability not only to Bosnia and Herzegovina but also to the wider region.
