Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
United States would like to thank President Ismail
Omar Guelleh for travelling all the way to New York to
brief the Council on the continuing crisis between
Djibouti and Eritrea. We appreciate the importance of
the President's participation in this meeting and the
content of his message. We take his message seriously.
We hope that the same is true for all members of the
Council and that we shall take appropriate note of and
respond to the challenge that he has presented to the
Council.

The United States also welcomes the presence of
the Foreign Minister of Djibouti and of the Permanent
Representative of Eritrea.

The United States remains extremely concerned
about Eritrea's unprovoked attack on Djiboutian forces
and its subsequent refusal to withdraw its troops or
engage in peaceful dialogue to defuse the situation. We
commend the Djiboutian Government for its efforts to
find a peaceful solution to the crisis.

The United Nations fact-finding mission to
Djibouti clearly documented the extent to which the
Djiboutian Government has worked to resolve the
crisis peacefully. The Government of Eritrea, however,
has defied the international community by attacking its
neighbour in a violent confrontation that left 44
Djiboutian soldiers dead and many more missing. The
Eritrean Government has refused to cooperate or even
to issue visas to the fact-finding mission dispatched by
the United Nations to investigate the situation. The
Government of Eritrea's failure even to acknowledge
the existence of the problem, let alone the seriousness
of the situation, is unacceptable.

The Security Council should take appropriate
action to find a resolution to the crisis. The United
Nations fact-finding mission has recommended that the
United Nations dispatch a high-level envoy to the area
to engage with Eritrea to find a peaceful solution to the
crisis. The fact-finding mission further noted that "[i]n
the event that the offer by the United Nations is again
rebuffed by Eritrea, the matter should be referred to the
Security Council for appropriate action" (S/2008/602, para. 62). The report's finding that "[a] sovereign
country is being drawn into a crippling and
unaffordable military mobilization, to deal with a
situation that may ultimately threaten national, regional
and international peace" (ibid.) reinforces the
seriousness of those recommendations.

In line with the report's recommendations, the
United States calls on the Secretary-General to
dispatch a high-level envoy immediately. Eritrea
should be given a clear time frame in which to accept
the assistance of the United Nations, the African Union
or any other State, organization or body that is
acceptable to both parties to find a peaceful solution to
the crisis. However, if Eritrea rebuffs any such effort
towards resolution, the Council must react
appropriately. If we fail to do so, not only do we risk
yet another costly and tragic war in an area that has
already suffered tremendously, but we also jeopardize
the credibility of the Security Council.

