Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me, first of all, on behalf of the Moroccan
delegation, to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this important debate on the crucial subject of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. My thanks
also go to Mr. John Holmes for his briefing at the
beginning of this debate.

The protection of civilians has become a
recurring topic in the face of violations by parties to
armed conflict of their obligations under international
law and international humanitarian law. The tragic
experiences of terror and privation to which civilians
are subjected in situations of armed conflict arouse our
indignation.

In fact, the growing importance that the Security
Council has accorded to this issue for 10 years is fully
justified. But the negative observation in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2009/277) that, despite the efforts
made since 1999 and the various decisions taken by the
Council, in particular the growing asymmetry of
conflicts and their consequences for civilians impels us
to rethink the concept of the protection of civilians and
to broaden it to include the post-conflict phase.

The existence of conflicts and the persistence of
some of them, sometimes for decades, are explained by
many factors. Among those, we cannot ignore the
sometimes active involvement of States of the region,
either through their direct engagement or indirect
participation, which contributes to the continuation of
those conflicts and thus makes them more difficult to
resolve. That is why the issue of good neighbourliness
and regional cooperation in all its forms is often the
key to any lasting solution that guarantees the
protection and prosperity of the populations concerned.

The new wave of intra-State armed conflicts and
armed rebel dissidence is, in most cases, the result of
frustration generated by poverty, the poor distribution
of resources, where they exist, and underdevelopment.
Those armed conflicts, fuelled by trafficking in arms
and drugs, have endangered the security of men,
women, elderly people and children, who are often
forced to flee for fear of reprisals, as targets of military
attacks in flagrant violation of international
humanitarian law.

Those intra-State conflicts have given rise to a
proliferation of the tasks assigned to peacekeeping
operations, including the protection of civilians. The
execution of those tasks must be in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter,
in implementation of the guiding principles governing
the conduct of peacekeeping operations and based on
the support of the international community.
The task of protecting civilians, in the context of
peacekeeping operations that have such a mandate, is
the primary responsibility of the host country, as
affirmed by the most recent report of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, and therefore
the missions that have such a mandate should
undertake their activities without prejudice to the
primary responsibility of the host State.

It is also worth underscoring that the success of
activities aimed at ensuring the protection of civilians,
when they come under a United Nations mandate,
requires the integration of efforts at all levels, the
availability of resources and necessary means, the
improvement of operational capacities and, above all,
the mandates for the mandates of peacekeeping
operations to be clear and feasible. Of course, it goes
without saying that priority should be given to the
political process itself, since deployment in a context
where that is non-existent or compromised will not
ensure the success of the mission deployed. The best
guarantee for the protection of civilians has one name,
that of peace.

When the 2005 World Summit endorsed the
principle of the responsibility to protect, it did so
taking into account the sovereignty of States and their
primary responsibility to protect their own populations
against any foreign intervention. As we see it, the
implementation of this principle should be the subject
of broad, multilateral and universal consultation to
define the parameters and field of action of such
protection. Likewise, the work of humanitarian
organizations must be carried out judiciously and
effectively, in accordance with the principles of justice,
neutrality, objectivity and independence.

The instruments of international law, including
the obligation to protect civilians in situations of armed
conflict, are reflected in the Fourth Geneva
Convention, the Additional Protocols, the human rights
covenants and the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council.

Nonetheless, in spite of the existence of this legal
arsenal, the Palestinian people continue to suffer
terribly. The Council will recall that, last December,
the Palestinian people in Gaza suffered military attacks
and were the victims of the disproportionate use of
force by Israel without any international protection
leaving hundreds dead and thousands wounded,
including many children, in violation of international
law and international humanitarian law. This situation
is all the more disturbing in that it is accompanied by
unacceptable restrictions on humanitarian access, thus
depriving the most vulnerable sectors of the Palestinian
people of their most basic rights.

One factor fuelling the outbreak of armed conflict
and causing physical and psychological harm to the
civilian population is the proliferation of light weapons
and their illicit traffic. The suffering inflicted on the
populations affected by the proliferation of light
weapons, particularly in Africa, requires serious
regulation of the traffic in these weapons. My
delegation associates itself with international efforts to
develop international standards to regulate the import,
export and transfer of such weapons.

Stepping up efforts to prevent and resolve
conflicts through peaceful means and to consolidate
peace in countries emerging from conflict will make it
possible to stem the risk of recurrence and thereby to
limit the scope of internal displacement and the
number of refugees and to guarantee civilians their
rightful protection.

Host countries must lend their full support to the
efforts of the international community in order to
facilitate, in accordance with international practice, the
unhindered repatriation of refugee populations and to
register them in conditions of complete transparency.
The lack of reliable and regularly updated information
on these populations will promote confidence neither
among donors who give aid and assistance to the
refugees nor among the parties to conflicts who are
engaged in dialogue to resolve them.

Furthermore, there is a close link between
peacebuilding efforts and the return of displaced and
refugee populations. When the priorities of security,
justice and reconstruction and the first dividends of
peace are visible and concrete, populations that have
fled a war and its consequences will return to their
countries in the hope that they will find dignity and
protection.

In this regard, we commend the Peacebuilding
Commission for having included in its integrated
peacebuilding strategies for the countries on its agenda
provisions for the protection of children, such as the
release of children who have been involved in armed
groups and their reintegration into their communities,
as well as a gender approach that gives equal
opportunity to men and women ex-combatants or
refugees to regain their rightful place and role in
society.

Towards this end, the prospect of receiving
professional training, physical and mental
rehabilitation services, and rapid-impact economic
projects will facilitate the reintegration of these
populations.

In other words, the approach to the tragic
consequences of conflict must be as preventive as it is
reactive. It is vital to address the principal causes of
armed conflict directly in order to prevent their
re-emergence. This preventive approach must include
sustainable development, poverty eradication, good
governance and the promotion of democracy.

