Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to begin by welcoming Mr. Tom Koenigs, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, and thanking him for his briefing to the
Council. In this regard, my delegation would like to
pay tribute to the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and to its commitment to
extend its role by opening offices in Day Kundi and
Ghor Provinces. We would also like to pay tribute to
the staff of the mission, who are working in difficult
circumstances.

The future of Afghanistan depends on achieving
the goals and objectives of the Bonn Agreement
concluded almost six years ago. The ensuing political
transition process has begun to unravel and has
deviated from its original specific course. The political
landscape in Afghanistan is made up of an
interdependent network that brings together all the

country's political groups. Therefore, there must be a
focus on active participation by all parties, in order to
establish a political process with democracy at its core.
The country needs genuine internal unity. There is also
a need for political awareness among political actors of
all stripes. Such a cohesive approach would enable
Afghanistan to realize the dream of political security
and stability.

Taliban attacks have increased considerably. The
movement is currently leading an intense insurgency
and relies increasingly on suicide attacks and other
tactics. This situation undermines confidence in the
reconstruction of Afghanistan. The worsening of the
security situation in the country must be addressed as
soon as possible.

Only a few provinces in Afghanistan enjoy
security and stability. We appreciate the role played by
the Afghan Government and NATO in maintaining
security and stability, and we stress the need to exert
more efforts within the framework of constructive
cooperation between the Afghan Government, its
neighbours and the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF), with the assistance of the international
community, in order to establish security without
compromising human rights in the country. That is a
vital role that must be played by the international
community.

We express our concern about the number of
innocent civilians killed by accident while terrorism
was being fought in Afghanistan.

The question of security is linked to
reconstruction, development and combating narcotics.
Therefore, military strategies must go hand in hand
with plans for development and national reconciliation.

While we welcome the role being played by the
Government in Afghanistan, we are aware of the scope
of the difficulties facing it. Thus, we hope that the
central Government can develop a new mechanism that
will enable it to deal with all its opponents. Let us not
forget that the Afghan people need cohesiveness,
because they have endured hardship and uncertainty
and have made great sacrifices in their long quest for
peace, freedom, well-being and independence.

International support for Afghanistan has recently
increased. That positive development should result in
the formulation of new initiatives to address challenges
in the areas of security, poverty, rehabilitating the

infrastructure, ensuring respect for human rights and
improving Afghanistan's political environment. My
delegation welcomes the recent meetings held in
support of Afghanistan, including the Tokyo and Rome
conferences on the rule of law in the country. Those
conferences resulted in a consensus on the need for a
national justice programme and a sectoral strategy
based on an Afghan monitoring and assessment system
supervised by the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board. We also welcome the recent high-level meeting
of Board members, held in new York on 23 September.

The problem of illicit drugs remains among the
difficult obstacles to the achievement of stability and
security for the people of Afghanistan. The United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime has reported a
17 per cent increase in opium poppy cultivation and a
potential 34 per cent increase in opium production.
Thus, it is obvious that the implementation of the
national anti-drug strategy has not achieved
satisfactory results. Areas such as Hilmand and the
eastern province of Nangarhar are major sources of
opium. Greater efforts and planning must focus on
providing alternative sources of income for farmers.

The spirit of solidarity that unites our nations and
our peoples with the brotherly people of Afghanistan
obliges us to shoulder our historic responsibility. The
State of Qatar reaffirms its principled commitment to
working to achieve stability in Afghanistan and
continuing to provide support to the Afghan people. It
joins with the international community in its efforts to
achieve those goals in order to promote reconstruction
in that brotherly country.

