Mr. Leon: The members of the Security Council
have before them the latest report (S/20lS/624) of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, which details the
work of the Mission over the past five months. The
report paints a mixed picture of evolving security
dynamics in Libya. A year since the country's most
serious outbreak of armed hostilities and the disruption
to the political process, local communities in western
Libya are increasingly taking the lead in ceasefire
and reconciliation initiatives between different towns
and cities, thus contributing to a marked reduction in
military tensions across that part of the country and the
wider Tripoli area. That is in stark contrast to security
dynamics elsewhere in the country.

Fifteen months since the start of military
operations in Benghazi, in the east, it is clear that the
confrontations between the parties have gradually
transformed into a war of trenches, with no imminent
end foreseen. In the interim, the status quo is exacting
a heavy toll on the civilian population and on whatever
remains of the city's much-damaged infrastructure.
More than 100,000 of Benghazi's population remain
internally displaced, and 70 per cent of the city's health
facilities are either inaccessible or not functioning.

The situation in the south is equally appalling. The
absence of the State and of a proper functioning security
apparatus has exacerbated local competition among
tribal groups for power and resources - a conflict
that has its roots in decades-long marginalization and
neglect by central authorities.

At the national level, the scale of human suffering
is staggering for a country with large oil reserves and
strong economic potential. According to different
United Nations agencies, an estimated 1.9 million
people require urgent humanitarian assistance to
meet their basic health-care needs. Access to food
is now a major problem for some 1.2 million people,
mostly in Benghazi and the east. The number of
internally displaced persons across Libya now stands
at approximately 435,000. The health-care system is
on the verge of collapse, with many hospitals across
the country overcrowded and operating at severely
reduced capacity, and many reporting acute shortages
of medicines, vaccines and medical equipment. Power
cuts are endemic in many areas of the country. Some
neighbourhoods, such as in Benghazi, are enduring
electricity cuts almost around the clock.

Close to 250,000 migrants are estimated to be
in the country or transiting through it, many of them
facing significant protection issues, including arbitrary
arrest and detention in abusive conditions, sexual
abuse, forced labour, exploitation and extortion. This
year alone, more than 2,000 migrants have drowned in
the Mediterranean Sea, the vast majority in a desperate
bid to make the sea crossing from Libya to Europe's
southern shores.

At the same time, the country's economy continues
to contract rapidly, the result of a significant reduction
in oil revenues due to falling oil prices and low oil
production from Libya's oilfields. Libya's financial
reserves are also being heavily depleted, in large
part as the result of unsustainable expenditures on
non-productive items. The political-institutional crisis
in the country has also manifested itself in growing
competition over key financial and other sovereign
institutions.

Against that grim backdrop of growing hardship
and misery stemming from deteriorating security and
general lawlessness, widespread violations and abuses
of international human rights and humanitarian law
continue with impunity across the country. Armed
groups from all sides continue to abduct civilians on
account of their political opinions or identity, often in
the hope of exchanging them in return for a ransom or
for the release of fighters or other civilians taken by
rival groups. Not even humanitarian aid workers have
been spared.

Permit me to use this platform to reiterate my call
on all sides in the conflict to undertake the necessary
steps to protect civilians from direct and indiscriminate
attacks, facilitate their evacuation and allow unimpeded
and safe access to humanitarian aid. I also wish to
remind all parties of their obligations to end all forms
of arbitrary detention and to protect all those detained
from torture or other ill-treatment. While we welcome
the release of some ofthe illegally detained persons, we
continue to urge all parties to do more to complete that
process as soon as possible.

When I last briefed the Council, in mid-July (see S/PV.7485), I spoke of the fact that the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, or Daesh, had asserted control of
the strategically located city of Sirte, in central Libya.
That control has now been extended to a stretch of
coastline covering more than 200 kilometres east and
west of Sirte. Despite an attempt on 11 August by local
armed groups to dislodge Daesh from Sirte, its fighters
regained control of the city three days later. The
casualty figures are difficult to confirm, but witnesses
report that Daesh has carried out brutal revenge attacks
on its opponents. There can be no doubt that the danger
that Daesh poses to Libya and the Libyan people is real,
imminent and palpable. Libyan security and military
actors, as well as political stakeholders on both sides
of the divide, are fully cognizant of the danger posed
by Daesh-affiliated militants. However, they must
recognize that no strategy aimed at containing, if not
eliminating, the Daesh threat can be viable unless it is
part of a concerted, unified and coordinated effort that
brings all Libyans together under a single banner whose
allegiance is to the Libyan State and to a Government
that is inclusive and representative of all Libyans. The
message to Libya's leaders is clear. There is simply no
alternative to unified and collective action if Libyans
are to succeed in preventing a repeat of the catastrophic
advances that Daesh has made in countries such as
Syria and Iraq.

After my last briefing, in which I updated the
Council on progress being made in the Libyan political
dialogue process, I reconvened the main dialogue track
for a new round of talks held in Geneva on 11 and
12 August. The two-day talks focused primarily on
ways of expediting the dialogue process ahead of the
critical deadline of 21 October, the date on which the
mandate of the House of Representatives could end,
according to the constitutional declaration. Although
the General National Congress in Tripoli, unlike other
dialogue participants, did not initial the main text of the
Libyan Political Agreement on 11 July, I am confident
that their concerns can be addressed in the ongoing
discussions on the annexes to the Agreement, including
those pertaining to the formation of a Government of
national accord.

Seven months after the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya launched the Libyan political
dialogue process, I am increasingly confident that the
process is finally reaching its final stages. It has been
a difficult and challenging process, but one that has
proved increasingly resilient, despite repeated attempts
by spoilers from all sides whose narrow interests
and agendas militate against a peaceful solution to
the conflict in Libya. The fact that a majority of
stakeholders have sought to engage in the different
tracks is a reassuring sign of the grassroots support
that the dialogue process has gradually acquired from
various segments of the Libyan population. The talks
have made a lot of progress in narrowing the deficit
of trust that exists among Libya's political stakeholders
and in forging agreement on a road map that lays out a
vision for bringing a rapid end to the political crisis and
military conflict that have ravaged Libya for more than
a year. Overcoming the country's political polarization
and divisiveness will be no easy task. We should not
underestimate the magnitude of the challenges or the
resources that will be needed to pull Libya back from
the brink of economic meltdown and a total collapse
of State institutions. Most important will be the
determination and commitment of Libyans themselves,
and specifically of their political leaders, if Libya is to
safeguard its national unity and territorial integrity and
spare its people the scourge oflong-term civil strife and
instability.

Iwould like to urge the leaderships ofboth the House
of Representatives and the General National Congress
not to squander the historic and unique opportunity
before them to be peacemakers. I appeal to them not
to waste the hard work they have invested over the
past seven months in order to arrive at the point where
they are today. The agreement they have negotiated
may not be perfect, but it is a fair and reasonable one,
in which the only winners are the Libyan people. I
would also like to reiterate that the United Nations,
along with the international community, will remain
steadfast in its commitment and support to Libya's
democratic process. Any attempt to derail the political
process by undemocratic means should not be tolerated.
The dialogue process remains the only credible and
legitimate mechanism by which Libyans can safeguard
the continuity of the democratic process in their
country. Time is running out. The onus is on Libya's
leaders on all sides and at all levels to make that final
push towards peace.

As Libya's dialogue process enters its final phase,
I wish to thank the members of the Council for their
support for my mediation efforts and to reiterate my
sincere and profound gratitude and appreciation to the
Libyan people and their representatives, as well as to
the various Member States and regional organizations
that have supported the dialogue process. In particular,
I would like to thank Algeria, Egypt, Germany, Italy,
Morocco, Qatar, Spain, Switzerland, Turkey, Tunisia
and the United Arab Emirates, as well as the African
Union, the European Union and the League of Arab
States. The collective effort and determination of the
international community will be vital to articulating a
clear strategy for the delivery of technical assistance. It
is equally important that the international community
move quickly to present a clearly articulated strategy
in support of the Libyan State and the efforts by a
Government of national accord to contain and eliminate
the threat that groups such as Daesh pose not only to the
stability of Libya but also to regional and international
security.

