Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to start by thanking you,
Mr. President, for having convened today's meeting
and to express my gratitude to the Prosecutor for
her participation. My delegation has familiarized
itself with the seventh report of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) on the investigation
of the situation in Libya. We would like to take this
opportunity to draw the Council's attention to the
benefit of the early circulation of future reports, so
as to ensure a more thorough analysis of the contents
before consideration by the Council.

In our view, the overall situation in Libya continues
to deteriorate rapidly. Moreover, that comment
applies not only to the judicial system. Essentially,
the Government does not control the situation
throughout the majority of the country, where former
revolutionary brigades and anarchy reign. There are
increasing reports of armed clashes among groups
and attacks on representatives of the armed forces and
their infrastructure, political activists, foreigners and
diplomats. The overall situation in terms of criminal
activity is deteriorating. The country has morphed into
a dangerous source for the proliferation of arms, which
are falling into the hands of terrorists and extremists.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/l3l) expresses his serious concerns regarding
the safety of judicial personnel. It also notes the
continuing practice of attacks, death threats and other
forms of intimidation against judges and prosecutors
and contains information regarding their killings. In
resolution 2144 (2014) the Council expressed its serious
concern regarding the lack of an appropriate judicial
process in conflict-related cases and reports of human
rights violations in detention centres, including torture
and sexual and gender-based violence.

We back efforts aimed at holding to account those
individuals involved in committing serious crimes in
Libya. The ability of the ICC to carry out effective and
impartial investigations of country situations referred
to it is highly important in terms of strengthening its
standing and the trust it inspires. Despite that, it is
unfortunate that there has been no major progress in
that area.

We have taken note of the information regarding the
admissibility of the cases of SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdullah Al-Senussi. Clearly, that issue must be
resolved by the Court's Chambers as it falls within their
jurisdiction.

At the same time, while mindful of the assessment
of Libya's political situation I have just referred to, we
consider unclear the logic of the conclusion that Libya
is capable of conducting proceedings in the case of
Abdullah Al-Senussi. That is especially so given that, as
the Pre-Trial Chamber itselfhas noted, there is a lack of
counsel in the case, serious security-related difficulties,
a lack of a witness protection programme, difficulties
in controlling penal facilities and other factors. We
look forward to detailed clarification of future appeals
rulings in those cases.

As it is clear from both the recent and previous
reports ofthe Prosecutor, the Registry's work is focused
exclusively on the former supporters of Muammar
Al-Qadhafi. In terms of the actions of insurgents
during the conflict, the report again contains standard
formulas and expressions of general concern. There is
no mention of concrete steps to be taken regarding the
continuing practices of torture and harsh treatment in
the detention centres.

With respect to civilian victims of NATO bombings
that exceeded the parameters of permissible action
under resolution 1973 (2011) and its objectives, the
Prosecutor of the ICC has in effect withdrawn herself
from that investigation. We believe that approach is not
equitable and hold out the hope that it will be corrected.

To achieve the objectives of establishing the truth,
combating lawlessness and achieving the national
reconciliation of any country, there is always an
overriding need for impartial and equal attention to
be paid to all sides of a conflict; without which it is
unlikely that international criminal justice will find
itself in demand by Governments.

