Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I, too, should like to begin
by thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Yamamoto for his briefing.

The situation in Afghanistan remains a source of
concern for the entire international community. A long
war continues, exacerbated by terrorism, ethnic and
regional tensions, and a fragile economy. The Afghan
people continue their epic suffering, with another
record-high period in civilian casualties, attested
by the Secretary General's report (S/20l8/824). As
Human Rights Watch put it, "civilians are losing the
war in Afghanistan". The recent upsurge in violence
has compounded the prolonged suffering of the Afghan
people. We strongly condemn all terrorist attacks
in Afghanistan. There can be no justification for the
indiscriminate killing of innocent children, women
and men.

Apart from Afghanistan itself, no country has
suffered more from the four decades of war, turmoil and
foreign interventions in Afghanistan, and no country
has more to gain from peace there, than mine, Pakistan.
For many years, Imran Khan, Pakistan's recently
elected Prime Minister, has declared that peace in
Afghanistan can be restored only through a negotiated
political settlement between the principal parties. In
his very first address to the nation after the elections,
Prime Minister Khan reaffirmed Pakistan's support for
peace, stability and prosperity in Afghanistan.

Afghanistan was also the first country to be visited
by Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Hussain Qureshi
over the last weekend, which is a clear signal of the
importance that our new Government attaches to its
relations with Afghanistan and of its commitment
to promoting peace and stability in that country. His
message in Kabul was that Pakistan remained ready
to play a constructive role in facilitating peace and
reconciliation in Afghanistan.

There are some signs that a negotiated end to
Afghanistan's protracted war may be possible. Hopes for
peace received a boost last June when President Ashraf
Ghani announced a ceasefire on the religious festival of
Eid al-Fitr, and the Afghan Taliban did the same. For a
few days, the ceasefire was comprehensively observed
across the country by the Government and the Tehrik-e
Taliban Afghanistan. Apart from the general desire for
peace, the ceasefire affirmed that peace was possible if
the principal parties in Afghanistan desired it.

Pakistan welcomes the Trump Administration's
acknowledgement that a negotiated political settlement
is the best option for bringing its longest war to an end.
Pakistan has urged this course of action for well over
a decade. The United Nations and the international
community have consistently declared that there is
no military solution to the conflict and that it must be
ended through a negotiated political settlement.

Agreement on launching a negotiating process is,
however, neither simple nor easy. Several past attempts
have been aborted by unilateral actions. There is little
trust between the main antagonists. Preconditions have
been set by some of the main parties to commence
and continue a dialogue process. The principal
responsibility for seizing the moment rests on the
parties directly involved in the Afghan conflict. Unless
they display flexibility, serious negotiations for a
political settlement could be further delayed. To create
an environment for peace talks, all sides should agree
on a de-escalation of violence, if not a cessation of
violence. For its part, Pakistan will actively encourage,
support and facilitate all efforts to launch a credible
and serious peace process.

A negotiated peace and national reconciliation is
all the more essential to enable the Afghan people and
the international community to confront and eliminate
the growing presence of Da'esh in Afghanistan. Da'esh
and a number of terrorist groups operating under its
umbrella, including the Tehrik-i-Taliban and Jamaat-
ul-Ahrar, pose a threat to Afghanistan, its neighbours
and, indeed, to the world. We agree with the Russian
delegation that an international effort is needed to
defeat Da'esh in Afghanistan.

Cooperation between Pakistan and Afghanistan
is a vital component of the endeavour to realize
peace and security within Afghanistan and the entire
region. Strengthening bilateral relations is a priority
for my country's new Government. The Afghanistan-
Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity provides
a framework for comprehensive and structured
engagement between our two countries. The inaugural
session of that body was held in Kabul in July, and
the operationalization of its five working groups
will enable us address all bilateral issues, including
broadening economic interaction, border management
and refugee repatriation.

We have taken a number of initiatives to support
Afghanistan's economic development. At Kabul's
request, Pakistan waived regulatory duties on imports
from Afghanistan. As a result, a substantial increase in
Afghan exports to Pakistan has been recorded in 2018.

We are also ready to extend all possible support
to Kabul to overcome the growing challenge posed
by illicit drug production and trade. The international
community, too, should do more to help Afghanistan
in developing a comprehensive strategy to address
that problem.

Finally, let me say that the bonds ofblood, language,
faith, geography and history that bind the peoples of
Pakistan and Afghanistan to each other are immutable
and unbreakable. Our destinies are, and will always
remain, intertwined. Cooperation between Pakistan
and Afghanistan is in the mutual and vital interests of
both countries. We stand committed to working with
the Afghan Government for the improvement of our
bilateral relationship and for the promotion of peace and
stability - in both our countries and across the region.

