Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
wish to congratulate you once again, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of December. We extend once again our
appreciation to the delegation of Peru for a task well
accomplished during the month of November.

Mr. President, we thank you for having organized
this important debate and wish the State of Qatar every
success during its presidency of the Security Council
for the month of December 2006. Let me also thank
Mr. J an Egeland, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for his insightful briefing.

Enhancing the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is a fundamental responsibility of States and of
the international community; we cannot afford to fail
in that respect. It is estimated that, of the hundreds of
thousands of people who lose their lives due to the
direct effects of war and low-intensity insurgency and
to war-related famine and disease each year, almost 90
per cent are innocent non-combatants. Other violent
acts include reprisals, forced recruitment, kidnapping,
rape, sexual exploitation and gender-based violence.
The protection of civilians ought to include protection
for humanitarian workers involved with refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs).

Such insecurity is due to the presence or activities
of armed groups and militias within and around camps
and settlements. Governments need to be reminded of
their obligation to provide protection.

As correctly pointed out by Mr. Egeland, the
internal displacement of civilian populations in areas
of conflict is on the increase, both in terms of numbers
and of the complexity of protection needs. It is good
news that the number of refugees is steadily declining,
but the problem of internally displaced persons
requires that renewed efforts be made to address it. The
High-level Panel on System-wide Coherence has
recognized the need for a more coordinated response
operationally in providing resources and protection to
IDPs.

Children, especially, have become the most
affected victims of armed conflict. In some conflicts,
the ratio of child soldiers is said to be as high as 60 per
cent. There is no doubt that the realities on the ground
are far crueler than statistics would indicate. We
therefore join in emphasizing the need to enhance the
efforts of the United Nations to protect civilians in
armed conflict, including children.

Admittedly, the most important strategic
objective has been to prevent armed conflict and its
recurrence in the first place. That objective goes hand
in hand with the initiative to urgently make the United
Nations a more effective instrument for the
maintenance of international peace and security. While
the ongoing protection process has always played a
vital role and will continue to do so, any progress made
in the protection of civilians will constitute an integral
contribution to the maintenance of global peace and
security.

06-6406]
It is for that reason that we reaffirm our
commitment in support of this highly cherished
humanitarian cause. We also condemn each and every
party involved in all situations of conflict in which
innocent civilian populations are deliberately targeted
and attacked as a strategy of war, for military
advantage. Such unacceptable behaviour is contrary to
the civilized conduct of modern warfare. It is our
conviction that all such perpetrators must be held
responsible for violating international law and that
such cases should be prosecuted in order to put an end
to the culture of impunity.

It is our View that today's fruitful discussions
should go beyond a naming and shaming exercise. The
Security Council has been greatly concerned at, and
remains seized of, the level of human tragedy
experienced by civilian populations, for example in the
context of recent events in the Middle East and in
Darfur.

The greatest challenge to the Council and to the
international community as a whole occurs when
Governments not only fail to protect their citizens but
are themselves the cause of insecurity to their citizens.
How can we exercise our collective responsibility to
protect under such circumstances? We should hold
such Governments responsible and accountable for
their actions.

Equally challenging is the identification of
existing gaps in the normative standards of
international law and in their implementation by
humanitarian actors, and the need to assist States that
lack adequate capacity to protect various categories of
affected civilians.

Experience in the Great Lakes has shown that a
regional approach to addressing security and
development problems has proved to be useful and
much more effective. We appreciate the support of the
Council and of the entire international community for
the peace processes in Burundi and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which have brought an end to
the protracted wars there and paved the way to national
reconciliation, the institutionalization of the rule of
law, and respect for human rights.

Indeed, the emerging peace, and the anticipated
peace and security compact to be signed later this
month in Nairobi by the countries of the region, will
bring great relief to the region and enhance regional
security and the safety of civilians.

Tanzania is very grateful that such positive
developments have come about through the assistance
rendered by the Council in the promotion of peace and
security in the Great Lakes region.

We agree with those delegations that raised the
issue of addressing the proliferation and illegal
circulation of small arms and light weapons, which fuel
conflicts and increase civilian casualties. This issue
requires more concerted action by the various organs of
the United Nations system as a way of enhancing the
protection of civilians.

I cannot conclude my statement without noting
my delegation's great concern at the emerging trend
whereby some State and non-State actors are openly
compromising the neutrality and questioning the
impartiality of the United Nations to deploy
peacekeeping troops or observers in areas they control.
We should assure Member States that the United
Nations is by definition an indispensable partner of its
Member States in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The core duty of the United Nations is not
only to maintain peace and security among Member
States, but also to protect their respective civilians.
Human security and safety should be as important as
the security of States. The two must be addressed
concurrently.

Finally, we would like to restate our appreciation
to Mr. Egeland for his role in raising the profile of
humanitarian issues on the international agenda in
general and on the agenda of the Council in particular.
He leaves behind a legacy of courage and dedication
and, above all, of commitment to protecting and
assisting civilians in precarious and vulnerable
situations.

