Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank the
President for organizing this open debate. Let me
also thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, the Special Representative of INTERPOL and
Mr. Koblentz for their briefings, and let me congratulate
the Secretary-General for a particularly eloquent and
sharp intervention.

Brazil firmly believes that the mere existence of
weapons of mass destruction constitutes the greatest
threat to humankind, and therefore to international
peace and security. The possibility that such weapons
might fall into the hands of non-State actors, particularly
terrorists, is a matter of special concern. Resolution
1540 (2004) is a valuable tool in addressing the issue
and complementing the main multilateral legally
binding instruments in the field.

Brazil actively participated in the discussions
leading to the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) and to
its first review, resolution 1977 (2011), as a member of
the Council. Since then, we have been firmly committed
to its implementation, as shown by the matrix prepared
by the Panel of Experts. The Brazilian Federal
Constitution forbids the conduct of any non-peaceful
nuclear activity on Brazilian territory. Brazil is party
to all the major treaties and conventions in the field
of disarmament and non-proliferation, such as the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America and the Caribbean, the Treaty of Tlatelolco,
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT), the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention. We are also members of export
control regimes such as the Nuclear Suppliers Group
and the Missile Technology Control Regime.

We have incorporated into our national legislation
all obligations deriving from those instruments, as well
as those from flowing from resolution 1540 (2004), and
we have submitted national reports to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Brazilian
legislation clearly safeguards the peaceful applications
of sensitive and dual-use goods and items, especially in
activities related to industry, research and development.
In that context, the Brazilian Government promotes
constant and structured outreach to inform the private
sector on applicable restrictions and controls.

Brazil has also been following with interest the
current comprehensive review of resolution 1540
(2004), and took part in the open consultations convened
in June by the 1540 Committee Chair, Ambassador
Roman Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain. We were
particularly pleased that strong emphasis was placed
on international cooperation and assistance, which in
our view are key to ensuring the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). We acknowledge the important
work that has been carried out by the 1540 Committee
and its Panel of Experts in that respect, and we expect
that this important issue will be addressed with a sense
of priority in the outcome of the comprehensive review.

Notwithstanding the importance of resolution
1540 (2004), circumscribing international efforts
exclusively to countering proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction is insufficient. Disarmament efforts
are essential to any effective strategy to avoid those
weapons being acquired by non-State actors - for,
as long as weapons of mass destruction continue to
exist, there will be those interested in acquiring or
developing them.

Over the past 50 years, the international community
has adopted multilateral, legally binding instruments
that ban some categories of those lethal armaments,
such as biological and chemical weapons. The NPT, in
its article VI, establishes an obligation

"to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective
measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms
race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament".

We remain frustrated, however, by the absence of
political will and leadership on the part of States
possessing nuclear weapons to initiate similar
negotiations aimed at the complete elimination of such
weapons, with clear benchmarks and timelines.

Last week's ground-breaking results of the
Open-ended Working Group on taking forward
multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations were
most encouraging. Its recommendation to the General
Assembly to convene a conference in 2017 - open
to all States, international organizations and civil
society - to negotiate a legally binding instrument
to prohibit nuclear weapons, leading towards their
total elimination, can place the nuclear disarmament
agenda on a new path, thereby overcoming its
protracted deadlock.

Time and again, the international community is
offered the argument that security concerns hamper the
objective of disarmament. That is a false dichotomy.
Relying on nuclear deterrence doctrines and strategies
undermines the medium- and long-term security of all
States. The risk that non-State actors may wish to acquire
nuclear weapons is only one among many examples of
such long-term security challenges. As the Secretary-
General himself once said, "there are no right hands for
wrong weapons." It is imperative that the international
community take decisive steps to achieve the common
and long- overdue nuclear disarmament objectives.

