Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I should like at the outset to thank the Chinese
presidency for having convened this meeting.

Argentina aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti and would like to make the following
additional brief comments.

We thank the Special Representative, Ms. Sandra
Honore Braithwaite, for her briefing on the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2350 (2017) (S/2017/604) and reiterate our
country's full support for her efforts.

We once again underscore the important
work carried out by all staff of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), who,
despite the tremendous challenges with which they are
confronted, including devastating natural disasters,
have fulfilled their mandate of helping Haiti to move
towards sustainable peace and development. We also
reiterate our congratulations to President Jovenel Moise
on his election and on the actions taken during his first
100 days in office, which are aimed at consolidating
democracy and relaunching the Haitian economy.

Argentina would like to underline the achievements
that we have seen in the run-up to the withdrawal of
MINUSTAH and the establishment of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), in
particular the progress on aspects relating to the future
implementation of MINUJUSTH's important mandate
of assistance to the consolidation of rule-of-law
institutions, the strengthening of the Haitian National
Police and the promotion and protection of human
rights in the country.

We support the transition plan and the political
strategy drawn up by the Secretary-General, as
described in the report submitted to us for consideration.
Without prejudice to all of the aforementioned, it is our
understanding that although resolution 2350 (2017)
envisages a two-year time frame for the new Mission, the
lifetime or duration ofMINUJUSTH must be dependent
on the situation on the ground rather than prescribed
by rigid deadlines, thus avoiding any premature
withdrawal that would imperil the achievements made
throughout the 13 years of MINUSTAH's presence in
the country.

Moreover, and, as is foreseen in the aforementioned
resolution, we believe it essential that the new Mission
include quick-impact projects which, according to the
report, have benefited more than 2 million people during
the fiscal year 2016-2017 by financing activities related
to the rule of law, governance, public infrastructure and
the supply of safe drinking water. Argentina believes
that such projects, together with those aimed at reducing
community violence, are vital in order to move forward
in the building and sustaining of peace in Haiti, as well
as to forge ties of cooperation and trust between the
United Nations presence and the Haitian people.

Argentina had previously welcomed the
appointment of Ms. Josette Sheeran as the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General charged with drawing
up a comprehensive strategy for the implementation of
the Organization's new focus on cholera in Haiti and
with supporting Haitian efforts to meet the Sustainable
Development Goals.

It is a great pleasure for me to share with the Council
the fact that my country, Argentina, recently announced
a voluntary contribution to the United Nations Haiti
Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund. We are
confident that the new Mission will contribute to the
implementation of the aforementioned new approach
on cholera.

The withdrawal of the Argentine military hospital
last August and the ending of MINUSTAH's mandate
in no way mean that we are cutting ties with Haiti,
particularly given that in addition to continuing our
bilateral cooperation, we will make available civilian
police officers and specific capacities, particularly
in the framework of the Mission's mandate, which is
aimed at strengthening and ensuring the professional
development of the Haitian National Police.

On that point, and without prejudice to the sovereign
decisions that Haiti might take on issues related to its
own security and defence, we trust that the eventual
planned deployment of armed forces in the country
will not detract from the effective implementation of
the recently concluded strategic development plan for
the Haitian National Police 2017-2021.

I should like to conclude by reiterating Argentina's
commitment to Haiti and paying tribute to the work of
Ms. Honore Braithwaite and to the work of all military,
police and civilian staff of MINUSTAH. We wish also
to honour the memory of those who have given their
lives in service of its noble mission.
