Mr. Kolby (Norway): Allow me first to thank the
Secretary-General for a very substantial report to the
Council with several concrete recommendations. They
deserve our close attention and support.

The spread of illicit small arms and light weapons
is a global threat to human security, human rights and
international humanitarian law. The great majority of
victims are innocent and vulnerable civilians, and
children in particular are paying a heavy price.

Besides the humanitarian toll, illicit small arms
and light weapons undermine peace-building efforts as
well as conflict prevention. We are concerned that
unregistered arms transfers to conflict regions seem to
continue unabated. We are also seeing massive
exploitation of natural resources for the purchase of
arms. The link to organized crime, drug trafficking and
terrorism underscores the urgency of dealing
effectively with illicit small arms.

The good news is that the international
community is addressing the issue and the Security
Council has a key role to play in that respect.
Preventing and combating the uncontrolled spread of
small arms must be an integral part of the Council's
peace efforts. That should constitute a key task for the
Council in discharging its primary responsibility for
maintaining peace and security.

Combating illicit traffic is essential in order to
succeed in peace-building and conflict prevention.
Recommendations 7 and 8 in the report are important
in that regard. Provisions for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and weapons
collection should be considered in the context of
negotiated settlements and by the Council in
peacekeeping mandates. By including DDR in budgets
for peacekeeping operations, we ensure a more solid
financial basis for those crucial activities. The case of
Sierra Leone illustrates fully the importance of DDR as
a part of overall peace-building efforts. Sierra Leone
also illustrates the weakness of voluntary funding of
DDR programmes. In general, it is particularly
important in the fight against illicit arms to form
partnerships between affected countries and regions
and those who can offer assistance, technically and
financially. That problem is a challenge to us all.

Dealing with the supply of arms is obviously just
as important as collecting illicit weapons in conflict
areas. We agree that arms embargoes should be used
more vigorously and expeditiously. The Council must
continue to promote the effective implementation of
arms embargoes, for instance, through sanctions
Committees and expert panels. As illustrated by
Colombia's paper prepared for this discussion, the
panels have made a number of specific proposals for
strengthening arms embargoes. The Council should
consider how those recommendations could be taken
forward. The violation of sanctions is a serious
challenge, and decisive action should be considered
against States that deliberately violate arms embargoes.

This leads me to the issue of tracing, which is
critical to identifying the origin and supply routes of
illicit weapons to conflict areas. We support the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the Council
should call for the preparation of an international
instrument on tracing. Important work has already been
initiated in this field; for instance, the establishment of
a United Nations expert group to examine the
feasibility of developing such an instrument. We are
convinced that that expert group would benefit from
the initiative taken by France and Switzerland to
develop elements for a political arrangement on tracing
and marking. Other challenges for the Council include
cooperation against illicit arms brokering and efforts to
strengthen export controls and transparency in
armaments.

The United Nations Secretariat will have an
important support function to fulfil for the Council and
Member States in dealing with illicit small arms and
light weapons. We note the Secretary-General's
intention in recommendation 3 to set up a small arms
advisory service within the Department for
Disarmament Affairs based on extrabudgetary
resources. If such a service is to provide added value, it
should primarily have a coordinating and advocacy
function. We strongly emphasize that such a service
should not develop operational capacity and duplicate
what others are already doing well. The Council should
continue its discussion of questions related to illicit
small arms. It might be useful to consider if any of the
particular issues raised in the report and in today's
discussion would lend themselves to a more focused
debate in the Council at a later stage. That discussion
could take place partly in connection with the drafting
of a presidential statement, as proposed by Colombia.

