Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): 1 wish to begin, if I may, by extending my heartfelt condolences to our Somali colleagues in the wake of the terrorist attack perpetrated by Al-Shabaab last weekend at the Elite Hotel in Mogadishu. I ask my dear friends to please accept our heartfelt condolences. We are thankful to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, James Swan, as well as to the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia, Mr. Madeira, for their comprehensive briefings on the situation in Somalia. We also welcome to his first meeting in person the new Permanent Representative of Belgium, Philippe Kridelka. The Russian Federation welcomes the efforts made by Mogadishu to achieve political stability, the normalization of the socioeconomic situation and the phased establishment of democratic institutions in the country. We steadfastly champion the maintenance of the territorial integrity and unity of Somalia. In recent months, the Federal Government has achieved concrete results in its dialogue with the federal member states in the run-up to next year's scheduled elections. We trust that this week's summit in Galmudug will help to identify the modalities of the future vote. The Security Council should fully support Mogadishu's commitment to holding one-person, one-vote elections. We remain convinced that the broadest possible implementation of the electoral model could potentially help extricate Somalia from the current political impasse and a state of permanent, all-out war. It could also deal a heavy blow to the positions of Al-Shabaab, which is keen on maintaining the traditional clan-based system of voting. We value the now regular virtual consultations between the Federal Government and the leadership of the states of Jubaland, Galmudug, Puntland, Hirshabelle and South-West. We are concerned about the breakdown in August of the second round of talks between the delegations of Somalia and the self-proclaimed Somaliland. We urge both sides to explore possible compromises as a way of resolving their differences. We concur with the conclusions of the Secretary- General's latest report (S/2020/798) that the security situation in Somalia remains volatile. Al-Shabaab has not stopped its terrorist activities. The fight against extremists has been adversely affected by the poor supply of weaponry to the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and its inability to procure military equipment, in particular helicopters, and is further compounded by the lack of engagement with the Somali National Army and the general passivity of the Somali authorities on the issues of restoring the local administration and security structures in the liberated areas. We believe that it is our common task to identify the proper response to the threat posed to the country by improvised explosive devices, which Al-Shabaab increasingly relies on in its operations. In these circumstances, AMISOM remains the linchpin in the fight against terrorism. We supported the extension of the mandate of the African peacekeepers until the end of February 2021. Given the prospects of the phased closure of the Mission, strengthening the capacity of the Somali National Army is critical. At the same time, we object to attempts by a number of countries to forcibly expedite the drawdown of AMISOM. Given the current situation, we deem it judicious for the Security Council to jointly and systematically pursue its efforts to reach agreement on multifaceted assistance to the country's authorities with a view to achieving a definitive end to the internal crisis in Somalia.
