Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Much gratitude and
plaudits to Germany for organizing what I consider to
be a very significant contribution to this cause.

While we associate ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of Argentina on behalf

 

of the Group of 77 and China, we would like to make
some additional points in our national capacity.

Pakistan strongly believes it is imperative to
address the threat posed by climate change to all
developing countries. We are particularly worried
about the existential peril of rising sea levels for a
number of developing countries, most notably small
island developing States (SIDS). There is now clear
scientific evidence that, barring effective measures to
reduce global warming, some countries' very existence
will be threatened.

Decisions adopted at the sixteenth Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) at Cancun
represent a tiny glimmer of hope amidst a pall of
gloom, apathy and disenchantment with climate change
negotiations.

There is no gainsaying the fact that a climate
catastrophe is unfolding due to low levels of emission-
reduction pledges by the developed world, as well as
the uncertainty surrounding the delivery of financial
commitments to heal the affected world.

Scientific and pragmatic sense requires that
developed countries cut their emissions to at least
25-40 per cent below 1990 levels by 2020. Ironically,
the current levels of voluntary pledges 4 at the lower
end of their ranges 4 suggest that they will have either
increased emissions by 6 per cent, or 4 at the upper
end 4 reduced them by 16 per cent. Either way, even
after including emission-reduction actions by
developing countries, we are heading towards a global
temperature increase of 2.5 to 5° C, spelling disaster in
particular for vulnerable developing countries that
neither contributed to climate change nor are capable
of handling its fallout.

In these circumstances, Pakistan primarily
recognizes that small island countries have expressed
legitimate concerns about the threat posed to their very
survival by climate change and rising seas. We
consider this debate an important contribution to our
quest for a solution within the UNFCCC-led process.

One of global warming's most disastrous yet
least-reported consequences has been global drought,
which has transformed a further one fifth of the
planet's semi-arid cropland into irretrievable desert.
Such desertification has created serious food and water
shortages, destroying almost one third of all crop lands

 

and range lands and potentially depleting water
supplies for 1 billion people around the world. Water
scarcity is already fuelling serious conflicts in South
Asia, the Middle East and Africa. Of Africa's 51
nations, only 12 feed their people without assistance.

Another by-product of global warming, the
worldwide wildfire plague has aggravated drought and
desertification even further. The aridity crisis fuels the
global wildfire plague, most dramatically in what we
consider a most important region, namely, the Amazon
Basin. More Brazilian rainforest is now consumed each
year by fire than by loggers. More carbon dioxide is
pumped into the atmosphere by wildfires than by
internal combustion engines. The pandemic fire plague
thus renders exponential the greenhouse effect. And the
wildfire plague mounts annually in size and frequency,
eroding and ruining even more land.

The first of the mega-fires was in Yellowstone in
1988. Since then, the number of such fires has
skyrocketed, and the total increase in their devastation
has had a multiplier effect. The fires pumped out
incomprehensible quantities of greenhouse gases,
accelerated drought, increased desertification and
impeded rainforests' ability to process carbon dioxide
and other greenhouse gases. These natural infernos are
now many times the size of anything people had seen
previously. Ten years ago, a 100,000-acre fire would
have been massive disaster. Now wildfires in the
United States alone are routinely many times that size.
Firestorms increasingly consume the Amazon
rainforest. During one recent year, satellite photos
documented more than 350,000 Amazon forest fires.
Previously, that rainforest had been impervious to such
conflagration.

The Earth's shrinking forest canopy has also
diminished the rainforest's assimilation of carbon
dioxide and other greenhouse gases, sabotaging its
cleansing of the atmosphere as well as undercutting
raincloud development over desolated jungles,
reducing precipitation even further.

These multiple disasters 4 shrinking farmlands,
pandemic wildfires and food and water scarcity 4
compounded by dwindling energy reserves, are
destabilizing the world's most violently troubled
nations. By destroying people's livelihoods,
aggravating poverty and fuelling terrorism among the
have-nots, can we even begin to fathom what we have
wreaked?

 

Let me say that a major cause in any
civilization's decline and fall 4 as documented by
such scholars as Arnold Toynbee, Oswald Spengler and
Edward Gibbon 4 is wealth inequity, the exploitation
of the populace and the violent rise of poverty,
inspiring class warfare arising out of the inability to
feed people. Conflict, not cooperation, is fast becoming
the world condition. If we are to have any chance at
disaster-prevention or consequence management, we
must act quickly and decisively. The coming
catastrophes will exacerbate the current conflicts.

Let me now take the Council back in time and
history. While the Mediterranean world was mired in
the dark ages, in Mexico there existed a "one world",
much like what we have at the United Nations today.
They read the heavens, preceded Copernicus's
heliocentric theory and devised a calendar accurate
until 2012. Thousands of years ago, the Olmecas built
the pyramid of Cholula, one-third larger than the great
pyramids of Giza; the Mayas build their famous city of
Uxmal; and the Toltecs, their fabled Tula. And then:
destruction! They had problems frighteningly similar to
our own. Their own version of global warming had
brought them continuous drought and pervasive
famine. Their hyper-dependence on a single crop,
maize, made them uniquely vulnerable to climate
change.

If our food base were hammered as hard as
Tula's, we would each have to go a long way for a
meal. In the United States a typical meal travels on
average 1,400 miles to the plate. Famine was what
finally defeated the American Plains Indians: when
99.99 per cent of the bison had been exterminated, they
were inescapably dependent on the buffalo and met
their downfall.

Today, climate change is an inescapable reality
for Pakistan. It is beginning to manifest itself with
increasing intensity and ferocity. We are one of the

 

worst victims of climate injustice. For us, dealing with
climate change is no longer a matter of choice; it is an
imperative. While there is a global scientific debate
taking place about the level and timing of glacial melt,
the signs in Pakistan are ominously Clear. In my
province of Sindh, with hundreds of thousands of
arable acres, water availability is down to less than half
of what it was 50 years ago. Pakistan's vast glacial area
covers around 15,000 square kilometres, and is in rapid
retreat. The rate of glacial recession in Pakistan, which
has increased by 23 per cent in the past decade alone,
is faster than in any other part of the world. Of
Pakistan's total land area, only 24 per cent is
cultivated, of which 80 per cent is irrigated by water
flowing through the predominantly glacier-fed rivers of
the country.

Against that backdrop, climate change affects
almost all sectors of the country, in particular those of
water resources, energy, health, forestry and
biodiversity 4 with a particularly significant impact
on agricultural productivity. Last year's unprecedented
floods in Pakistan demonstrated the urgency of
addressing the threat that climate change poses.

In conclusion, allow me to underline that
important work is being undertaken in relevant forums,
most notably the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. We underscore the
importance of the mandates that each of the principal
organs of the United Nations has been given by the
Charter. The General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council must retain their pre-eminence and
importance.

