Mr. Rivas (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate, which we believe is very
timely as this year we will commemorate the seventieth
anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations.
1 also thank you for the concept note (S/2015/87, annex)
that has been circulated for this purpose.

This debate allows us to reaffirm Uruguay's
commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and, at the same time,
provides us an opportunity to reflect on where we stand
today, given that we note with concern that we are still
far from fully fulfilling those purposes and principles.

Uruguay aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Maldives on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group.

In the task of maintaining peace and security,
Uruguay, as founding Member of the United Nations,
reaffirms the principles enshrined in the Charter of
San Francisco in 1945. While the international context
has significantly changed since then, those principles
remain fundamental principles that form a framework
of basic rights and obligations. The principle of the
sovereign equality of States is the cornerstone of
the multilateral system that unites us today. By the
same token, the principle of non-intervention in the
internal affairs of States is a fundamental value, as it is
safeguards the sovereign equality, territorial integrity
and self-determination of States.

As stated in the Preamble of the Charter, the
Organization was founded to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. However, we note
with regret that we are far from achieving the goals of
peace and security enshrined in the Charter.

Uruguay is concerned about the fact that the
purposes and principles of the Charter are not observed
in various areas of the world where they are still
challenged by activities that contradict them. That not
only affects international peace and security, but also
has an impact on the system as a whole and endangers
its very foundations. The fact that an unprecedented
120,000 military, police and civilian personnel are
deployed in various missions demonstrates that the task
of peacekeeping remains enormous and is growing.

The consent of the State concerned is a guiding
principle of peacekeeping operations, which ensures
their legitimacy. However, we are aware that currently
most armed conflicts are intra-State in nature and
that, in some cases in which the most basic values and
human rights are threatened, one cannot adopt the
most extreme interpretation of sovereignty because
that would amount to impunity. We acknowledge that
is the primary responsibility of the State to protect its
population. However, when that responsibility is not
fulfilled and there is an imminent threat of genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity or ethnic cleansing,
non-intervention gives way to the involvement of the
international community.

Uruguay's commitment to international peace and
security is tangible, inter alia through our significant
contributions to peacekeeping operations in which it is
participating, not only to achieve those goals but also
through the categorical, ethic and moral imperative of
solidarity with brotherly countries of the region and
with other nations that must face serious situations
of conflict and instability. Uruguay's commitment is
not new, but goes back to the 19505 and 19605, when
my Government decided to send military observers
to missions in the Sinai Peninsula and in India and
Pakistan and then increased its participation until the
number of Uruguayan Blue Helmets exceeded 2,000 in
2013.

In that regard, it is worth mentioning the role
of Uruguay in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where approximately 1,000 of its troops are
participating, and in the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, where not only does it have troops on
the ground, but it also chairs the Group of Friends of
Haiti.

To achieve lasting peace we must address the
underlying causes of conflict, and therefore promote
development in all its dimensions and the defence,
promotion and protection of human rights. The political
stability, democratic governance and territorial
integrity of States are necessary conditions for conflict
prevention. At the same time, strengthening the rule
of law, protecting and promoting human rights and
ensuring sustainable economic and social development,
equality, social inclusion and the elimination of poverty
also contribute to the prevention of conflicts and post-
conflict peacebuilding.

In conclusion, while we recognize the primary role
that the Charter entrusts to the Security Council in the
difficult task of maintaining international peace and
security, we also recognize the complementary role
that is entrusted to regional and subregional bodies.
As a member of the Union of South American Nations,
a cooperation and political consultation body that has
played an important role in preventing conflicts and
finding peaceful settlements to disputes, Uruguay is
part of a zone of peace that puts its trust in preventive
diplomacy as an effective tool.

