As the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015), Viet Nam has closely cooperated with South Sudan, members of the Committee, members of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and the Panel of Experts, with the goal of facilitating the effective implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions and contributing to peace, stability and development in South Sudan. Viet Nam welcomes the recent positive developments in the political, security and economic situation in South Sudan, especially since the establishment of the Transitional Government in February 2020. Weare encouraged to see that the ceasefire has been maintained in most parts of the country. We also commend the commitment of the South Sudanese parties to resolving the remaining issues, especially the efforts of the Government in addressing the coronavirus disease pandemic. At the same time, we are aware of the complexities of the situation, particularly the need to address intercommunal violence issues and to make more concrete progress on the security arrangements. However, we believe that the progress that the relevant parties have made is encouraging and should be acknowledged by the international community. Viet Nam reiterates its position that sanctions should only be a tool to promote sustainable peace, security and development, and shall not affect the development of a country, the livelihood of its people or the effective functioning of its Government. Sanctions should be lifted once the situation permits. At the same time, we acknowledge that the resolution recognizes the achievements made by the South Sudanese parties, having incorporated inputs to that effect by Viet Nam and other members. It also sets out a clear and specific roadmap for the review of the sanctions, particularly the arms embargo. These provide good ground for the future work of the Council in the right direction. Therefore, after careful consideration, Viet Nam has decided to vote in favour of resolution 2521 (2020). We sincerely hope that the adoption of the resolution will contribute to long-term peace and stability in South Sudan. We are also pleased with the spirit of compromise during the negotiation process, which we believe will promote cooperation between the members in the implementation of the resolution. Viet Nam will continue to work closely with relevant Member States, the United Nations, IGAD and the African Union, and calls on other Council members to do the same in advancing the implementation of the agreements among the South Sudanese parties, with the aim of facilitating the review and the subsequent lifting of the sanctions. In conclusion, Viet Nam reiterates our consistent position in support of the unity, peace, stability and sovereignty of South Sudan and contributing to peace and stability in the region.
