Mr. Manongi (United Republid of Tanzania):
We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
briefing on the situation in Burundi.

The President of Tanzania, His Excellency
Mr. John Pombe Magufuli, is acutely aware that the
state of affairs in Burundi is of great concern to the
subregion, and indeed to the international community.
That is not only because Burundi is a State member of
the community, but also because, as a region, we all
stand to suffer adverse consequences resulting from
the insecurity and instability in Burundi. We therefore
commend the Secretary-General's efforts to promote
cooperation with Burundi and the region. We also
ask that those welcome efforts be balanced by equal
measures to enhance support for the socioeconomic
needs of the people of Burundi, as well as to assist
the country in its efforts to strengthen its institutions
of governance. Obviously, there are a number of push
factors driving the current state of play that need to
be approached and resolved in an open, inclusive and
comprehensive manner. We thank those who have
supported our efforts. Nonetheless, there is no doubt
that more support is required in order to sustain a
credible and inclusive dialogue in Burundi.

The East African Community will continue to exert
all efforts in support of peace and security in Burundi.
The region is conscious that, if left unchecked, the
political situation there has the potential to degenerate
further, with far-reaching humanitarian implications.
The East African Community is ready to play its part.
We welcome the engagement of the United Nations
and look forward to its playing a complementary
and mutually supportive role. We are encouraged
by, and indeed grateful for, the confidence that has
been expressed in connection with the appointment
of Mr. Benjamin William Mkapa, former President
of the United Republic of Tanzania, as a facilitator
in support of the mediator for the Burundi peace
process, Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of
the Republic of Uganda. In his efforts to assist Burundi
and its people during the Arusha peace process in 2000,
President Mkapa had this to say:

"A sustainable solution to the Burundi conflict
has to come out of negotiations in which all who
have a stake in Burundi can freely participate. A
sustainable solution has to be owned and respected
by all participants in the peace process. The outside
world cannot impose a durable solution."

We believe that that admonition remains true for the
circumstances that we are dealing with today in Burundi.
It is therefore encouraging that President Mkapa is
currently making a preliminary visit to the region in
order to ensure that there is a shared understanding of
his new mandate. He has assured community leaders
of his mission's dedication, openness and inclusiveness.
He needs, and deserves, the genuine support and
cooperation of all parties in Burundi, the region and the
international community. We expect all stakeholders to
be forthcoming and to commit to a speedy, genuine and
successful outcome. The subregion will not hesitate to
seek and call for the imposition of stern measures on
any individuals or groups that attempt to act as spoilers
of the undertaking. In the meantime, we call for unity
of purpose and action as we promote the process for
a journey of great hope and expectations embodied in
the legitimate aspirations of the people of Burundi,
the East African Community, the African Union and,
indeed, the United Nations.

