I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga for their very informative briefing. I will be brief and limit my remarks to three points. First, France condemns in the strongest terms the escalation of intercommunal violence and recent violent clashes in Kolom. In that context, I would like to stress our deepest concerns over reports of sexual violence against women and children and of internal displacements. We call on the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan alike to coordinate an investigation as announced and recall that those responsible must be held accountable and brought to justice. Those terrible events confirm that the situation in Abyei is still fragile and that the deployment of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) remains absolutely necessary. However - and this is my second point - only a genuine political process to address the issues of Abyei and the border demarcation can really stabilize the security situation there. France calls on both Governments to seize the opportunity inherent in the improvement of their bilateral relations to tackle the Abyei question and launch a serious dialogue with the aim of achieving a political solution, in accordance with the Agreement of 20 June 2011. We welcome the progress in the peace processes in both countries, as reported by Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga, and encourage all armed groups in Darfur to join the negotiations. France also encourages the African Union, the African Union High-level Implementation Panel and the United Nations Special Envoy for the Horn of Africa to intensify their mediation roles with a view to achieving a political solution between the Sudan and South Sudan, in accordance with the 2011 Agreement. We should all do our best to prevent the situation in Abyei becoming a new frozen conflict and UNISFA an open-ended mission - as the Secretary-General writes in his most recent report (S/2020/308), the international community can neither accept nor afford that. My final remarks address the reconfiguration of UNISFA, pursuant to the relevant decision of the Security Council. We deeply regret that the three formed police units are still pending deployment. We call on both Governments to provide full support to UNISFA in the deployment of its personnel, including by issuing the requested visas. The three formed police units must be deployed as soon as possible; that is the only way to deal with the high level of criminality in Abyei, and to adapt the force to the current challenges. At the same time, both parties should engage to implement the Abyei police service, in line with the 2011 Agreement. Lastly, France urges the United Nations and all the stakeholders to do their best to deploy the civilian deputy head of mission and the civilian team. UNISFA must be able to support the peace process, including at the communal level, and to engage with the African Union and the relevant stakeholders in Juba and Khartoum.
