Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like first to most warmly thank the representative of

Germany and Mr. Javier Solana, the High
Representative for Common Foreign and Security
Policy of the European Union, as well as Mr.
Guehenno and Mr. Gambari, for the briefings they have
given us here in the Council this morning.

As we have all agreed unanimously, the Security
Council will continue to deal closely with the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo even though
the historic elections have already been crowned with
success. As planned, the Government is now in a building
phase, and we are pleased by President Kabila's
appointment of Mr. Antoine Gizenga as Prime Minister.
We hope most earnestly that he will be welcomed by
the people of the country and that the President will be
able to complete the formation of a Government that
will fully discharge its responsibilities.

The successful formation of the Government will
help the Secretary-General to conduct fruitful
consultations with the Congolese authorities on the
future of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) after
its current mandate ends on 15 February 2007. There
will be an advent of a new Government for the country,
after all the remaining electoral stages have been
completed and the Secretary-General has presented a
report with useful recommendations to the Council at
the end of the month so that it might take an
appropriate decision regarding the future MONUC
mandate. We hope we can agree on that before mid-
February, in accordance with resolution 1671 (2006).

We wish to say how greatly we appreciate the
role of the European forces (EUFOR). They have
played a crucial role in assisting and supporting
MONUC during the presidential elections. That
considerably helped to stabilize that enormous country,
which is faced with turmoil that continues to beset the
country, especially in the east. We hope the situation
will be stabilized when the European forces withdraw
and that the new Government will be able to work with
all the Congolese parties to ensure progress for the
country.

With regard to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, we welcome the news of the negotiations
among the three factions in Ituri, which is a step along
the path to disarmament and the reconstruction of the
country. These factions were the Cobra Matata militia,
the United National Front and the Revolutionary
Congolese Movement. All of this means that it will be

possible to reintegrate more than 8,000 men into the
armed forces. We would like to say how greatly we
appreciate the efforts of MONUC in the efforts
currently under way and the agreements concluded
with these militias so that the agreement might be
consolidated. We also welcome the news that 60
individuals under the dissident General Nkunda, in
South Kivu, have also joined the disarmament
programme. We hope to have news that is just as
satisfactory about the remaining militias.

The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo does not yet allow us to be
optimistic, but rather causes concern. Efforts are still
ongoing to help tens of thousands of people displaced
from villages, who are benefiting from the assistance
of UNICEF and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). OCHA is making
considerable efforts to assist them by providing
supplies and means for their subsistence. We hope that
assistance from donors will continue, especially from
the European Union. We hope too that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will continue to receive
bilateral assistance or multilateral aid so that the
Government might be able to consolidate the pillars for
the new authorities, thereby ensuring progress for the
country through the use of its natural resources for its
own prosperity.

