Ms. Honore (Spoke in French): I would like to
express my gratitude to Luxembourg as President of
the Security Council and to all of the members of the
Council for convening this meeting to consider the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (8/2014/162). I also
take this opportunity to welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Haiti.

(spoke in Spanish)

I wish to thank in particular all of the countries that
contribute troops and police to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the
Member States that have collaborated in the stabilization
and reconstruction process for their valuable support to
the consolidation of peace and democracy in Haiti.

(spoke in English)

Since my last briefing to the Security Council
in August 2013 (see S/PV.7024), the overall security
situation in Haiti has remained relatively stable. As
compared to 2012, the year 2013 saw a decrease in
major crimes, including homicides and kidnappings, by
21 and 53 per cent, respectively. While the first half of
the reporting period witnessed a 57 per cent increase
in demonstrations, notably in the metropolitan area
of Port-au-Prince and other urban areas across the
country, most were peaceful and largely triggered by
socioeconomic grievances.

The performance of the Haitian National Police
continued to improve and the security situation
in the five departments vacated by MINUSTAH's
military component remained stable. However, when
the capacity of the National Police was put to severe
test, operational support by MINUSTAH forces was
often necessary. Further strengthening of the police
therefore remains a critical stabilization benchmark for
MINUSTAH.

Turning to the political situation, I would first
like to commend Haiti's political leaders for choosing
the path of dialogue and reaching an agreement on
holding elections this year. I would furthermore like
to congratulate the Conference Episcopale d'Ha'i'ti
and its President, Cardinal Chibly Langlois, for
successfully mediating an agreement resulting from a
step unprecedented in Haitian political history when,
on 24 January, an inter-Haitian dialogue between the
executive branch, Parliament and political parties was
launched to discuss issues of democratic governance,
elections and amending the Constitution. The formal
signing of the El Rancho accord by the executive, the
legislature and participating political parties was finally
accomplished on 14 March. The accord stipulates that
one election will be held this year, combining the long-
delayed local, municipal and partial senatorial elections
with those foreseen for the end of 2014, that is, for a
second third of the Senate and for the entire Chamber
of Deputies.

As outlined in the accord, key provisions to be
implemented within a 10-day time frame include
amending the electoral law to confer the appropriate
mandate on the Electoral Council; replacing up to
one member of the Electoral Council by each of the
three State powers; and a Cabinet reshuffle to include
individuals drawn from interested political parties.
A commission has been established to monitor the
implementation of those provisions. A number of
signatories to the accord expressed reservations about
certain provisions, signalling the likelihood that
further negotiations will be necessary to facilitate their
implementation.

The long-awaited adoption and promulgation of an
electoral law in December 2013, along with the accord
of 14 March emanating from the inter-Haitian dialogue,
have prepared a path towards inclusive and transparent
elections to be held later this year, a sine qua non for
Parliament's continuous functioning in January 2015. It
is now critically important that the Haitian authorities
implement the provisions of the accord, including the
amendment of the electoral law, in a timely manner.
To that end, MINUSTAH, along with members of
the international community represented in Haiti, are
engaging Haiti's key political actors.

With regard to the economic situation, there is
reason for cautious optimism and renewed hope, owing
to the economic growth rate of 4.3 per cent in 2013,
which has provided the Haitian Government with an
important building block for more sustainable and
equitable development. Post-earthquake reconstruction
and rehabilitation has continued, and of the 1.5 million
people housed in camps in the aftermath of the tragedy
of January 2010, only an estimated 146,573 people
remain in temporary camps. Notwithstanding that
achievement, it is a humanitarian imperative that the
Government follow through its commitment to ensuring
the orderly closure of those camps and finding durable
solutions for the displaced, who continue to live under
adverse conditions or to face forced evictions.

The fact that some 600,000 Haitians still face
severe food insecurity is cause for concern, as is the
prevalence of acute malnutrition among children,
which increased from 5.1 per cent in 2012 to 6.5 per
cent in 2013.

While the number of suspected cholera cases has
been reduced significantly every year, falling from
352,033 cases in 2011 to 58,608 in 2013, more must be
done, since Haiti still has the highest number of cholera
cases in the world. Delivering and sustaining better
health requires an urgent, scaled-up effort to combat
the disease and address decades of underinvestment
in basic systems for safe water, hygiene, sanitation
and health care. The United Nations system in Haiti
has developed a two-year, $68 million initiative in
support of the Government's 10-year national plan
for the elimination of cholera. In addition, the United
Nations and the Government of Haiti are finalizing the
establishment of a high-level committee to oversee the
coordinated implementation of the cholera response
measures, as outlined in the nationa1 plan.

In accordance with resolution 2119 (2013),
regarding MINUSTAH's further conditions-based
consolidation, the Mission is on target to achieve a
15 per cent reduction of its uniformed strength and reach
the mandated strength of 5,021 military troops by the
end of June 2014. The strength of the police component
remains at 2,601. Given the gains in stabilization since
2004, the Secretary-General is confident that Haiti
and its partners can continue moving forward with the
ongoing consolidation process. Furthermore, in his
August 2013 report (S/2013/493), the Secretary-General
indicated his intention to explore the best way for the
United Nations to continue contributing to greater
stability and development in Haiti beyond 2016.

On the basis of an initial review and the activities of
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team, five
broad options have been identified and proposed in the
Secretary-General's latest report. They include, first,
designating a United Nations special envoy for Haiti
to deliver political good offices; secondly, establishing
a special political mission with continued support for
police development through individual police officers
and assistance to rule-of-law and human-rights
efforts; thirdly, establishing a smaller, more focused
peacekeeping mission without a military presence and a
continued and possibly increased country-wide United
Nations police presence. It is important to note that no
United Nations military presence is envisioned under
the first three options. A fourth option would establish
a smaller, more focused peacekeeping mission with
United Nations police and a small military presence;
a fifth would adjust MINUSTAH'S current mandate
to reflect a reduced scope of its activities, achieved
through the completion of the consolidation plan.

The United Nations remains firmly committed to
including key national and international stakeholders
in the consultative process, leading ultimately to
determining which option is the most appropriate
to ensure not only that Haiti benefits in every way
from a successful transition to a newly configured
United Nations presence beyond 2016, but also that the
stabilization achievements are preserved and sustained.
Obviously, consultations will also take place with the
Government of Haiti. To this end, a full scale, United
Nations-wide strategic assessment should be conducted
to provide the Council with an updated, in-depth
evaluation of conditions on the ground.
In parallel with the processjust described, a revision
of the 2013-2016 United Nations integrated strategic
framework for Haiti is being envisaged, in coordination
with Haitian Government counterparts and the donor
community, to identify priority areas for the United
Nations country team's strategic engagement as the
Mission consolidates. In the meantime, it is important
that the Government and MINUSTAH continue to work
on multiple fronts to attain the stabilization benchmarks
outlined in the MINUSTAH consolidation plan.

Concerning the development of the Haitian National
Police, MINUSTAH, together with our international
partners, continues to support the Haitian Government
and the police in the implementation of the HNP
development plan for 2012-2016. With the objective of
achieving a minimum of 15,000 active police officers
by 2016, the twenty-fourth promotion graduated 1,058
cadets, including 111 women, in December 2013. The
twenty-fifth promotion, set to start soon, will have an
expected 1,250 cadets and will be completed by the end
of 2014. The current strength of the Haitian National
Police is 11,228 active police officers, including 950
women.

The further development of the Haitian police
is vital to ensure enduring stability in Haiti.
Notwithstanding the progress achieved in the build-
up of a professional and accountable police force and
the important contributions made by bilateral partners
to the police development plan, resources are still
insufficient to achieve all the targets of this plan. The
sustained commitment of the Haitian Government
and the continuous generous assistance of the
international community will remain critical not only
to enabling the National Police to progressively assume
full responsibility for internal security, but also to
strengthening required management and administrative
capacity, oversight mechanisms and the development of
specialized units.

Progress in the professionalization of the HNP
needs to be complemented by similar improvements
in other areas of the rule of law, notably in the justice
and corrections sector. The Mission is supporting the
presidential commission on judicial reform and a law
reform working group with a view to finalizeing a new
criminal code. Updating Haiti's antiquated criminal code
and criminal procedure is a preoccupation for Haitian
jurists, human rights advocates and MINUSTAH.
Similarly, the Mission continues to work with Haitian
authorities and international partners to reduce lengthy
periods of pre-trial detention and to improve deplorable
prison conditions. However, the Government of Haiti
needs to develop a more strategic, comprehensive and
sustained approach to reforming the justice system as
a whole. Concerning respect for the rule of law, it is
equally important that key oversight and accountability
mechanisms be rendered operational and allowed to
operate independently.

With respect to the forthcoming electoral process,
the United Nations continues to provide technical
advice and capacity-building support to the Electoral
Council, which has the constitutional responsibility for
the organization ofthe elections. However, the Mission's
consolidation implies a more focused and strategic use
of available assets in support of the national electoral
authorities.

In relation to governance, MINUSTAH has
concentrated its good offices on promoting dialogue
among national stakeholders to overcome the electoral
impasse. During the reporting period, despite the
lingering stalemate between the executive branch
and Parliament, Haiti saw the adoption of important
legislation beyond the electoral law, such as the law
on the financing of political parties, the law against
money-laundering and terrorism financing, and the
anti-corruption law for which MINUSTAH had been
advocating.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, Haiti is at a turning point where
progress on peace, security and stability must be
sustained through the consolidation of the democratic
process, the rule of law, good governance and better
support for the needs of the entire population. The
promulgation of the electoral law and the recent
signing of the El Rancho agreement, arising from the
inter-Haitian dialogue process, mark important steps
towards the holding of elections in 2014.

The commitment shown by national stakeholders to
dialogue as a means of agreement is a victory for Haiti.
I hope that the dialogue will continue and deepen so as
to respond to the many challenges the country faces. It
is in the national interest that Haitian political actors
adhere to the spirit of the agreement in order to ensure
that the country continues to move forward on the path
towards the democracy and stabilization necessary
for the sustainable socioeconomic development of the
Haitian people.
