Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to welcome the Prime
Minister of Libya to the Security Council Chamber. He
faces great challenges, and we would like to wish him
every success in overcoming them. In the presence of
the Prime Minister, we would like to mention three
issues that were not raised in the briefing.

The first point is about the civilian casualties as
result of the NATO airstrikes on Libya. The Security
Council gives the issue great importance because the
civilian deaths were caused by actions that it had
sanctioned, whereas they were intended to protect
civilians. On 3 November, the Secretary-General of
NATO stated that Libya had no confirmed civilian
casualties as a result of the airstrikes and that no
further investigation was therefore needed.
Nevertheless, there was an International Commission
of Inquiry of Libya of the Human Rights Council. On
2 March, there was a report (A/HRC/19/68) that
mentioned the deaths of dozens of civilians as a result
of the airstrikes. But what we have, instead of a direct
and honest reaction from NATO, is that things have
gone back to square one.

On 5 March, it was announced that no statement
could be made about the casualties because "it was
unable to verify the figures". As we can see, NATO is
coyly attempting to avoid responsibility with regard to
a highly sensitive humanitarian matter. We expect
NATO to recognize the existence of civilian casualties,
to apologize and to say that it is ready to pay the
appropriate compensation. We believe that the matter
should have been properly resolved and that
responsibility lies not only with NATO and the
Security Council, but also with the new Libyan
authorities. Their consideration of the matter of civilian
casualties as a result of the airstrikes will show their
commitment to the protection of human rights and will
contribute towards national reconciliation. We call on
the Secretary-General to work for a joint statement of
the United Nations and NATO in order to bring the
issue of civilian casualties as a result of the NATO
airstrikes to a close.

Secondly, we have expressed concern about the
uncontrolled proliferation of Libyan arms in the region.
However, it is not only weapons that are going abroad.
There is information that there is a special training

centre for the Syrian so-called revolutionaries in Libya,
supported by the authorities. Its cadets are being sent
to Syria to attack the legitimate Government. That is
completely unacceptable on any legitimate grounds.
That action is undermining stability in the Middle East.

Given the fact that Al-Qaida is active in Syria, the
question arises of whether the export of revolution is
turning into the export of terrorism. Colonel
Al-Qadhafi said that he was involved there as well, but
surely issues need to be dealt with in their respective
countries.

It is clear that the transition period in Libya has
been very difficult. Just a few days ago, in the east of
the country, there were signs of separatism and the use
of the force. We support the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Libya. Nevertheless, we are
convinced that all issues must be dealt with by political
means through dialogue. Otherwise, the situation in
Benghazi is going to turn into a tragedy.

