Mr. Bamba (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Ihave
the honour to take the floor on behalf of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).
ECOWAS welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau (S/2013/262).

Before I elaborate on this agenda item, allow me,
Sir, my dear friend and brother, to congratulate you
most warmly on the assumption by your country,
Togo, of the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of May. I should like to take this opportunity
also to congratulate my friend, and brother, too,
Eugene-Richard Gasana of Rwanda for the outstanding
manner in which he guided the work of the Council last
month.

Allow me to most sincerely thank those who spoke
before me, in particular Ambassador Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti of Brazil, the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission;
Ambassador Da Gama of Guinea-Bissau, my brother;
and, in advance, Ambassador Antonio Gumende,
who will be speaking on behalf of the Community
of Portuguese-speaking Countries, for their valuable
contributions to our debate.

I should like above all to thank Prime Minister
Jose' Ramos-Horta, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, for his excellent
briefing on the situation in the country. I should like
here to pay heartfelt tribute to him, because Prime
Minister Jose Ramos-Horta is a true artisan of peace.
Indeed, he has in a short time been able to reinstate
the dialogue both among the political class in Guinea-
Bissau and at the level of the international partners
involved in the process of resolving the crisis in the
country. The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General has shown himself to be truly worthy of the
Nobel Peace Prize awarded to him. He can count on the
full support of ECOWAS in his efforts to achieve peace
in Guinea-Bissau.

Allow me now to present the perspective of
ECOWAS on the situation in Guinea-Bissau. Since the
coup d'etat of 12 April 2012, ECOWAS has worked
tirelessly to promote the restoration of full constitutional
order and guarantee a reasonable level of security for
the people. The ECOWAS member States have provided
the financial and technical resources necessary to
keep the State functioning. They have supported the
inclusive nature of the transition process and given
renewed confidence to the people by maintaining an
acceptable level of security through the deployment of
the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB).
There is no doubt, however, that the complementary
support of the international community remains crucial
to guaranteeing the success of the transition programme
and bolstering stability in the country.

Today, as has been widely noted, there are three
types of challenges facing Guinea-Bissau: political,
security-related, and social and economic.

On the political front, recent political developments
indicate that there is an ongoing struggle to achieve a
consensus among the main political parties regarding
the institutions that should undergird the transition, in
particular concerning the role of the People's National
Assembly in coordinating the process.

There are also tensions between the Transitional
Government and the People's National Assembly
concerning the conduct of State affairs, as well as a
low-key campaign by some political parties aimed at
prolonging the political transition beyond 31 December
2013, which is the date widely agreed to.

Along those lines, I would recall that the decision
on the transition date was taken by the Authority of
Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS at their
summit held in Yamoussoukro, Cote d'Ivoire, on 27 and
28 February 2013, following consultations with all
national stakeholders and a painstaking analysis of the
progress made in the implementation of the road map.

At the summit, it was also decided that, should
there be an impasse in Parliament, the President of
the Transitional Government, His Excellency Serifo
Nhamadjo, would have to propose a new road map for
adoption by Parliament. Thus the Transitional President
was firm and unwavering with respect to the drawing
up of a revised transition road map.

For its part, the Electoral Commission is
determined to make rapid progress in its work, in
particular with respect to plans relating to biometric
voter registration, the demarcation of constituencies
and other pre-electoral activities.

In general, there seems to be a consensus on the
need in the short term to accord priority to the holding
of elections and not to begin any far-reaching reforms
until after the elections.

In spite of the uncertainty that prevails as to
whether Parliament will approve the political transition
pact, there is nevertheless hope that consensus will be
reached between the parties on the adoption of the road
map and the implementation of the various objectives
of the transition programme. That is why it is important
for the international community to recognize and
support the transition road map so as to induce local
stakeholders to ensure that the road map is adopted and
implemented fully.

The ECOWAS member States remain determined
to cooperate with local and international stakeholders
in creating conditions conducive to the holding of free,
fair and peaceful elections in December 2013.

In the area of security, Guinea-Bissau has seen
relative calm since the deployment of ECOMIB, in
2012, and concerns of possible resurgence of violence
within the army proved unfounded. However, I would
note two major incidents, which are also mentioned in
the report of the Secretary-General. First, there was
the arrest by the United States judicial system of the
former Navy Chief of Staff, Rear Admiral Bubo Na
Tchuto, for alleged drug trafficking. Secondly, there
was the indictment by the American authorities of the
current Chief of General Staff of the armed forces,
General Antonio Indjai, for alleged participation in
drug trafficking.

Those two events heightened tensions in the
country. The situation was further exacerbated given
the disagreement on the matter ofpromotions within the
army, amid rumors of conspiracy and destabilization,
which led to the military authorities taking stock of the
situation on 20 April 2013 and subsequently making a
commitment once again to cooperating in the combat
against drug trafficking. Here I would reiterate the
commitment of the States members of ECOWAS to
supporting the international community in the fight
against drug trafficking and to ensuring that the
perpetrators of such crimes are punished.
However, at the same time ECOWAS remains
committed to security-sector and defence reform, as
these are complementary to the transition process. We
support any effort aimed at addressing the root and
structural causes of the crisis, in particular lack of
discipline and impunity within the armed forces.

On the socio-economic front, while there have
been minor improvements in the social and economic
fabric of Guinea-Bissau since the consolidation of
the transitional authority in late 2012, the situation
nevertheless requires urgent action by the international
community, in particular to support economic sectors,
including fishing and cashew cultivation, as well as
social sectors, including education, health-care services
and infrastructure.

The economic and social crisis in Guinea-Bissau
has been exacerbated by the country's isolation by the
international community. The sanctions inflicted the
greatest suffering on those who are poor and without
a voice. It is therefore important that the sanctions
be lifted and that the Security Council encourage
international development agencies to relaunch their
respective programmes in cooperation with Guinea-
Bissau.

I would note also that in addition to their support
for the democratic transition and security in Guinea-
Bissau, the ECOWAS member States will continue
to coordinate, along with the rest of the international
community, within existing frameworks, to support
the protection and upholding of the human rights of the
country's citizens.

ECOWAS is also committed to maintaining its
support for close cooperation between the Transitional
Government and the People's National Assembly with
a View to the adoption and implementation of the
transitional road map and to guaranteeing the provision
of financial and technical support for the National
Electoral Commission. ECOWAS therefore believes
that recent developments in Guinea-Bissau require
us more than ever to collectively forge international
consensus and thereby demonstrate our shared desire
to tackle the situation by helping Guinea-Bissau work
with all relevant stakeholders to guarantee the holding
of free, fair and transparent elections by December, as
required by the international community.

In conclusion, in the light of the aforementioned
considerations, ECOWAS would propose the following
points as a basis for garnering consensus that guarantees
the inclusion of all stakeholders and ensures stability
and security in Guinea-Bissau.

First, as mentioned previously by Ambassador Da
Gama, the revised transitional road map should, we
hope, be adopted in the coming days. The road map
allows for the holding of legislative and presidential
elections before 31 December. It is understood that,
should no solution be put forward by the National
Assembly, ECOWAS reserves the right to explore all
other options available to ensure the holding of the
elections in the allotted time.

Secondly, the military must put an end to all
residual interference in the transition process and
commit to fully cooperating in the fight against drug
trafficking and impunity.

Thirdly, the international community should draft
an international plan of action for the medium and long
terms for the purpose of assisting Guinea-Bissau in
addressing the root causes of instability, as identified
in the findings of the joint assessment mission of
December 2012, including the full restructuring of
the defence, security and justice sectors, measures to
end impunity, and far-reaching reform of the political,
financial and economic sectors.

Fourthly, the partners must agree on arrangements
to make the transition process completely inclusive and
widely recognized.

Fifthly and finally, the international community
needs to agree on arrangements for extending
emergency aid to achieve the immediate objectives
of the transitional road map, including, naturally, the
holding of elections before the end of the year and,
primarily, assistance to further relieve the suffering of
the most vulnerable by means of improved targeted aid
and quick-impact projects to generate income.

ECOWAS stands ready, as always, to cooperate
with all partners in carrying out the aforementioned
objectives in order to transform Guinea-Bissau into a
responsible member of the international community. To
that end, ECOWAS calls on all interested stakeholders
to deal with the matter of Guinea-Bissau with
impartiality and openness, and invites them to put the
interests of the country above all political or individual
considerations so as garner true consensus with respect
to the way forward.

