Mr. Moragas Senchez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to start by congratulating and thanking the
Polish presidency of the Security Council for having
recalled the special responsibility of the Security
Council in reaffirming the importance of international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians. I wish
also to thank Yves Daccord and Ms. Hanaa Edwar for
their statements.

Spain aligns itselfwith the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union on behalf of its 28
member States, and by Qatar on behalf of the Group of
Friends on the Responsibility to Protect.

Spain attaches the highest importance to the
protection of civilians in its work at the United
Nations. Violations of international humanitarian
law, access-related problems, combating sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict, the protection of
children, the situation of detainees and the need for
accountability are some of the issues to which we pay
the greatest attention.

Today I would like to devote my statement to attacks
against medical personnel and facilities as well as those
that target schools and other educational institutions. In
both cases they affect two pillars of any society: health
and education.

A little more than two years ago, five non-permanent
members of the Security Council came together with
one objective: to put an end to attacks against the
sick and the wounded, medical personnel providing
assistance to them and medical facilities in armed
conflict. As we have reiterated on other occasions, my
country is satisfied with the unique nature of resolution
2286 (2016) because of its scope, the role it grants to
civil society and the procedure followed in its drafting
and negotiation. The fact that it was sponsored by 84
Member States also reflects the high degree of support
for its objectives.

However, two years after its adoption, we cannot be
equally satisfied with the degree of compliance with the
resolution. I believe, however, that more and more of us
are raising our voices when an attack occurs to demand
that a prompt, impartial and exhaustive investigation
be carried out, as stated in the recommendations of
the Secretary-General issued a few months after the
adoption of the resolution.

On April 24 and 25, Spain organized the first
annual retreat on international humanitarian law for
the members of the Security Council in order to create
a forum in which the various areas of action of this
normative body could be debated. This year's retreat
was devoted to the protection of medical assistance
in conflict. The goal was for the various options for
enhancing respect for international humanitarian law
and resolution 2286 (2016), which I mentioned earlier,
to be debated among representatives of humanitarian
organizations, academia and the United Nations system.

During the debate, it became clear that in order
to achieve long-term results, a firm commitment on
the part of all States Members of the United Nations
was necessary. This translates into possible revisions
of our national laws and military doctrines, as well as
the inclusion of the protection of medical assistance in
conflict in our bilateral contacts. The road map already
exists, with the Health Care in Danger initiative of
the International Committee of the Red Cross. In
addition, my country is prepared to recall during its
contacts the potential of existing non-judicial fact-
finding mechanisms, in particular the International
Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission.

We wonder, however, what more we can do from

a multilateral perspective. International humanitarian
law and resolution 2286 (2016) make it clear that
certain behaviours are prohibited, but we cannot ignore
the fact that these norms are not being complied with.
We wonder also how we can generate the political
will necessary to achieve a behavioural change in the
various parties to a conflict, and how we can increase
the political or reputational cost to those responsible
for these attacks. We wonder also if the United Nations
should not take on a more prominent role in those cases
in which none of the existing fact-finding systems can
be activated, now that we have initiatives such as the
World Health Organization's Surveillance System of
Attacks on Health Care.

Spain wishes to explore, together with the other
four co-penholders of resolution 2286 (2016), which
options could allow for a greater degree of compliance.
We believe that the General Assembly can play a role
in this respect.

Spain's concern also extends specifically to the
protection of education in armed conflict. As in the
health sector, it is not only the present but also the
future of any society that is at stake. Today, on the third
anniversary of the Safe Schools Declaration, we know
that attacks against students, schools and universities
and their staff have increased in recent years.

We in Spain have just announced our intention to
host the third Safe Schools Conference, in 2019. We
will work to ensure that the Declaration is endorsed by
more Member States, and that, with the help of all, it is
made more operational.

I would conclude by stating that the protection of
civilians is not about positioning oneself on the side of
one or the other; it is about being on the side of civilians,
who need medical assistance, education and, more
generally, protection. Let us translate our words into
concrete action. We cannot afford the cost of inaction.

