Mr. Shawabkah (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): The
Council's meeting comes at a time when American
efforts are intensifying and are coupled with an
international undertaking to find an environment
conducive to the success of direct negotiations between
the Israelis and the Palestinians. Those negotiations are
conducted with a view to reaching a two-State solution
establishing an independent Palestinian State based on
the lines of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, to live in peace and security in a stable and
secure region, side by side with all States and peoples
of the region, including Israel.

Jordan supports those efforts and calls on Israel to
respond to them so that direct negotiations can be
resumed and lead to a positive outcome that addresses
all final status issues, including Jerusalem, refugees,

security and borders. The parties must demonstrate
their seriousness by adhering to peace. That requires
halting all unilateral Israeli measures in the occupied
West Bank - at the heart of which is East Jerusalem -
including construction inside settlements, forced
evacuation and deportation, confiscation of land and
property, and policies of demolition of Christian and
Muslim Palestinian homes and eviction of their
occupants. It also includes all forms of archaeological
excavations and digging tunnels under and around holy
Christian and Muslim sites.

Beyond their illegality and unlawfulness, such
measures violate the rules of international law and
international humanitarian law. With them Israel is
blatantly flouting its obligations as the occupying
Power while impeding United States and international
efforts.

Jordan welcomes the statement by United States
President Barack Obama during the General
Assembly's general debate last month (see A/65/PV.11)
on the importance of achieving a two-State solution
and the strenuous efforts to bring about successful
negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis.

The crux of the Arab-Israeli conflict is the
question of Palestine; no solution to the conflict can be
effected without settling it via a two-State solution.
The achievement of that solution and of a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, in conformity
with international legitimacy and the Arab Peace
Initiative, is of vital interest to, and enjoys the support
of, the entire world, not merely the States and peoples
of our region.

The Arab Peace Initiative, adopted in Beirut in
2002 and reaffirmed time and again at subsequent Arab
summits, most recently at the Sirte summit in Libya
this month, reveals the collective Arab and Islamic
commitment to an equal, comprehensive, permanent
and just peace. Unfortunately, that initiative has not
received from successive Israeli Governments a
response commensurate with its importance.

Here I would like to reiterate my country's view
of the gravity and enormity of the consequences and
dimensions of the absence of peace and stability in the
Middle East. When His Majesty King Abdullah 11 Bin
Al-Hussein always recalls the centrality of the
Palestine question and emphasizes its priority and
primacy over the other issues in the region, we proceed
from the complete conviction that achieving a two-
State solution and a comprehensive peace is the only
way to effectively and harmoniously resolve the other
issues in the region, including manifestations of
bigotry, extremism, terrorism and violence.

Jordan regrets the Israeli Government's decision
not to extend the moratorium on settlement activities in
the occupied areas. That threatens to derail the whole
negotiating process, contrary to the wishes and
demands of the entire international community - to
whose will Israel pays no heed.

