Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs Jenca
and, through him, Special Coordinator Mladenov for
all of their work.

From the outset, I would like to make clear, as
we approach the centenary of the Balfour Declaration
next month, that the United Kingdom understands
and respects the sensitivities many have about the
Declaration and the events that have taken place in the
region since 1917. The United Kingdom is proud to have
played a role in helping to make a Jewish homeland a
reality, and we continue to support the principle of such
a homeland and the modern State of Israel.

Just as we fully support the modern State of
Israel as a Jewish homeland, we also fully support the
objective of a viable and sovereign Palestinian State.
The occupation is a continued impediment to securing
the political rights of the non-Jewish communities in
Palestine. Let us remember that there are two halves
to the Declaration - the second half of which has not
been fulfilled. There is therefore unfinished business.

With the approaching centenary, we believe that it
is important to look forward, not backward - forward
towards establishing security and justice for both
Israelis and Palestinians through a lasting peace. We
believe that the way to achieve that lasting peace is
through a negotiated two-State solution that leads to
a safe and secure Israel living alongside a viable and
sovereign Palestinian State, based on 1967 borders with
agreed land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital
of both States and a just, fair, agreed and realistic
settlement for refugees.

We continue to watch developments on
intra-Palestinian reconciliation closely. Our long-
standing policy on reconciliation is that we support
the Palestinian people in realizing self-determination
through an independent, sovereign and unified
Palestinian State encompassing the West Bank
and Gaza.

We continue to closely monitor the situation in Gaza
and we welcome Egyptian efforts on this important
issue. We also join the Secretary-General in welcoming
the Palestinian Authority's return to Gaza on 2 October
and the agreement to allow the Palestinian Authority to
resume administrative control. That is an important and
positive step towards the full restoration of Palestinian
Authority control and effective governance in Gaza.

We encourage those involved in the talks to engage
in good faith so as to allow the Palestinian Authority
to fully resume its Government functions and ensure
compliance with the Quartet principles. Our policy on
Hamas remains clear - Hamas must renounce violence,
recognize Israel and accept previous agreements. We
expect now to see credible movement towards those
conditions, which remain the benchmark against which
its intentions should be judged. We call on those in the
region with influence over Hamas to encourage it to
take these steps.

In support of the two-State solution, we must
continue to press the parties on the need to refrain
from actions that make peace efforts more difficult.
We are clear that the repellent phenomena of terrorism
and incitement pose a grave threat to the two-State
solution and must end. We strongly condemn the use
of racist, hateful and anti-Semitic language. It is right
that we continue to urge against any type of action
and language that makes it more difficult to achieve a
culture of peaceful coexistence.

Settlement construction is a significant barrier
to achieving the negotiated agreement we seek and
seriously threatens the physical viability of the two-
State solution. We have witnessed an unacceptable
acceleration of settlements activity throughout 2017,
both in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. To date,
Israel has advanced plans over 13,000 settlement
units - the highest number since 1992. Reports also
indicate that a significant number of units may be
advanced this week, and new settlement construction
permits were approved in Hebron for the first time in
15 years. We condemn each of those illegal acts in the
strongest terms.

Moving briefly to Iran, as we have heard, President
Trump has taken the decision not to recertify Iran's
compliance with the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) to Congress. The United Kingdom stands
committed to the JCPOA and its full implementation
by all sides. We believe that preserving the JCPOA is
in our shared national security interest. The nuclear
deal was the culmination of 13 years of diplomacy, and
was a major step towards ensuring that Iran's nuclear
programme is not diverted for military purposes. The
JCPOA was unanimously endorsed by the Council in
resolution 2231 (2015).

The International Atomic Energy Agency has
repeatedly confirmed Iran's compliance with the
JCPOA through its long-term verification and
monitoring programme. Therefore, we encourage
careful consideration of the implications to the security
ofthe United States and its allies before taking any steps
that might undermine the JCPOA, such as reimposing
sanctions on Iran that were lifted under the agreement.
As we work to preserve the JCPOA, we share
concerns about Iran's ballistic missile programme
and regional activities that also affect our security
interests. We stand ready to take further appropriate
measures to address these issues in close cooperation
with the United States and all relevant partners. We
also look to Iran to engage in constructive dialogue to
stop destabilizing actions and work towards negotiated
solutions. We believe that approach entails the best path
to regional security.

