Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Allow me to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for
his briefing and his seventh report on measures to
investigate the situation in Darfur in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005). We commend the efforts of the
Office of the Prosecutor to strictly abide by its
mandate, to assess events in that Sudanese province
from an exclusively a legal standpoint, and to
independently and impartially carry out its functions to
establish the truth.

The fight against impunity is important.
However, in our view, it must be carried out in direct
linkage with the overall efforts to restore peace in the
Sudan.

Carefully weighed and prudent action is called
for if we are to avoid further complications on the path
towards a settlement in Darfur. In each individual case,
the right balance must be struck between the
requirements of personal responsibility and the
interests of the peace process. In our view, that is not
an easy task, but it is possible.

The Russian Federation deeply regrets and is
concerned by the information contained in the report of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court with
respect to ongoing violence in Darfur. We anticipate
that the outcome of the current Security Council
mission to countries in Africa, including the Sudan,
will give us a more detailed picture of events there. A
great deal has been said today about problems in
establishing cooperation between the Court and the
Government of the Sudan, which leads us to conclude
that there are several reasons underlying the current
situation. Instead of increasing unilateral pressure on
the Sudanese authorities at this politically sensitive
phase, we might perhaps do better to focus our efforts
on measures to restore mutual trust and establish
dialogue.

The principle of objectivity calls for a
comprehensive assessment of the actions of all parties
to the conflict. In that regard, we listened most
carefully to the information provided on the steps taken
by the investigation to clarify the circumstances of the
attack on African Union peacekeepers in Haskanita. We
note that the attack was only one among several
episodes that have threatened the lives of those who are
on a noble mission in the region. There must be a full-
fledged investigation into all such incidents. The initial
steps taken by the Office of the Prosecutor in that
respect clearly deserve support. At the same time, we
are of the view that the bulk of the effort lies ahead.

