Mr. Fonseca (Brazil)(sp0ke in Spanish): First of all,
I would like to express my appreciation to Under-Secretary-
General Miyet for the briefing he presented to us and to
Ambassador Holbrooke for the report on his visit to Africa.

As previous speakers have done, I would like to refer
to the dialogue that took place yesterday involving the
representative of South Africa and Ambassador Holbrooke.
I come out of a somewhat more dialectical tradition than
does Ambassador Peter van Walsum, so I believe that in
certain political situations, when two sides are presenting
contradictory arguments both can be right.

I believe that this is the case. I agree with Ambassador
Andjaba that no one could make a firmer, more forceful
and more eloquent presentation than the African call made
yesterday by Ambassador Kumalo for a more significant
United Nations presence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

I also think that what we want to specify here is that
the call so eloquently presented is not an artificial one, it is
not artificially contrived. We could imagine that the Lusaka
Agreement could have done without the United Nations
presence, because there are peace agreements in other parts
of the world in which the United Nations do not have a
role. If the call was so strong and clear, I believe that
those who signed the Agreement were clearly aware that
if the United Nations were absent from the Agreement,
the Agreement would be more difficult to fulfil.

Therefore, the argument that can be made - and I
believe previous speakers have made it - is that if a
United Nations peacekeeping force had been put in place
immediately after the signing of the Agreements, given all
the difficulties and imperfections, as Ambassador Andj aba
pointed out, perhaps today we would have a slightly
different situation, because the presence of that force
could have had a deterrent effect, and the violations of
the Agreement might not have happened.

This kind of argument, which is called
"contrafactual", is very useful in academic theses, but for
resolving political problems, it is of somewhat limited
value. At any rate, we should pay close attention to this
element. This is not an artificial call. I believe, as my
African colleagues have underscored, that the call is
necessary in order for the accord to have the appropriate
results - not merely to interrupt the crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but to have an impact
on the whole region.

I think that Ambassador Holbrooke's argument is
valid. We must deal with the problem of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with all necessary realism. Were
the United Nations to fail in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the consequences would go far beyond that
country itself. The very authority of the Security Council
would be adversely affected; therefore, I believe the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is an important test for
the United Nations. This is very clear, and there is no
need to elaborate on it.

How do we reconcile two contradictory positions,
both of which are right? It is not easy. I believe that my
colleagues, especially my African colleagues, presented
very clearly the need for the Security Council to act very,
very swiftly. Ambassador Dejammet has drawn our
attention to the need for a concept of operations to be
developed in a very precise and clear-cut way. I believe
that would be essential, with the support of other factors
that been pointed out, such as the appointment of the ex-
President of Botswana to facilitate the dialogue. All these
are positive elements that we must certainly take into
account in seeking a solution of the problem.

I wish to conclude by saying that it is obvious that
in this operation, we will have to have prudence and a

 

sense of realism. I would simply like to say that we should
not forget an adjective that was used over and over again
in the discussions when we began to try to tackle the
problem of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and that
is the adjective "robust". The strength of peacekeeping
operations would have to be "robust", and I believe if we
analyze all the consequences of that adjective and add "sent
urgently", we could begin to solve the problem.

