The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.

At the outset, I would like to express my thanks to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
her statement and for her excellent work on the ground
in Haiti. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
August report (S/2015/667).

I would also like to add my voice to the condolences
expressed by a number of colleagues on the sad passing
of our Force Commander in Haiti; in that connection I
send my heartfelt sympathy to the delegation of Brazil.

I will, of course, align myself with the statement to
be delivered later in this meeting by the observer of the
European Union.

It is obvious that Haiti faces a great challenge.
For only the third time since 1989, a transition will
take place following presidential elections, which we
all trust will be entirely peaceful. Spain supports that
process from a threefold perspective.

First, with respect to the electoral process itself,
we are participating in the mission of the Organization
of American States with four observers, as well as
with financial resources. Our second level of support
concerns the political realm, through our active
participation in the Group of Friends of Haiti, as well
as through the Friends of the Economic and Social
Council, and of course by promoting the important
missions of the Club de Madrid, which have received
financial support from the European Union, whose aim
is to further dialogue. The third important arm of our
support for Haiti is through Spain's official development
assistance. Spain has provided €255 million, or nearly
$300 million, in total official development assistance to
Haiti for reconstruction since the earthquake, and Haiti
remains a priority country for Spanish cooperation,
which has allocated €159 million, most of which has
already been released, for the period 2015-2017. That
means that Spain has maintained, and will maintain,
its commitment to Haiti, which remains the leading
recipient of Spain's official development assistance in
the world.

With respect to the 9 August elections, they were
indeed more peaceful than previous iterations, as the
British representative has indicated, but it is no less
true that there were incidents of violence in 13 per
cent of the polling places. I would like to believe that,
without the presence of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), there would have been
more such incidents. For that reason, Spain believes
that MINUSTAH's continued presence in the country
is, and will remain, absolutely fundamental for the
establishment of the new Administration and for
ensuring a peaceful transition.

Spain therefore supports the renewal of
MINUSTAH's mandate for another year and, as the
Secretary-General recommends, the retention of the
number of authorized personnel that we deem essential
to enable the Mission to fulfil its mandate. Spain
also fully supports the deployment of the evaluation
mission that the Secretary-General proposes in his
report in order to assess the role and presence of
the United Nations in Haiti once MINUSTAH has
fulfilled its mission. Spain agrees on the importance
of that evaluation being shared with the new Haitian
Government in order to ensure the successful transition
to a post-conciliation phase. For that reason, it makes
sense for the evaluation mission to be deployed once
the new Government has been constituted and after
the new Government, with MINUSTAH's support, has
ushered in a period of stability,

Spain has always maintained in its statements to the
Council that decisions respecting MINUSTAH should
be taken with flexibility. Stability will not be guaranteed
with the last round of elections on 27 December. We
need to give the country more time in order for Haiti's
political, economic and social stability to become fully
established. Haiti is entering a crucial year. It is will
be vital for the Security Council to closely follow the
evolution in Haiti, and Spain will likely propose that
the Council, in due time, hold consultations to closely
examine the results of the evaluation mission that will
travel to Haiti early next year to define the fundamental
parameters ofthe final phase ofMINUSTAH's mandate.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor the representative of Haiti.

