We would like to thank the Russian Federation, in its capacity as President of the Security Council this month, for convening today's open debate on the twenty-fifth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), which established the women and peace and security agenda, to which Peru attaches great importance. Likewise, we would also like to thank the very valuable briefings made by the Secretary- General, the Under-Secretary-General and Executive Director of UN-Women, the United Nations Goodwill Ambassador for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, the Adviser on Sexual and Gender-based Violence for the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei and the Head of the Women and Children Legal Research Foundation. In particular, we welcome and celebrate this important anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), as it marks an important milestone for the Council and recognizes women as actors relevant to the building of international peace and security. It is also special because it coincides with the anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, which constitutes a central element in the rights of women and girls, recognizing the fundamental role of women in our societies and developing an action programme in favour of the empowerment of women and gender equality, while also envisaging a world in which women can fully exercise their freedoms and rights. For Peru, the agenda of gender equality and the empowerment of women is crucial, which is why in recent years we have made great efforts to improve the enjoyment and exercise of the rights of all women, adolescents and girls. Within this framework, Peru is committed to the women and peace and security agenda, which includes the empowerment of women and the achievement of gender equality, in order, inter alia, to achieve the complete and effective participation of women in various decision-making institutions and processes at all levels within our societies, including those related to international peace and security. This commitment was expressed in the work we carried out during our recent membership in the Security Council, in particular within the informal group of experts on women and peace and security, which Peru had the honour to co-chair with Germany. We also wish to emphasize the support we give to multilateralism and the rule of law as essential components of a strong international community. It is undeniable that incorporating women and their perspectives in peace- oriented processes is important to ensuring sustainable peace. However, despite this understanding, evidence shows that we must redouble our efforts aimed at having the necessary levels of effective, full, equal and meaningful women's participation in them, considering women's double dimension in this regard: on the one hand, they are active agents of peace and, on the other, they are beneficiaries of peace. If we want to accelerate the achievement of sustainable peace and security, we must ensure the participation of all relevant actors, including women. However, their involvement alone is not enough; their participation must be meaningful, on equal terms and situated at all levels of decision-making. We welcome the progress made so far, but we must continue to make progress and consolidate the true role of women, with a view to achieving gender equality and their full empowerment. Furthermore, we see that the diversity of women is still not properly recognized. Women are not a single, homogeneous group. Therefore, their diversity, uniqueness and particular needs must be recognized and taken into account. This will have a strong positive impact on the advancement of the women and peace and security agenda. The important role that women play in all areas of our societies 1s paramount. The coronavirus disease pandemic has shown this, with women representing 70 per cent of all health and social workers on the front lines of the pandemic. Nevertheless, inequalities and gaps remain evident. Accordingly, the inclusion of women in decision-making processes is quite relevant, since it helps to make their needs and points of view more visible, thereby contributing to the elimination of stereotypes about women's roles. Evidence shows that greater participation by women in decision- making processes results in a diminished likelihood of conflict. In this regard, we cannot fail to mention sexual and gender-based violence, which is a serious problem that we as an international community must address and resolve in order to achieve a safer world and more inclusive and sustainable societies, not only for the benefit of women and girls but for all of humankind. It is on the basis of what I have said here that Peru guides its actions and promotes the participation of women. We would like to emphasize that our country is the fifth-largest contributor of troops to United Nations peace operations in terms of the percentage of female personnel in such operations and that a significant number of them serve as officers at management level. In conclusion, we would like to express our recognition of the important work that the Secretary-General is doing in this area, as well as our firm commitment to continuing to work with the United Nations and its Member States in a proactive and constructive manner and to further advance this agenda in line with the need to build a sustainable and inclusive peace.
