Allow me to first express my gratitude for Germany's leadership in convening today's timely and relevant open video-teleconference of the Security Council on peace operations and human rights. The Republic of Korea offers its deep appreciation to Her Excellency Ms. Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, German Federal Minister of Defence, for presiding over the meeting today. My delegation also thanks Ms. Michelle Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan; and the civil society representative for their enlightening briefings. The coronavirus disease pandemic is having far-reaching implications that cut across all aspects of human life, undermining social cohesion, increasing the risks of instability and violence and subsequently affecting the operating context for peace operations. At the same time, however, it also serves as an opportunity to promote thorough discussions on the nexus between the two pillars: peace and security and human rights. Today, my delegation would like to emphasize the following three points with a view to enhancing the role of United Nations peace operations in the context of the protection of human rights. First, we believe that the effective implementation of mandates, including the protection of civilians grounded in the protection and promotion of human rights, is dependent on adequate resources, well-organized predeployment and in-mission training. This is the reason that the Government of the Republic of Korea has focused on training programmes to deploy well-prepared and appropriately equipped personnel in its units. For instance, it has designated a child protection adviser in its units to contribute to the delivery of protection-of-civilian mandates on the ground. Secondly, in the pandemic situation, we would like to highlight the importance of incorporating the latest technological developments into planning and monitoring operations to fully and effectively implement protection-of-civilian mandates. We also underscore the growing importance of access to technology in encouraging the further participation of more stakeholders. It is the key to ensuring people's engagement in the continuum of peace processes so that the needs of all segments of society are taken into account. Bearing in mind the double-edged characteristics of technology, we must maximize the positive aspects of new technology. In that regard, my Government welcomes the initiative taken by the Secretariat to establish a panel of experts on digital technology and United Nations peace operations. Thirdly, the meaningful participation of women at all levels of United Nations peacekeeping operations at Headquarters and in field missions not only is a final goal in itself but also benefits the operational effectiveness and mandate implementation of each mission. We also emphasize the need to prioritize the prevention of and response to sexual and gender-based violence as an important component of protection-of-civilian mandates. The Republic of Korea, for its part, will continue to deliver on the women and peace and security agenda to ensure that women's rights are incorporated into the relevant planning and implementation of peacekeeping operations. We will increase the representation of our female peacekeeping officers and observers to 25 per cent by the year 2028. The Republic of Korea will redouble its peacekeeping efforts, especially in the areas of training, capabilities and women. My delegation would like to reaffirm its commitment to working alongside the United Nations, as well as all Member States, in improving the effective implementation of mandates, including the protection of civilians grounded in the protection and promotion of human rights. In that connection, we look forward to developing this discussion at the 2021 Peacekeeping Ministerial, to be held in Seoul on 8 and 9 April.
