Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank Ethiopia for
its able leadership this month and for highlighting
the importance of aviation security. I also express
my appreciation to the Secretary General of the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
Ms. Fang Liu, and the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, Ambassador Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta,
for their informative briefings. I would especially
like to express my gratitude to Ms. Fang Liu for her
official visit to Kazakhstan last month. Her meetings
with officials of my country augur well for our close
collaboration in the future.

Kazakhstan is committed to aviation security
and protecting civil aviation facilities and critical
infrastructure for combating international terrorism
from terrorist attacks, in the light of the complex and
innovative methods used by terrorist organizations.
My country's relevant competent authorities have
intensified their interaction with the relevant regional
and international organizations and taken vigorous and
prompt measures to eliminate threats to international
flights, in accordance with resolution 2309 (2016),
which calls on Member States to take immediate
measures to eliminate any gaps or loopholes.

In 2016, the Executive Directorate of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTED) carried out an assessment
of Kazakhstan's implementation of the basic counter-
terrorism resolutions of the Security Council and found

them to be quite effective. The European Commission
also carried out a technical safety assessment in
Kazakhstan and confirmed that the country was
effectively implementing ICAO standards.

In addition, in accordance with the national
transport law of the Republic of Kazakhstan, our civil
aviation committee is considering the installation and
maintenance of an information system for collecting
and processing air passenger data. We are working to
introduce the Advance Passenger Information System
and carrying out a study of the capabilities of the
Interactive Advance Passenger Information System,
which is becoming the new standard. We are undertaking
that exercise with the assistance of experts from CTED,
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism. In the
near future, intend to ratify the Convention on the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts Relating to International
Civil Aviation.

Because the nature of attacks on civil aviation
infrastructure is constantly changing, Kazakhstan
believes that it is necessary to constantly review,
harmonize and consolidate legislation and actions with
neighbouring and regional countries that share constant
flow of air traffic. That applies to the international
sphere, as well.

We call for the development of an active exchange of
information between Member States and international
organizations on new methods and practices in the
field of aviation security. Special vigilance is called
for with regard to preventing direct attacks, smuggling
explosives onto aircraft, using drones to carry
lethal materials or vehicles laden with explosives,
the hijacking of planes and attacks with mortars of
short- and long-range anti-tank missiles. All of that
requires thorough screening, the creation of stand-off
security zones, clear operational roles between armed
forces, special security and the police and situational
crisis training of civilian populations. In order to help
countries fight those challenges, comply with norms
and establish uniform procedures, capacity-building
will be necessary by way of well-qualified personnel,
training, equipment for detection and destruction and
early warning.

In conclusion, we reaffirm Kazakhstan's
commitment to implementing effective measures to
counter and mitigate terrorist attacks against civil
aviation by strengthening partner relations and applying
the norms and standards established by ICAO.

