Mr. Brou (spoke in French): On behalf of the
institutions of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), I would like at the
beginning of my briefing to express my condolences to
the Government and the people of the United States on
the occasion of the passing of Mr. George H. W. Bush,
forty-first President of the United States of America.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to participate in this important meeting,
which is in line with the high-level meeting presided
over yesterday by His Excellency Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, President of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire,
whose theme was post-conflict reconstruction and
peace, security and stability (see S/PV.8413). All of
yesterday's statements provided ample evidence of
the reciprocal causality between sustainable economic
development and peace and security. Today's theme
gives us the opportunity to deepen our reflections on
the international community's efforts to promote peace
and security. I would like to make three observations
that summarize the action of ECOWAS on this key
issue.

The first concerns the ECOWAS internal mechanism
for peace and stability in the region. The civil wars in the
region, particularly those in Liberia and Sierra Leone,
and their consequences - destabilizing for security and
devastating for the economic and social development

of these countries - led in particular to the adoption
of the ECOWAS Revised Treaty in 1993. Through this
revision, the regional peace and security agenda was
added to the Community's original agenda, namely,
regional economic integration and development, with
the overall objective of creating a peaceful and secure
environment conducive to regional integration and
economic development in the region. ECOWAS has
adopted two major instruments enabling it to intervene
at any time in crisis prevention, management and
resolution, as well as to undertake peacekeeping and
post-conflict reconstruction: the Protocol relating to
the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management,
Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security, adopted in
1999, and the Supplementary Protocol on Democracy
and Good Governance, adopted in 2001. These two
instruments provide the legal framework for and give
legitimacy to ECOWAS interventions.

These actions are carried out, on the one hand,
at the level of crisis prevention, to prevent tensions
and perceptible disputes from escalating and turning
into conflicts. In this way, we avoid the dramatic
consequences of conflicts while avoiding the cost of
a hypothetical intervention. Preventive actions and
preventive diplomacy have been conducted in almost
all States at the precise moment when a crisis emerges.
They are less visible but have helped to reduce tensions
and avoid the emergence of difficult situations.

Preventive diplomacy actions are more frequent
during electoral processes, especially during
elections. They have been successfully deployed in the
presidential elections in Guinea, Nigeria and Ghana,
and more recently in Sierra Leone and Mali. In addition,
recently, preventive diplomacy actions were carried out
in Nigeria in anticipation of the upcoming elections.

Furthermore, to enhance the effectiveness of the
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, ECOWAS is
establishing an early-warning and response system,
based on the collection and analysis of a variety of
indicators in the political, social, economic, climate and
environmental fields. Based on a regional architecture,
this arrangement is being extended with the creation of
early-warning and response mechanisms at the national
level; these are already in place in five Member States.
The programme envisages a gradual extension to the
other countries of the region.

With respect to crisis management and resolution,
interventions are deployed when preventive diplomacy
actions have not achieved the expected results or have led
to open crises or when crises occur in an unpredictable
manner. These actions focus on facilitation or mediation
efforts between national political actors, and, in
extreme cases, involve the deployment of peacekeeping
missions. The recent history of ECOWAS is rich with
these missions. They include, for example, mediation
in the political crises in Togo and the Niger, in 2005
and 2009, respectively; multiple mediations in Guinea
Bissau, resulting in the deployment of the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea Bissau since 2012; the case of Cote
d'Ivoire, presented yesterday by His Excellency the
President of the Republic; mediation efforts in the post-
electoral crisis in the Gambia following the presidential
election ofDecember 2016, which led to the deployment
ofthe ECOWAS Mission in the Gambia (ECOMIG); and
the ongoing mediation in the political crisis in Togo.
The second observation that underlies our action
is the partnership in all the aforementioned areas
of intervention. Collaboration with all partners, in
particular the African Union and the United Nations,
is a constant feature of our action. We coordinate our
actions to ensure better visibility and efficiency. The
partnership is characterized by the following.

First, our partners, in particular the representative
of the African Union and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, participate in
all meetings of the ECOWAS Mediation and Security
Council at the ministerial level and the Meeting ofHeads
of State and Government, the main decision-making
bodies on issues of regional peace and security.

The second element is the political support of
the African Union and the United Nations for the
deployment of peace missions. Such support was
instrumental in defining the mandate of ECOMIG and
in its deployment, which required the authorization of
the Security Council;

Third is the conduct of joint missions with the
United Nations, particularly in Burkina Faso in 2014
during the political crisis and in Mali in 2012 following
the military coup d'etat, and preventive diplomacy, as
I have already mentioned, in Guinea, Nigeria, Ghana
and, more recently, Sierra Leone.

Lastly, as part of strengthening that cooperation,
on 23 April, ECOWAS signed a memorandum of
understanding with the United Nations, which
covers areas related to political dialogue, national
reconciliation, democratic governance and conflict
prevention and management, as well as human rights
and the rule of law.

The third observation relates to the implementation
of post-conflict reconstruction activities. The aim
of such work is to build peace through support so
as to prevent the resurgence of conflict, including
through institution-building, reconciliation and the
implementation of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) and security sector reform
programmes. In Guinea-Bissau, the security sector
reform programme was launched in 2013. In The
Gambia, for example, it involved supporting the
Government in drawing up and implementing a security
sector reform programme and capacity-building of
the National Assembly in its role of political control
over the defence and security forces. ECOWAS also
supports the Government in its efforts to improve the
management and security of weapons and ammunition
stockpiles.

Currently, there is close cooperation with the
United Nations and the African Union through the joint
missions deployed in various countries. More recently,
ECOWAS has embarked on programmes in other
areas, namely, providing basic goods and services to
disadvantaged groups, particularly women; supporting
resilience in the agricultural sector; and facilitating
reintegration through training and job-creation
programmes. Such activities are necessary to create the
conditions for sustainable peace.

In conclusion, ECOWAS remains strongly
committed to working with all its partners, in particular
the United Nations and the African Union, in order to
maintain and build peace and to ensure sustainable
development. I would like to end my remarks by
reiterating our sincere thanks for the opportunity of
this meeting.

