Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): 1 thank Under-Secretary-
General Stephen O'Brien for his briefing, which brought
into the Security Council the gruesome reality of the
besieged areas in Syria and the horrendous suffering of
the people there. That has prompted my delegation, and
me, to ask to take the floor in response.

Earlier this month we waited in anticipation as
access was granted by the Syrian authorities to the
United Nations to bring its humanitarian programme
to the 34 out of 35 besieged and hard-to-reach areas,
either partially or in full. We had high hope that it was
a positive development building on the breakthrough
following the 1 June deadline by the International Syria
Support Group, and that it would lead to more sustained
access to all besieged and hard-to-reach areas. The
promising outlook we had at the beginning of the month
quickly diminished, however, with the disturbing news
that about 300,000 people in eastern Aleppo had been
cut off from humanitarian assistance, thereby triggering
death and a constant struggle against starvation.

The closure of the Castello road more than a week
ago effectively blocked civilian and humanitarian
movement, and it is deeply worrying that trapped
civilians are being subject to heavy shelling, as violence
in Aleppo escalated. Much to our horror, civilian
casualties and fatalities are increasing, and hospitals
and other medical facilities continue to be targeted
and destroyed. Indiscriminate attacks and air strikes
in Aleppo resulted, inter alia, in the death of almost
100 civilians in bombings last Tuesday. We welcome a
commitment to investigating that unfortunate incident.

While we know the importance of the fight against
terrorist groups in Syria, such attacks must not be at
the expense of civilians. A humanitarian pause at this
critical juncture should be given serious consideration.
The revolting beheading of a 12-year-old Palestinian
boy in Aleppo last week, allegedly perpetrated by a
member of the moderate opposition, highlights the
plight of children in Aleppo. In addition to more than
200,000 children killed in Menbij last week, the United
Nations Children's Fund has reported that a further
235,000 are trapped in the area. Priority must be given
to allowing civilians, especially children, to flee to
safety from their homes. The unspeakable crimes
committed against them must end.

The Council only recently welcomed the Iraqi
Government's approach, which consisted of applying
a pause in the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant in Fallujah to facilitate the safe passage
of civilians, protected from mortars and missiles. The
same standard must be applied to Aleppo. We must
hasten the political process, abandon these sieges and
end this carnage. Delays would only cause more deaths
and bring the dehumanizing level of suffering to a
new low.

