Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to thank you, Sir, for convening this debate. I also
thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing this morning.

The problem of the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question, remains a matter of great
importance to the Arab countries and to the international
community as a whole. At the same time, the issue has
seen no progress despite all the efforts undertaken on
all fronts and all levels. A comprehensive settlement of
the Middle East issue, and in particular the Palestinian
question, calls for concerted international efforts to
guarantee the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people and to ensure justice and right.

At the summit of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), held in Mecca on 25 August, the
King of Bahrain reiterated the importance of the matter
and the fact that we need to work in earnest to bring
about a just, comprehensive and lasting solution to the
issue, resulting in an independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on the Arab
Peace Initiative, the decisions ofthe Quartet and United
Nations resolutions. Moreover, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs reiterated before the General Assembly (see A/67/PV.14) the principled position of Bahrain that it
has put forward in all bodies and forums.

The Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates the need to
ensure the implementation of the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly that call
for the lifting of the ongoing illegal blockade of Gaza.
We urge the international community to assume its
responsibilities and to work immediately to bring an
end to the blockade.

The Middle East question will be resolved only
if Israel withdraws from the Palestinian and Arab
territories that it has occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan and all occupied
Lebanese territories, in accordance with relevant
Security Council resolutions.

AnindependentPalestinian State mustbe established
on the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as the capital. It is important to achieve ajust
solution on the repatriation of Palestinian refugees,
based on General Assembly resolution 194 (III). In
addition, we call for reactivating the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly that call
for an end to all Israeli violations and aggression. We
must also ensure compliance with the Fourth Geneva
Convention in the occupied territories.

Lastly, the two-State solution is the only possible
lasting option and the Arab Peace Initiative is a key
foundation of that option and solution.

I greatly fear that the current stalemate in the peace
process is due to Israeli policies, which have undermined
all Arab and international efforts to achieve peace. We
call upon the Security Council and other mechanisms,
such as the Quartet, to spare no effort in seeking an
end to the stalemate, for the benefit of the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples alike and in the service of regional
and international peace and security.

