Ms. Citaku: I will be very considerate of the
Council's time, but some of the issues raised by my
colleague from Serbia deserve a response.

In fact, most of his statement, if it were not so
troubling, given that it was delivered here in the Security
Council, would have been amusing and entertaining.
Accusing the international community, the leaders of the
free world and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
of being involved in Kosovo for their own interests and
our resources is insulting. Actually, Kosovo is a clear
example of the world coming together to defend human
dignity, human life and humanitarian values.

For those who do not know, Kosovo is the size of
Connecticut; it is a small country. By the way, we had
borders long before we had our statehood. We are not
actually very rich in natural resources. Our biggest
resource is human resources - people. We have a
young population, 70 per cent of whom are under 30.
This human potential, which was liberated and enabled
to live in freedom, is the only benefit and pleasure that
the international community has gained. Sincerely,
I am shocked and offended. I hope that my colleague
from Serbia will reflect on these statements.

Secondly, the war in Kosovo did not happen 500
years ago or 70 years ago; it is a recent war. It happened
in 1998 and 1999 before the eyes ofthe world, under the
eyes of those in this Chamber, and journalists from the
United States to Russia to China to Japan. Everybody
was there and the images are real. Interpretations can
change and be different, but facts cannot change. Facts
are real.

I am sorry that my colleague is losing patience.
I listened to him, and ask him to listen to me. Ijust
hope that one day we will come to the Chamber and
hear an apology and signs of remorse from Serbia,
because ultimately that is in Serbia's interest as well.
Can anyone imagine Germany, after the Second World
War, accusing Allied forces of intervening to save
Europe? I really hope that Serbia will reflect because,
as I said, that is the only way the region will be able to
move forward.

Unfortunately, our legislation and Constitution
make it very clear against whom we can open
investigations and indictments. We cannot indict
people in absentia - when they are not physically
present in Kosovo - and the fact is that most of the
people who committed war crimes have left Kosovo.
As far as Mr. Ivanovic' is concerned, he was indicted
and has been brought to trial by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). The Kosovo
Government supports the role of EULEX, and we look
forward to a time when all these trials are far behind us.

I apologize for taking more of the Council's time.
I really felt offended and I know some others here did
as well.

The meeting rose at 6.30pm.
