Mr. Henze (Germany): As this is the first time this
month we have spoken in this Chamber, I, too, should like,
on behalf of my delegation, to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of December. Your skills, your eloquence
and your ability to persuade will certainly help us do our
work. My delegation pledges its full cooperation.

I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Al-Khussaiby for the dedicated and efficient
way in which he and his delegation conducted the Council's
work last month.

My delegation is one of the sponsors of the draft
resolution on which the Council will vote, by which the
peace-keeping assignment of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) has been extended for
three months, with a revised mandate. The revised mandate
reflects the progress made Within Rwanda towards stability
and security. The overriding requirement now is to assist
the Government of Rwanda in facilitating the safe and
voluntary return of refugees. The presence of 1.6 million
Rwandan refugees outside Rwanda's borders continues to
be a major burden for Rwanda and for the whole subregion.
Their voluntary and safe return will be an essential
contribution to national reconciliation within the country.
Their repatriation is also essential for improving the general
security situation in the Great Lakes region. My
Government is satisfied that, with this draft resolution,
UNAMIR continues to have a mandate which allows it, as
we hope, effectively to assist in this process. In this respect,

 

we welcome the declaration of the Heads of State of the
Great Lakes region made in Cairo on 29 November.

With the adoption of the present draft resolution, the
Security Council will furthermore decide upon the request
of the Government of Rwanda to withdraw UNAMIR
after 8 March. My Government would have preferred not
to decide now on the end of UNAMIR's mission, but, of
course, we respect the wish of the Rwandan Government.
We are certain that it will provide full cooperation to
UNAMIR while the Mission is still on the ground.

UNAMIR continues to provide protection for the
International Tribunal for Rwanda. The Government of
Rwanda, however, has insisted that it alone will now
provide protection for other international personnel. It is
no secret that we would have liked a mandate with a
longer term and a larger UNAMIR force. In the view of
my Government, international agencies and
non-governmental organizations on the ground will not be
able to carry out their important humanitarian and
reconstruction tasks unless their safety is ensured. That
will now be the task of the Government of Rwanda. It
will have to fully cooperate with them. My Government
is confident that Rwanda will fulfil this task. It intends to
continue its substantial assistance to Rwanda's
reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts on this basis.

I would like to conclude by paying a particular
tribute to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in Rwanda, to the Force Commander of
UNAMIR, and to all other UNAMIR personnel for their
dedicated work in this important United Nations Mission.

