The President: I will now add a few remarks in
my national capacity.

First of all, I would like to join others in thanking
Under-Secretary-General Holmes for his very lucid and
focused briefing, which was also very worrying.

The Emergency Relief Coordinator's briefings
are extremely useful - in fact, essential - for all of
us to have a better understanding of the situation on the
ground. These briefings are valued by all members as
necessary background input for the Council's
determinations.

As we have said so many times before, we need
an enhanced operational and results-based approach to
our action. While sitting in this Chamber, we must
never forget that what counts most at the end of the day
is whether or not we are able to deliver by bringing
increased relief to those who suffer, to the weak and
the marginalized.

On Sudan, I will not repeat what previous
speakers have already said about the gravity of the
situation. Nor will I take up more time, except to call,
along with other members, for the full implementation
of the moratorium and the Joint Communique. What
Mr. Holmes told us about the commitment of the
authorities is encouraging, notwithstanding the
different assessments and analyses of the causes.
Despite all efforts along the political and peacekeeping
tracks, the humanitarian situation does not show any
sign of improvement. This requires immediate action
by all and more cooperation on the part of the
Sudanese authorities.

As for the Somali region of Ethiopia, the Ogaden,
we appreciate the efforts of the United Nations and the
Government of Ethiopia to respond to that crisis. We
welcome the commitments made by the Ethiopian
Government in this regard - notwithstanding the
differences in the analyses, gravity and nature of the
problem. We hope for a substantial improvement of the
situation soon, and we look forward to receiving an
update at a time that the Secretariat deems appropriate.

On Somalia, I wish to repeat once more our
strong conviction that this is a test case for the
credibility of the United Nations. While listening to
Mr. Holmes, I was reminded of the debate that we had
recently in this very Chamber on the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
(S/2007/643). The recommendations for action
contained in that report were very precise and focused.
Let me try to apply those recommendations to the case
of Somalia, in particular the following actions:
ensuring the protection of civilians through clear
mandates for peacekeeping missions; ensuring access
by humanitarian personnel and their safety and
security; and combating sexual and gender-based
violence. I am sure that strong and substantial doubts
will arise as to whether those goals are being reached
in Somalia. As we said during consultations on
Somalia last month, we have to draw a more focused
operational conclusion from this situation. Based on
what previous speakers have said, I think it is clear that
we need to turn our attention to Somalia.

In this respect, I wish to bring up two or three
points mentioned by Mr. Holmes in his briefing. First
of all, we need to further step up our relief efforts. This
is clear, and we have to act. The fact that we are well
aware of the connection among all four different tracks -
political, security, humanitarian and human rights - as
well as the development track - should not prevent us
from doing something. It would merely be an excuse to
say "We can't act here, because this track depends on
all the others". However, as Mr. Holmes said, we must
step up our relief efforts. In his own words, "There is
no simple solution, certainly not a military one".

We also heard from Mr. Holmes that
peacekeeping forces need a peace to keep. On this
point, I think what the Secretariat means is that, when
there is no peace, there can be no peacekeepers. We
around this table understand that. We appreciate and
share what the Secretariat is telling us. But outside of
the United Nations the perception is otherwise. I
imagine that other members of the Council also have
contacts with civil society, non-governmental
organizations, and the media. What I am told is "If you
wait for peace, the United Nations will no longer be
necessary". So what is the perception that we have to
counteract? As many who have taken the floor before
me have said, we must make it clear that there can be

no selectivity or double standard - no more attention
being paid to one crisis and less to another. There is a
perception of the fading of full United Nations
engagement. I think we have to counteract the
perception that the United Nations engagement in
Somalia is fading, including in the security area. I
believe it was the representative of the United States
who said that we need very robust contingency
planning, so as to ensure the perception that outside
this House we are addressing the issue. I have in mind
yesterday's meeting and the initiative of the United
Kingdom, which I deeply appreciate.

This meeting between members and the
Secretariat has been very useful, and I think we have to
work in this direction, because, as Ambassador Holmes
said, "lack of high-level attention" - and I imagine
that what Ambassador Holmes meant was operational
attention -"is not an option for Somalia".

It is difficult, of course, because we have to
address two issues here. On the one hand, we must
have a greater impact on the ground; on the other, we
have to address the perception outside of this House,
because what is at stake is our credibility. This has
been said by other speakers, perhaps by Panama or
Peru. So, addressing this perception, as we know very
well, is a most difficult thing, because, inter alia, it can
change from one day to the next.

Thank you very much, Ambassador Holmes.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Ambassador Holmes to respond
to comments and assessments.

