Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
also wish to begin by welcoming in our midst the
Prime Minister of Somalia, Mr. Ali Khalif Galaydh,
and his participation in the discussion on the situation
in Somalia - in this open format, which is a very good
development.

We also wish to thank Mr. Stephen, the head of
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia, for his
presentation of the Secretary-General's report. Aside
from this week's consultations, the last time the
Security Council took up this issue in depth was in
August, when we received extensive information on the
humanitarian situation. On that occasion, an exhaustive
study was done and we were able to appreciate the
immense potential that a decisive involvement of
United Nations agencies had.

Now, we wish to present some general
considerations that might contribute to the discussion
on a well-defined and appropriate role for the Security
Council in Somalia's national reconciliation process.

We are convinced that Somalia poses a series of
challenges for the international community in the
political and humanitarian domains, in which the
United Nations system cannot completely avoid
involvement. We are completely convinced of this,
though aware that recent history and the conditions of
security prevalent in several areas of Somalia do not
favour the carrying-out of sustained multilateral
activities that could have substantial impact on the
ground.

However, we wish to affirm that it is precisely
this complex context in which we are acting that must
collectively motivate us on the Council to take
decisions contributing to the strengthening of the
efforts made by other regional and national actors,
keeping in mind that all of us desire the reconstruction,
the cohesion and the reconciliation of the country.

That is why Colombia considers that the
Secretariat and the Security Council must offer
sustained political support to the transitional
Government. This is the only visible and viable effort
on the national level, and if we do not offer the
Government the necessary support, we will find
ourselves in the same situation as before, but without a
legitimate interlocutor inside the country.

At the regional level, we appreciate the various
regional initiatives, and we believe that they must be
the centre of attention of any effort that is taken from
New York. We do not conceive the Council as a
substitute for regional activities. On the contrary, we
believe that the Council should complement and
politically reinforce the solutions proposed by Africans
in response to African problems. In this sense, we
welcome the efforts extended by the Intergovernmental
Authority for Development, and the political
coordination extended by the Organization for African
Unity, including the possibility of convening a national
reconciliation conference.

We do not know if these regional initiatives will
produce the desired results, but we firmly believe that
this is the best way to guarantee that the Arta process
can move forward in the right direction. For that
reason, we call for examining the situation in Somalia
from a regional focus that involves all internal and
external actors in the search for a common result: the
attainment of peace, stability and normality in the
entire territory.

I wish to conclude by articulating three specific
considerations on the humanitarian situation, the
presence of the United Nations and the creation of a
Committee of Friends, as has been suggested.

First, with respect to humanitarian activities and
development, the Security Council must demonstrate
its commitment to the work already being carried out
by United Nations agencies and by other humanitarian
organizations. Even when it is evident that the
Council's action is not essential to the work of these
organizations and agencies, the Council's total inaction
and isolation could be counterproductive for carrying
out these humanitarian and development activities.

Secondly, we have taken note of the Secretary-
General's opinion that the security conditions
necessary for opening a peace-building office do not
exist. Given the importance this office has for the
process of unification and reconciliation in Somalia,
we wish to encourage that a thorough review of
security in Somalia, as suggested by the Secretary-
General in paragraph 71 of his report, be undertaken
without delay.

Finally, we have noted the proposal to create a
Committee of Friends. Colombia, of course, does not
oppose an idea of this kind, especially in the absence of
political alternatives for Somalia. However, we want to
point out that a Committee of Friends is
recommendable only as long as it strengthens the
regional capacity for resolving the situation in Somalia;
strengthens political and financial support for the
transitional Government; contributes to defining an
appropriate role for the Security Council in dealing
with this situation and prevents a greater breach
between the Council and the situation on the ground.

