Mr. Haidara (Nigeria): Let me begin by thanking
the delegation of China for having organized this
open debate. I particularly commend your resolve,
Mr. President, in deciding to personally preside over
this meeting throughout the day. This is a reflection of
China's commitment to enhancing peace and security in
Africa. I also commend the Secretary-General and the
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security
for their briefings, which aptly captured the essence of
our deliberations today.

Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

As encapsulated in the concept note (S/2017/574, annex), Africa remains the continent with the greatest
development potential. Nonetheless, efforts to harness
this potential have been hampered by the myriad
challenges facing the continent. Some of the most
urgent challenges are the spread of extremist ideologies,
terrorism and the illicit transfer and proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. Yet these contemporary
global challenges tend to be transnational in character
and are often beyond the capacity of any one country
to resolve.

While the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security resides
with the Security Council, regional actions lighten
the burden of the Council and provide an added layer
of legitimacy to multilateralism. Regional efforts
enhance the prospects for inclusivity and consensus in
addressing the challenges to global peace and security.
It is against this backdrop that we situate today's debate,
which seeks to enhance Africa's capacity in the areas of
peace and security.

The United Nations Charter, as adopted, foresees
a world in which the United Nations and regional
organizations would work together to prevent, manage
and resolve crises. Over the years, notable instances of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, particularly in peacekeeping and conflict
prevention, have yielded high-quality dividends. These
gains hold a lot more promise for the future.

In recognition of the foregoing, Nigeria welcomes
the determination of the United Nations to enhance its
relationship and cooperation with the African Union
(AU) and to support the full and effective implementation
of Agenda 2063. This, we believe, will contribute in
no small measure to ensuring the promotion of peace,
stability and socioeconomic development in Africa.

We therefore see a need to redouble efforts to
further strengthen the strategic partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union. This
will enable us to address, in a holistic manner, the
challenges faced in the fields of peace and security. In
this regard, Nigeria welcomes the signing in April of
the new landmark framework to strengthen partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
on peace and security in order to better respond to
the changing dimensions and evolving challenges of
peace operations.

Nigeria supports the continued efforts to strengthen
African peacekeeping capabilities and emphasizes
the importance of implementing the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. We also recommend
the enhancement of an effective partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union, in order to
improve the planning, deployment and management
of African peacekeeping operations. In this regard,
we stress the importance of finding ways to secure
predictable, adequate and sustained financial support
for African Union-led peace operations, so that the
missions deployed can effectively maximize their
operational capabilities with respect to the tasks at hand.

While the option of a jointly developed and jointly
funded budget would require additional work by the
United Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission
before it could be put into practice, Nigeria endorses the
four options outlined by the Secretary-General, and we
call on the Security Council to endorse these options.
In addition to the issue of financing, we take note of the
proposal contained in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/454) for a decision-making framework aimed at
making joint action more effective between the United
Nations and the African Union.

In conclusion, if indeed the primary responsibility
of the Council is to maintain international peace and
security, its work in managing international peace
and security should be viewed through the lens of
preventive diplomacy. If the United Nations is able
to assist African nations in restoring their social and
institutional fabric, and if we can also apply ourselves
to the ongoing task of providing opportunities for
people and their livelihoods within the context of the
Sustainable Development Goals, we can go a long way
towards reducing the propensity for conflict in Africa.

