Mr. Brencick: (United States of America): I, too,
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
sobering - even alarming - briefing today. His call
for urgent action to address the crisis in Darfur should
resonate all the way from this Chamber to the
presidential palace in Khartoum.

We also welcome the presence and participation
of the representatives of the League of Arab States and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference.

The Sudan - according to the charge d'affaires
today - is always open to dialogue with the Council.
That raises the question, of course, of where its
representatives were when the Council invited them to
our meeting on 28 August in which we made clear to
the Government of National Unity our concern about
the situation in Darfur, our conviction that outside
assistance is essential and our desire to work with the
Government of National Unity to achieve a satisfactory
outcome.

In his whole lengthy intervention today, the one
critical point that Sudanese charge d'affaires left out
was a stated commitment by the Government of
National Unity to address the humanitarian situation -
the suffering of the people of Darfur - by consenting
to the deployment of United Nations forces and by
cooperating with the implementation of resolution
1706 (2006).

We have already heard Jan Egeland, Under-
Secretary-General of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, describe the situation in Darfur
as a man-made catastrophe of an unprecedented scale,
which, he said, would get even worse if a political
solution were not reached imminently. We have also
read remarks from Antonio Guterres, United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, that Darfur is on the
verge of a terrible disaster and a humanitarian
catastrophe if the Government of National Unity does
not allow United Nations forces into region. Now, we
have just heard the same assessment from the
Secretary-General himself.

Aid agencies have consistently asserted that their
work is impossible without a United Nations force on
the ground to provide them with needed security. How

many people need to describe the horror of the
situation in Darfur, and how much worse must the
situation become, before the Government of National
Unity gets the message?

The adoption of resolution 1706 (2006) was a
first step. The second and more crucial step is
implementing it. Rather than assuming its
responsibility, the Government of National Unity has
indicated that it will take a step backwards by forcing
the expulsion of the troops of the African Union
Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) by the end of this month,
leaving a vacuum in Darfur for the Government of
National Unity to fill with its own troops.

We must support the African Union (AU) and
AMIS at this critical point in maintaining their key role
in addressing the Darfur crisis and the suffering of the
people. If the AU Peace and Security Council decides
to extend AMIS through the end of the year, everyone,
including the Government of National Unity, must do
everything possible to support it. This includes
immediately implementing resolution 1706 (2006),
which calls for robust assistance to AMIS. The Council
agreed that the transition of AMIS to a United Nations
operation is the best option for all. We will circulate a
draft presidential statement this afternoon, whose
purpose is to allow the Council to speak for the
international community with one strong clear voice,
and to say to the Government of National Unity, "Work
with us, because the situation in Darfur cannot stand".

