Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): I would like to join those
speakers before me who expressed their feelings of distress
and sorrow over the tragedy which has befallen Kenya and
Cote d'Ivoire.

I would like now to make some general remarks
concerning our "month of Africa" and then to focus more
specifically on some conclusions regarding the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The United States presidency has,
if I may use an understatement, adopted a high-visibility
approach to selected African topics. That high-visibility
approach, to our eyes, had the additional virtue of fitting
exceptionally well with the desire for improved
transparency expressed by my own and by most other
delegations of non-permanent members.

It is worth noting in passing that our successful
"month of Africa" was not exactly a month of legal
advisers. Your refreshing approach, Mr. President, has done
wonders in cutting away a lot of procedural dead wood, for
which future generations of Security Council presidents will
owe you gratitude.

Through your efforts also, Sir, the Security Council
has returned to the public spotlight, not only through its
highly successful meeting on Burundi in the presence of
former President Mandela, but also through its meetings on
the AIDS tragedy with its particularly poignant
consequences for Africa, on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and on other African issues. This public spotlight is
important. A Security Council that does not have public
support will lose in effectiveness, and you, Mr. President,
have done a lot to hone our sensitivity on this point.

But let us be cautious at the same time. The public
appetite for Security Council debates is surely not
insatiable. We must reserve these events for very special
causes and leave ourselves sufficient time to concentrate on
the less visible, but ultimately crucial, preparation of
Security Council action.

So where do we go next? Hopefully, by the time the
next ministerial meeting takes place, in September of this
year, the Council's relentless attention to African issues will
actually begin to yield fruit. The particular relevance of that
ministerial meeting to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for instance, is clear for all to see, with the
attention it will be giving to the follow-up of Security
Council resolutions 1196 (1998), 1197 (1998) and 1209
(1998), on arms embargoes, peacekeeping mechanisms and
illicit arms flows to and in Africa respectively.

Let me now try to draw some brief conclusions from
last week's debate on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. To our mind, the debate confirmed that there is
no alternative to the Lusaka Agreement, which shows that
we are on the right road. But at the same time, we are in
for a very bumpy ride on that road, as seen in the recent
resumption of ceasefire violations. Most encouraging is
that contacts among the protagonists are possible and
useful. Encouraging also is that the debate gave the
international community a renewed sense of urgency in
making the Lusaka Agreement work. At last, the United
Nations is about to embark upon a very substantive
exercise of implementation of the Lusaka Agreement on
the basis of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2000/30).

I believe that it is important to remind the Council
and others of the statement to the press made by the
United Kingdom presidency of the Council on 22
December 1999. Through that statement, Council
members reiterated the willingness of the United Nations
to be seriously involved. But at the same time, Council
members pointed out that, in order to play its role in a
peacekeeping operation, the United Nations must be
confident that the parties themselves are determined to
refrain from all hostile acts and to respect the ceasefire.
This remains for us the guideline for our future
involvement.

Of paramount importance to any solution in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will be the way we
deal with the very real life-and-death issues of the illegal
flows of arms to and in Africa and the related problem of
the illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and, may I add, of
other resource-rich areas of conflict in Africa, such as
Angola, Sierra Leone and others. Practical approaches,
including voluntary arms embargoes, to these challenges
were outlined by my own and other delegations last week.

Equally crucial to finding a solution is how we deal
with the problem of Interahamwe, ex-Rwandan Armed
Forces (FAR) and other groups. In our view, that solution
cannot be achieved through military means. Perhaps the
Mozambican example - the combined legal and financial
arrangements to induce soldiers to lay down their arms
and return to their homes - can serve as a model in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

With regard, finally, to the Joint Military
Commission (JMC), my Government has pledged
$250,000, and has expressed a firm intention to assist
 

financially the work of the facilitator, former President
Masire.

January's African agenda was inevitably a selection
from among the African issues before the Council. Issues
such as Ethiopia-Eritrea and Western Sahara did not make
it this time. Still, the Council should take the time to look
at these issues again, for, while the Council has shown
itself capable of dealing with complex matters such as East
Timor, Sierra Leone and now even the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, somehow the Council has not been
capable of stopping the foot-dragging by parties on those
other issues.

Finally, Sir, like the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms.
Frechette, you said earlier today that the key word at this
stage is "follow-up". Maybe in your summing up as the
final speaker you could formulate, or try to formulate, a
number of key elements or benchmarks by which to
measure the Council's follow-up at regular intervals in the
near future.

