I should like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his valuable briefing and praiseworthy efforts in service of peace in the Middle East. I should also like to thank the Secretary-General for his sixteenth report (S/2020/1234) on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). On 29 November, along with the rest of the international community, Tunisia proudly celebrated the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian people. On that occasion, my country reaffirmed its unwavering support for the just Palestinian cause and declared that it would stand forever with the fraternal Palestinian people in its principled defence of its legitimate rights, which cannot be extinguished with the passage of time. The most prominent of those rights is the right to establish an independent State on its territory along the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Moreover, on that occasion, the international community, at the national, regional and international levels, renewed its commitment to supporting the just Palestinian cause, in line with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. In contrast to the broad international support for a two-State solution on the basis of United Nations resolutions and the agreed-upon terms of reference, the reality is that, much to our regret, the stalemate in the peace process drags on, and the occupying Power continues to deny the Palestinian people its fundamental rights and to take unilateral actions that are contrary to international law, including the expansion of settlement-building activity, intensification of house demolitions, displacement of the Palestinian population and efforts to cut the geographical connection between East Jerusalem and the West Bank, thereby seriously threatening the two-State solution and undermining the prospects for a peaceful settlement. Perhaps the most significant factor that has encouraged the occupying authorities to continue with their hostilities against unarmed Palestinian civilians, their human rights violations in Palestine and their gross violations of international law is that the international community is not serious about holding them accountable. In view of the gross violations that have been committed by the occupiers and their racist practices, Tunisia calls upon the Security Council and the entire international community to shoulder their responsibility to halt those violations and save the two-State solution, in particular by compelling Israel, the occupying Power, to cease its settlement-building activities immediately and, in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016), completely abandon its plans to annex territory once and for all and end its occupation of Palestinian territory. Tunisia also calls upon the international community to ensure the protection of the Palestinian civilian population and put pressure on the occupying Government to end the restrictions imposed in the occupied territories and the unjust blockade of the Gaza Strip, which are threatening the Palestinian economy with collapse and exacerbating human suffering, especially in the light of the unprecedented challenge posed by the pandemic. In keeping with its commitment to peace as a strategic option, Tunisia renews its support for the international community's efforts to launch serious and credible negotiations in accordance with a defined timetable aimed at establishing a just, comprehensive and lasting peace on the basis of international law, internationally authoritative resolutions and the terms of reference for the settlement of the situation. Tunisia reiterates that the Palestinians must participate in any efforts or initiatives aimed at settling the conflict and achieving peace in the region. Accordingly, Tunisia supports the initiative launched by Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas to convene a plenipotentiary conference in which all stakeholders participate, with a view to embarking upon a peace process on the basis of established principles. Tunisia hopes that this initiative will receive the support it deserves from the Quartet, the Security Council and stakeholders, in order to lay the groundwork for the convening of such a conference and thereby promote security and peace in the region. Tunisia renews its support for the vital role that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East plays in alleviating the suffering of refugees in its various areas of operation and supporting stability in the region until a just solution to the Palestine refugee issue has been found. Tunisia urges all regional and international actors to step up the humanitarian response in order to help the Palestinian people respond to the effects of the pandemic and the economic restrictions imposed by the occupiers. In conclusion, Tunisia reiterates that achieving a just, comprehensive and lasting peace and ensuring security and stability in the Middle East necessarily requires Israel to withdraw from all occupied Arab territories, including the occupied Syrian Arab Golan, in accordance with internationally authoritative resolutions, the terms of reference for the peace process and the Arab Peace Initiative.
