Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I congratulate you, Sir, and your brotherly
country, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, upon your
election to the Security Council and your assumption
of the Council presidency this month, and express our
full confidence in your ability to wisely and effectively
steer the work of the Council. We also thank you for
your quick response to the request made by the Group
of Arab States, the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to convene this
emergency meeting.

We also express our appreciation to Italy for its
skilful leadership of the Council last month. I further
wish to congratulate the other new members of the
Council and to wish them success as they collectively
strive, along with the other members, to uphold the
important responsibility entrusted to them.

We also extend our thanks to Mr. Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for this
morning's comprehensive briefing.

We are at a precarious juncture in the Middle
East. Crisis is on the rise, endangering the lives and
well-being of millions of civilians and undermining the
current nascent peace efforts. The decisions and actions
taken now by all concerned parties, including the
Security Council, as the international community's
guardian of peace and security, will either help us to
cross the threshold into a new era of reason, calm and
stability necessary for peacemaking, or plunge us once
again into the dark abyss of violence, killing and
destruction that has brought so much tragedy to our
peoples and dashed our hopes for peace so often in the
past.

Regrettably, despite the recent momentum
generated by the revival of the peace process and the
resumption of bilateral negotiations on final status
issues between the Israeli and Palestinian sides for the
first time after a bitter seven-year freeze, there has

been little progress and much deterioration, mainly
because of Israeli actions that are destabilizing the
situation on the ground and creating ever more
challenges. Instead of truly turning a new page and
embarking on the path of peace, Israel, the occupying
Power, has pursued its ongoing illegal policies and
practices in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. Such policies and practices
have never actually ceased.

The Palestinian people, who have suffered too
long under occupation and as a stateless people, have
endured the dramatic intensification of their suffering
and hardship in recent weeks as a result of the illegal
and brutal practices being carried out by Israel, the
occupying Power, against the civilian population in the
occupied Palestinian territory. The situation in the
Gaza Strip is distressing and grave as Israel intensifies
its collective punishment of the Palestinian civilian
population, escalates its military aggression and
tightens its siege and closures, obstructing the entry
into Gaza of even basic foodstuffs and other essential
humanitarian supplies.

The current situation is absolutely untenable,
humanly unbearable and morally unacceptable. The
Israeli policy of aggression is creating a humanitarian
catastrophe in the Gaza Strip, heightening fears and
tensions, and inciting and fuelling the vicious and
dreaded cycle of violence. Regrettably, our repeated
appeals for real action to address Israel's illegal
policies and practices and the resultant humanitarian
crisis in the Gaza Strip have gone unheeded, and the
occupying Power remains unaccountable, acting with
flagrant impunity in violation of international law and
all humanitarian principles and norms. Grave breaches
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War are being committed
by Israel before the very eyes of the international
community. The wilful killing of civilians, the wanton
destruction of property and the collective punishment
of civilians under occupation are strictly prohibited by
the Geneva Convention, and the occupying Power must
be held accountable for such crimes.

There is no pretext, security or otherwise, that
can justify such inhumane punishment of innocent
civilians, including children, women, the elderly, the
disabled and the sick. Moreover, such illegal acts of
aggression and punitive measures by the occupying
Power severely poison the environment between the
two sides, undermining peace efforts and reigniting the
cycle of violence, with its far-ranging negative
implications for the situation on the ground and the
prospects for peace.

While we had hoped to come before the Security
Council to report on the positive momentum generated
by the international conferences held recently at
Annapolis and Paris and by the recent visit of the
United States President, and to report to the Council on
progress made in bilateral negotiations, developments
on the ground prevent us from doing so, for they have,
regrettably, obstructed any tangible progress from
occurring and are rapidly draining the momentum
generated at the international level and between the
two sides towards the attainment of a peaceful,
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict.

The ongoing siege of the Palestinian civilian
population in the Gaza Strip and the brutal military
assaults carried out by the Israeli occupying forces
against the Palestinian civilian population in the Gaza
Strip last week, which caused widespread death and
destruction, are starkly illustrative of the relentless
Israeli onslaught against Palestinian human rights that
continues to ignite the cycle of violence.
Simultaneously, the occupying Power has not ceased
pursuing its expansionist aims with its unlawful
colonization settlement campaign in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. The
impact on the ground is extremely negative, as is the
impact on the peace process itself.

Recently, the Israeli occupying forces launched
countless military assaults against the Gaza Strip by
land and air - as we have heard in Mr. Pascoe's
briefing. Those assaults, including extrajudicial
executions, killed dozens of Palestinian civilians and
caused widespread destruction to civilian property,
infrastructure and farmlands. Since the November
Annapolis Conference, more than 160 Palestinians
have been killed by the occupying Power, including at
least 12 children and 9 women, with the majority of
those killed and wounded in Gaza.

The occupying Power continues to issue threats
and to inflict more death and destruction, as the
Minister of Defense and other Israeli officials
repeatedly declare their intentions to launch a large-
scale military attack against the Gaza Strip. In addition,
the Israeli occupying forces have continued carrying
out military raids and daily arrest campaigns in the

West Bank. The city of Nablus has been hard hit by
violent Israeli military actions in recent weeks; those
actions have seriously undermined the Palestinian
Authority's efforts to promote the rule of law, order
and security there.

The message sent by such deadly and destructive
actions is one that plays into the hands of those who
seek to cast doubt on the peace process. It is a message
that fuels the cycle of violence and extremism with full
force, a message which, if not stopped, will sabotage
the fragile peace process entirely, as has occurred in
the past. The international community must call upon
Israel to immediately cease all illegal acts of
aggression and terror against the Palestinian people.
Israel must be held accountable for its actions in
accordance with international law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention.

Moreover, as stated earlier, as part of inflicting
collective punishment on the Palestinian people, Israel
has persisted with its crippling siege of the Gaza Strip,
deepening humanitarian suffering and despair.
Following its declaration of the Gaza Strip as a hostile
entity in September 2007, the occupying Power
imposed a continuous closure on all border crossings,
obstructing the access and movement of people and
goods, including humanitarian, food, medical and
building supplies. This was followed by the reduction
of fuel supplies. The occupying Power intensified its
closure of the territory by sealing off all border
crossings, preventing the delivery of food supplies to
the population since Friday, 18 January 2008.
Meanwhile, it has persisted with the reduction of fuel
to the Gaza Strip, completely cutting off fuel to the
main power plant on Sunday, 20 January 2008, until it
stopped working completely. That inhumane and illegal
siege has severely impacted the living conditions of the
people in the Gaza Strip.

Such illegal measures of collective punishment
threaten to exacerbate the humanitarian crisis and to
hasten the deterioration of the situation on the ground
in all its aspects. The suspension of fuel supplies has
impacted the provision of electricity to the civilian
population, with the majority of the population of the
Gaza Strip suffering in darkness since yesterday, with
no electricity for their homes and no heating, in
addition to the fact that the fuel shortages have brought
vehicular traffic in the Gaza Strip to a near standstill.
Health officials are reporting that hospital generators
are running out of fuel supplies, endangering the lives
of sick patients, young and old, and that such fuel
reductions will inevitably further obstruct the
functioning of sanitation and water facilities, with the
consequent negative health impact on the civilian
population.

Were it not for international humanitarian
assistance, including that provided by United Nations
agencies, the economic, social and health situation in
the Gaza Strip would have long ago collapsed. Such
assistance is also now in jeopardy as United Nations
agencies on the ground are warning that, if the closures
continue, vital food aid to the more than 1 million
refugees and other needy civilians in Gaza who are
dependent on such aid for survival will have to be
suspended within a few days.

The critical situation in Gaza must be addressed
in accordance with international humanitarian law and
human rights law and cannot be ignored in the drive
for peace. How can the Palestinian civilian population
in the Gaza Strip believe in a peace process and in an
international community that permits their ongoing
suffocation, isolation and suffering under the lock and
key of Israel's occupation? Palestinians in Gaza are
barely surviving under these circumstances; the
majority of the population is now unemployed,
impoverished, malnourished and hopeless. Israel, the
occupying Power, must be called upon to immediately
cease such illegal punitive measures and to comply
with all of its international legal obligations. This is a
humanitarian imperative as well as a peace imperative.

The international community, including the
Security Council, cannot remain silent in the face of
the perilous decline of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, particularly in the Gaza Strip. We
call upon the members of the international community
to shoulder their responsibilities in all areas and to
urgently intervene to put an end to this punishment of
the Palestinian people, to alleviate the humanitarian
crisis, to stem the deterioration of the security situation
and to salvage the fragile peace process, which will
surely collapse under the weight of such ongoing
illegal Israeli policies and practices.

The Palestinian people and their leadership look
to the international community at this time of crisis to
take immediate and necessary measures to bring an end
to the suffering of the innocent civilian population in
the Gaza Strip, to give them some hope at this time of
despair and to strengthen their waning conviction in
the primacy of international law in order to allow
justice and peace to ultimately prevail.

The international community must uphold
international law and shoulder its responsibilities,
including by ensuring respect for the law. It must
demand that Israel, the occupying Power, immediately
cease its military aggression, its collective punishment
of the Palestinian people and all its other violations of
international law in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem.

Today, we call upon the Security Council
urgently to take specific practical measures to put an
end to the crisis situation in the Gaza Strip. Israel must
be called upon and compelled to lift the siege, to allow
Gaza's border crossings to be opened, to permit the
movement of persons and goods and the provision of
immediate access to food and medical supplies, and to
resume the delivery of fuel to meet the civilian
population's humanitarian needs, allowing the basic
activities of life in Gaza to resume.

In that regard, I should like to draw attention to
the willingness and readiness of the Palestinian
Authority to operate the Palestinian side of all
crossings in Gaza. An integrated plan has been
submitted to the Israeli side through the Quartet
Representative, Mr. Tony Blair, and the Quartet has
expressed its support for the plan. Today, Mr. Pascoe
announced the support of the United Nations for the
plan, which was originally put forward by Palestinian
Authority Prime Minister Mr. Salaam Fayyad. Israel
must be strongly urged to act on this practical initiative
in order to ease the suffering of the Palestinian civilian
population.

We are facing a critical period that requires us to
take immediate action to protect the peace process
before it has been irreparably damaged. The
international community, particularly the Security
Council, must shoulder its responsibility if peace and
security in our region are to be more than mere words.
Therefore, we call once again on the Council to take
immediate measures to address the crisis in the
occupied Palestinian territory, particularly in the Gaza
Strip. We also urge the Council to remain engaged,
including through the Quartet, to work effectively to
uphold international law and to implement its own
relevant resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973).
7

Now is the time for concrete action by all
concerned parties in a collective drive to achieve a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace through an end to the
Israeli occupation of the Palestinian and Arab lands
occupied by Israel in 1967; the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital; and the achievement of a just solution to the
question of Palestinian refugees on the basis of General
Assembly resolution 194 (III). We must not miss this
historic opportunity, because the alternatives and the
consequences would be dire. We must not continue to
allow conflict, despair and injustice to prevail over
peace, hope and justice.

