Mr. Mahmoud: It is an honour for me to speak
on the occasion of the review of the sixth report
(S/2009/6ll) of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB). The
report before the Council provides an account of the
main advances over the past six months and the
challenges that lie ahead for the Government and
people of Burundi. It also describes the main activities
of BINUB in support of the Government's peace
consolidation efforts, in accordance with the mandate
entrusted to it by the Council.

The report before the Council is self-explanatory.
I shall therefore not summarize its main points. I would
merely wish to bring to the Council's attention the
most significant developments that have occurred since
its publication, venturing some thoughts on their
overall significance for peace consolidation in Burundi.
As outlined in the report, the period under review has
witnessed significant advances in the peace process
and in the preparations for the 2010 elections, despite
some enduring challenges.

As regards the peace process, members may
recall that the mandate of the Partnership for Peace in
Burundi, established in May under the chairmanship of
Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo of South Africa, will
come to an end at the end of this month, as will the
Political Directorate that acted in its support.

On 20 November, the South African Facilitator,
Mr. Charles Nqakula, presented his final report on the
Burundi peace process to the leaders of the Regional
Initiative for Peace in Arusha, Tanzania. At that
meeting, he reaffirmed his country's decision to
09-64223
withdraw on 31 December the last elements of the
African Union (AU) Special Task Force, composed of
South African soldiers, charged with the close
protection of the top leaders of the Forces nationales de
liberation (FNL).

On 30 November, the Partnership for Peace held
its third formal meeting in Bujumbura and decided, as
part of its exit strategy, to entrust the FNL close
protection to a joint Government-FNL unit to be
selected from the national defence and security forces.
Work has already begun to put this joint unit in place,
with the help of BINUB and the outgoing Special Task
Force. Other residual tasks of the peace process were
also discussed at the 30 November meeting. They
include the assignment of the remaining Government
posts to the FNL and the release of additional political
and war prisoners. These were also entrusted to the
Government and the FNL to finalize.

Another new development related to the peace
process was the FNL party general congress, held on
29 November. The congress confirmed its Chairperson,
Agathon Rwasa, as leader of the party and officially
designated him the FNL presidential candidate for the
2010 elections.

Still under the heading of recent developments, I
wish to inform the Council that on 23 November, the
Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) held an informal meeting at which
the Government of Burundi presented its national
strategy for the socio-economic reintegration at the
community level of demobilized soldiers, adults
associated with former political armed movements,
returnees, displaced persons and other conflict-affected
groups. This is an important step in the right direction.
Every effort must be made to ensure the sustainable
reintegration of these groups in order to prevent them,
as stated in the Secretary-General's report, from
becoming an added source of concern. It is my hope
that under the dynamic leadership of the Burundi
configuration Chair, Ambassador Peter Maurer, this
strategy will benefit from the meaningful support of
the wider membership of the PBC, as well as that of
other international partners.

As indicated in the Secretary-General's report,
the elections have become a major focus for Burundian
political actors. Despite the positive developments in
the electoral preparations outlined in the report, one of
several immediate challenges is the funding of the
09-64223

electoral process. The pledges made so far by
international partners have yet to be disbursed in a
timely manner. An amount of $3 million still needs to
be urgently mobilized before the end of December to
help the National Independent Electoral Commission to
attend to the most pressing tasks under its mandate. I
wish to thank all those countries who have already
made firm pledges or signed memorandums of
understanding with the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP).

Another election-related challenge is the
significant number of potential voters who cannot
afford the administrative costs related to acquiring a
national identity card. I recently received a letter from
the Minister of the Interior requesting financial and
material support for issuing and distributing those
cards. BINUB and UNDP are currently looking into the
practical modalities for such support as a matter of
urgency. A rapid response would help alleviate the
concerns of some political parties, who allege that the
cards were being distributed in a way that favours the
ruling party. Recent public statements by government
officials, including the Minister of the Interior, have
refuted those allegations.

In response to a repeated request by President
Nkurunziza, BINUB is exploring, along with regional
and subregional organizations both in Africa and
outside the continent, the possibility of their sending to
Burundi long-term observers who would come a few
months before the elections and stay for several weeks
after. We are working with the Independent National
Electoral Commission and the Ministry of the Interior
on how best to implement the President's request.

In a related development, and in order to help
ensure that women played their rightful roles in the
upcoming elections, BINUB and other national and
international partners have helped the Independent
National Electoral Commission to develop a gender-
sensitive strategy to enable women to be informed
voters and motivated candidates. That strategy and the
related sensitization activities were launched earlier
this week.

In that connection, we have prepared for Council
members, as per our past practice, a separate note on
the contributions, over the past six months, of BINUB
and the United Nations system at large in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). I believe
that note has already been distributed.
3
As to the concern raised in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2009/611) on the intimidation
activities of youth groups associated with certain
political parties, I wish to report that President
Nkurunziza and the Minister of the Interior, in separate
statements on 17 and 18 November, urged political
leaders to put an end to those potentially destabilizing
practices. While it seems those statements have been
heeded, the situation bears continuous scrutiny by the
Minister of the Interior and all political parties and
civil society organizations.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report,
overall, Burundi is making commendable progress
despite the remaining challenges that afflict most
countries emerging from conflict. BINUB, if its
mandate is renewed, will continue to support the
Government and the people of Burundi in meeting
those challenges.

In concluding, I wish to emphasize the critical
role that socio-economic development can play in
consolidating peace. I therefore urge development
partners to redouble their efforts to help Burundi meet
its anti-poverty goals and develop the main sectors that
can generate growth.

