Ms. Pulido Santana (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela would like to thank the President of the
Security Council, Ambassador Wang Guangya, for
having convened this important meeting to address the
grave situation besetting our sister Caribbean country,
Haiti. We are pleased that the Secretary-General was
here at the beginning of the meeting. We also welcome
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Jamaica and the
Bahamas.

Whatever happens in the sister Republic of Haiti
is a matter of deepest concern for Venezuela, and we
carefully follow developments in its internal affairs.
The joint communique issued yesterday by the Rio
Group, which was mentioned by the representative of
Brazil at this meeting, clearly reflects the position of
Venezuela on the situation in Haiti. Accordingly, the
Government of Venezuela would like to reiterate its
complete support for the constitutional Government of
Haiti, of which Jean-Bertrand Aristide is the President,
and firmly rejects all attempts to overthrow the
constitution of that country or to make any changes in
it concerning the fixed terms for the election of
authorities.

We also support steps taken by the Organization
of American States (OAS), the natural forum for
considering this situation. We fully support the efforts
of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) to find a
peaceful and negotiated solution within the Haitian
constitutional framework.

We express our wish that efforts to achieve an
immediate cessation of violence and the speedy
restoration of peace to the country will continue. As we
had the opportunity to say at the briefing on Haiti that
was convened by the President of the General
Assembly in a timely and appropriate fashion on 20
February, we hope that mechanisms of the United
Nations will prompt the international community to
deal directly with the humanitarian emergency that is
currently besetting Haiti.

In that context, we reiterate our support,
expressed in the Permanent Council of the OAS, to
contribute to alleviating the serious humanitarian
situation through a financial contribution and to
support other initiatives that stem from the San Jose
Agreement and the Caracas Agreement on Energy
Cooperation. At the same time, Venezuela will be
sending emergency supplies such as food and
medicine.

We stress that it is crucial for the international
community to express and show its solidarity with the
people and the democratic institutions of Haiti that are
threatened today. Venezuela welcomes the Secretary-
General's decision to appoint a Special Adviser, as well
as the opening of an office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights in Haiti.

Venezuela views with optimism the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations to support regional
steps to find a peaceful and democratic solution to the
Haitian crisis. Our country remains optimistic
concerning the results of efforts under way in the
United Nations and in regional organizations, and we
hope that they will effectively support one another,
with a view to finding a speedy solution to the Haitian
conflict.

