Mr. Zarif (the Islamic Republic of Iran):
Mr. President, let me join the previous speakers in
congratulating you for assuming the presidency of the
Council and in expressing our appreciation to your
predecessor for the excellent work he carried out. Let
me also express our appreciation to you for having
convened this important meeting of the Council - a
meeting that has once again been convened to debate
yet another in a series of repeated and grave violations
of international humanitarian law perpetrated by Israel
against the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territories.

Recent military operations against civilian targets
in the northern Gaza Strip and the brutal killing of a
large number of innocent Palestinian civilians,
including women and children, in refugee camps are
war crimes committed by Israel in defiance of basic
norms of international law and international
humanitarian law. Indeed, Israel's illegal acts of
aggression and oppression against the Palestinian
people seem to be deliberate attempts to preclude and
torpedo any possibility of resuscitating peace in a
region which has been engulfed in a whirlpool of
tension and conflict for so many decades.

Israel's systematic and total disregard for the
demands of the international community and its
continued acts of violence and terror against the
Palestinian people have caused the deterioration of the
already dire and grave situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory. The recent Israeli war crimes in
the Gaza Strip will undoubtedly create more instability
and serve to inflame tension, threatening to further
destabilize the situation in the region.

The impunity with which Israel has been allowed
to carry out its established policy of targeting civilians
has undoubtedly emboldened it to continue in defiance
of international law, United Nations resolutions and
even basic norms of decency. Collective punishments,
house demolitions, land confiscation, indiscriminate
extrajudicial killings and targeted assassination of
Palestinian resistance leaders are but a few examples of
the daily acts of State terrorism committed against the
Palestinian people. It is indeed high time for the
international community to take effective measures to
protect and enforce the most basic rights of the
Palestinian people and help put an end to the vicious
cycle of violence brought about by the persistent and
continued illegal occupation of Palestinian territories
by Israel.

We believe that an end to Israeli occupation, the
formation of a Palestinian State with Al-Quds al-Sharif
as its capital and the return of all Palestinian refugees
to their homeland represent the only solution to the
enduring Palestinian crisis. While strongly condemning
the latest Israeli campaign in the Gaza Strip, we
believe that it is imperative for the international
community to weigh in heavily and to unambiguously
prevent Israel from further carrying out its nefarious
designs against Palestinians.

This Council especially shoulders the heaviest
responsibility and should act with a view toward
preventing Israel from continuing to flout the will of
the international community incorporated in numerous
United Nations resolutions. We hope that this time all
members of the Council recognize the need for taking
decisive action in the face of this new escalation in the
region and do not choose to allow further paralysis of
the Council and erosion of its authority as a result of
failing to address the grave situation created in the
wake of the recent Israeli campaign.

