Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the information
provided by the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Zerihoun, and by Ambassador
Vieira, as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission.

Almost two decades have passed since the special
political mission in Guinea-Bissau began its work,
seeking to address the complex social, political and
economic landscape in our brother country after
violence broke out in 1998. Today, we note with
concern that the situation in Guinea-Bissau has seen no
substantial improvement.

As stated in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/1086) containing the strategic analysis of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), resolution 2404
(2018) - which extended the mandate of the mission
until February 2019 - stipulates that it must focus
on three priority aspects: first, support for the full
implementation of the Conakry Agreement and the
facilitation of inclusive political dialogue and the
national reconciliation process; secondly, support
for the electoral process for this year's legislative
elections; and thirdly, technical assistance to complete
the constitutional review.

With regard to the second point concerning the
electoral process, that process has been truncated by
the failure to hold the legislative elections scheduled
for 18 November owing to a lack of the technical and
financial means needed for their consolidation. In that
vein, in order to continue promoting the stabilization
process in Guinea-Bissau, we consider that, in the short
term, the commitment of the international community
is vital in order to ensure full cooperation and the
necessary support for the successful completion of the
voter-registration process, in addition to assisting with
electoral technical mechanisms to hold transparent,
inclusive and fundamentally peaceful elections.

Furthermore, one of the structural factors of
the crisis is related to the political impasse that was
eventually overcome by the country's various political
forces through the appointment of a consensus Prime
Minister seven months ago and the formation of the
Government. However, the challenges in the areas of
governance, rule of law and socioeconomic development
must continue to be addressed within the framework of
the political process and inclusive dialogue.

Those aspects should enable members of the
Government and the political parties represented in
the National Assembly to demonstrate real political
will in order to continue advancing along the path
of consensus in order to constructively implement
the signed agreements. We believe that it is critical
to promote the legitimate commitment to reaching a
lasting political and social solution, guided exclusively
by the best interests of the people of Guinea-Bissau.

Additionally, in the context of ensuring State
stability and with regard to security aspects, the fight
against drug trafficking, transnational crime and
impunity must also be a priority. To that end, the United
Nations has a key role to play in promoting development
and strengthening and improving State capacities with
a view to reducing vulnerability to drug trafficking and
crime by bolstering the elements of justice and police
forces. The international community must also provide
Guinea-Bissau with the assistance necessary to enhance
State control of its coastline and airspace, in addition to
training the members of the relevant State institutions.

We also commend all the efforts of the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-
Bissau, and appreciate the contribution of the European
Union and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, and the crucial efforts of the Head of
UNIOGBIS to reconcile the parties to the conflict and
to promote dialogue. We further commend the work
carried out by the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, chaired by Brazil. We
once again stress the importance of strengthening the
links between that body and the Security Council with
respect to coordination, exchange of information and
active participation.

In conclusion, we believe it imperative to redouble
our joint efforts for stabilization in Guinea-Bissau. We
have also stressed the need to use political tools to find
political solutions with a view to achieving sustainable
peace. In that context, in order to achieve stabilization
and sustainable peace in Guinea-Bissau, it is imperative
to place the well-being of the population and its most
vulnerable sectors above any political partisan or
personal interest.

