The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Guinea-Bissau, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration of the item, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Da Gama
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Joseph Mutaboba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mutaboba to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall also take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Her Excellency Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti,
Permanent Representative of Brazil, in her capacity as
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

It is so decided.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the Permanent Representative of
Gabon to the United Nations, in which he requests that
the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for Guinea-Bissau, His
Excellency Mr. Sebastiao Isata, be invited to
participate in accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure. If I hear no objection, I
shall take it that the Council agrees to extend an
invitation to him under rule 39.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Isata to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2010/550, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Her Excellency
Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti and His Excellency
Mr. Sebastiao Isata. I would like to remind the briefers
to keep their remarks to 10 minutes, and I shall hold
them to that time limit.

I now give the floor to Mr. Joseph Mutaboba.


