Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing on the work of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and for the work
carried out by Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, together with
Mr. Stephen O'Brien, in leading that office.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela rejects the
siege tactics carried out by any of the parties to the
conflict against civilians, which violate international
law and international human rights law and constitute
a war crime. In Syria, there is a complex war with a
high level of violence and a diversity of actors in the
armed conflict. In addressing such a sensitive issue,
therefore, we must do so in a balanced way and refrain
from politicizing human rights and ensure that such
siege practices are put to an end.

The Syrian Government is responsible for
protecting its citizens, and it has done so in areas
that are under its control and even areas beyond its
control. That is a fact that has been reflected in United
Nations reports. It is our hope that cooperation between
OCHA and the Syrian authorities will continue and be
strengthened beyond what we are now seeing. However,
we are concerned by the fact that whatever is done in
this tragic situation is never enough and that there are
hundreds of thousands of Syrians under siege by various
non-State armed groups and terrorist groups, with
whom one cannot even negotiate to make them respect
international law and international humanitarian law.

We therefore regret that the Syrian humanitarian
issue has been politicized since the conflict began. We
believe that humanitarian assistance must be focused
on meeting all the needs of those on the ground and
those who have crossed the border to other countries
in search of security. It is therefore vital to have the
support and consent of the Government of Syria, as
established in United Nations resolutions.

The main enemy of Syria and the region is the
self-proclaimed Islamic State and the other terrorist
organizations operating in that brotherly country.
The world witnessed the atrocities perpetrated by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) when Palmyra
fell and ISIS went in and destroyed the heritage of
humankind, slaughtering people in its path, including
the world-renowned archaeologist Khaled Mohamad
al-Asaad, while the world watched in astonishment and
the Security Council stood by in silence.

On many occasions our country has expressed
its dismay about the dire humanitarian situation in
Syria. When the Council met to renew the mandate of
resolution 2191 (2014) last December (see S/PV.7595),
we expressed our interest in seeing the humanitarian
assistance mechanism reach the ares most in need.
Based on the most recent report of the Secretary-
General, dated 11 December 2015 (S/2015/962), more
than 212,000 people remain under siege by ISIS, the
Al-Nusra Front and associated groups. We await
a strategy by OCHA for tackling that problem. In
that context, we are concerned by the statement by
Mr. Yacoub El Hillo, OCHA Resident Coordinator, on
the delicate situation of more than 42,000 people in the
vicinity of Madaya, who are at risk of starvation, as well
as the more than 20,000 people in Kafraya and Fu'ah,
who unfortunately do not seem to have aroused the
same interest. We welcome the positive response of the
Syrian Government, as indicated in the joint statement,
to facilitating access to humanitarian convoys. In that
regard, we have heard reports of a second delivery of
assistance to Madaya, Kafraya and Fu'ah in the last few
hours. We hope that this coordination and cooperation
will be extended to the entire Syrian territory.

We would like to express our appreciation for the
work carried out by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and
OCHA, which, in coordination with the Government,
has enabled humanitarian assistance to reach the
populations of Madaya, Kafraya and Fu'ah. In less than
two days, 200 volunteers and aid workers dispatched
45 convoys to Madaya to reach 40,000 people, and
another 18 convoys to Kafraya and Fu'ah intended
for approximately 20,000 people. In that context, it is
important to draw attention to the safety guarantees
that must be upheld by non-State actors to ensure that
the assistance reaches the civilians in need, and not
the fighters. Similarly, the parties must guarantee the
safety and security of humanitarian workers in such
difficult conditions.

We recognize the noble efforts of the humanitarian
agencies in Syria, whose work takes place under
difficult conditions owing to the same conflict in
which the country and its people have been plunged in
extremely poor conditions. For that reason, we condemn
the attacks against personnel and the facilities in which
they carry out their noble work. It is unacceptable that
humanitarian personnel be military targets by any of
the parties.

Over the past five years, we have seen how the
country and its population have suffered the ravages
of terrorist groups, making Syria a place where they
try out and promote their savagery in order to impose
their totalitarian vision. Unfortunately, it seems that
the international community has not yet acknowledged
the danger that the extremist ideas represent for the
future of humankind, given the way some media have
portrayed certain leaders of some of those groups as
moderates, concealing their long record of intolerance
and hatred, in order to advance the particular political
agendas of a few stakeholders. We stress that the areas
controlled by ISIS, the Al-Nusra Front and their allies
are a genuine challenge for humanitarian organizations
and for the international community. All efforts made
to reduce the operational capacity of those groups will
benefit the civilian population and help bring about a
negotiated political solution to the conflict.
In December 2015, we held a ministerial meeting
with the aim of promoting the paths towards peace and
political dialogue. We must seize the opportunity that
has arisen and decisively strengthen the peace process.
The resolution ofthe humanitarian crisis in Syria is tied
to the ceasefire set forth in resolution 2254 (2015) and
the initiation of peace talks among the warring parties
and among Syrians themselves. Furthermore, the
Council must fulfil its role of overcoming the obstacles
to restoring the peace that was snatched from the people
of Syria. We call on all parties negotiating in Geneva to
reach a political solution to this terrible armed conflict
to act in good faith and without preconditions. We
must coordinate our efforts and move together in the
same direction. It is important that we maintain the
momentum that was reached last December and that
nothing stands in our way from continuing on the road
towards peace.

Finally, we reiterate our support for the efforts
of the Special Envoy for the Syrian Arab Republic,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to bring about a peaceful
political solution to this conflict and we await his
report due next Monday. We must remain united in the
Security Council in support of a political solution to the
conflict as the only effective way to resolve the terrible
humanitarian tragedy being experienced by the people
of Syria.

