Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia voted in favour of the draft resolution
submitted to the Security Council. The text was the
outcome of the collective efforts of all the members of
the Security Council and the concrete result of
intensive consultations and complicated compromises.
We are pleased to note that the intensive process of
working on the text, in which the views expressed and
proposals made by members of the Council were taken
on board, has led to a text that is much more balanced
and coherent in terms of the goals it sets out to
achieve, compared to the initial draft.

The restrictions introduced by the resolution on
cooperation with Iran, like those contained in the
provisions of resolution 1737 (2006), are aimed at
eliminating the concerns that the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) still has on the Iranian nuclear
programme. These restrictions are in no way aimed at
punishing Iran. The Council's decision has sent an
unequivocal message to Tehran on the need for full
cooperation with the IAEA and the Security Council.
At the same time, the content of resolution 1747 (2007)
is unambiguous in that the door to negotiations with
Iran remains open.

Of key significance in that context is the
provision contained in the resolution stating that if Iran
suspends all its activities related to the enrichment and
reprocessing of uranium during the negotiations period,
the implementation of the measures imposed by the
Security Council also will be suspended. Furthermore,
the text of the resolution clearly sets out the possibility
of revoking these measures.

Another very important point: these measures,
just as in resolution 1737 (2006), have been imposed in
accordance with Article 41 of the Charter and
consequently preclude the possibility of the use of
force. One of the provisions of the resolution stipulates
that any further steps taken by the Security Council, if
necessary, will also be exclusively peaceful ones. We
remain convinced that the effective resolution of the
Iranian nuclear problem can be achieved only through
political and diplomatic efforts.

We deem of great significance the fact that the
new resolution does not in any way alter the provisions
of paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006). The
freezing of financial activities will therefore not
prevent payments from being made by the natural or
legal persons listed in the annexes to resolution 1737
(2006) or in the resolution just adopted, payments
under contracts entered into before the aforementioned
persons were included on the list on the grounds
outlined in paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006). In
other words, the activities authorized by the Security
Council in the area of trade and economic cooperation
can continue.

Russia initiated and fully supports the statement
made by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the group
of six countries, which is being made public in parallel
with the adoption of resolution 1747 (2007) and was
read out today on behalf of the group of six by the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom.

It is clear that the way the situation develops in
future will depend largely on Iran's actions. We hope
that the Government of Iran will take into account the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1747 (2007),
carefully analyse the positive content of the statement
made by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the six
countries, and, ultimately, choose fully to cooperate
with the IAEA, through a dialogue based on mutual
respect, on any other outstanding issues. Such a
constructive approach by the Iranian Government
would make it possible for us to put any unresolved
problems behind us and create a situation in which the
attitude taken towards Iran in its development of a
peaceful nuclear programme would be the same as
towards any other State party to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

Russia will continue to contribute to achieving
that aim in the interests of strengthening the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and strengthening regional
and international security.

