Mr. Minton (United States of America): I apologize
for taking the floor again. I shall be brief.

The misleading substance of the Iraqi Permanent
Representative's statement earlier tonight compelled my
delegation to seek a right of reply this evening. I will get
straight to the point.

The current leadership in Iraq is the only party
responsible for the inadequacies of the conditions inside the
territory it controls. The Iraqi leadership has created and is
sustaining the circumstances in which the people of Iraq
unfortunately find themselves. It is the unwillingness of the
leadership of Iraq to meet accepted obligations as defined
by this Council or to implement the mandated humanitarian
programme effectively that perpetuates the unfortunate
situation within the country.

Iraq would have members believe that it is committed
to the welfare of its population, particularly its children, the
subject of our discussions today. All available evidence will
lead members to the opposite conclusion. The current Iraqi
leadership, by its actions, shows that it has nothing but the
utmost contempt for its own people. Colleagues will recall
that the Secretary-General has recommended for over one
year that the Government of Iraq purchase targeted
nutritional supplements for children - I repeat, for
children - and mothers. The United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF) again joined that appeal with the release of
its survey on child and maternal mortality in Iraq.

Clearly, the Government of Iraq does not concur with
the assessment by the Secretary-General or UNICEF. It has
ordered only about 11 per cent of the total allocation of 15
million of these critical supplements for children and
mothers. Worse than that, it has actually reduced, not
increased, the value of the high-protein biscuits and
therapeutic milk that it was supposed to order for
vulnerable populations.

As the Secretary-General noted in previous reports, the
Government of Iraq continues to under-order, or not order
at all, key food basket items such as pulses and dairy
products. The Secretary-General concluded that the lack of
these items, some of which have not been ordered at all by
the Government of Iraq, has reduced the caloric value of
the food basket available to the Iraqi people.

Council members are aware that $241 million in
medicines and medical equipment is bottled up in
warehouses, unavailable for use by children, mothers or
any of the general population. That means that almost 40
per cent of all medicines and medical supplies that have
arrived in Iraq through six phases of the oil-for-food
programme are gathering dust in Iraqi Government
warehouses.

If that were not enough evidence of a Government
not working for its people, we all recently became aware
of the results of the UNICEF surveys on child and
maternal mortality. What these surveys clearly showed
was that where the Government of Iraq is responsible for
the population, mortality markedly increased since 1991.
At the same time, in the north, where the United Nations
is implementing the programme, mortality figures actually
declined to levels that were better than they were before
the Gulf war - in other words, there has been a marked
improvement where the Iraqi Government is not in
charge.

Despite being presented with this evidence, the
Government of Iraq refuses to order nutritional
supplements specifically for mothers and children, refuses
to order all the foodstuffs necessary to complete the food
basket, refuses to release critical medicines from
overstuffed warehouses and refuses to significantly
increase spending on needed pharmaceutical items.

The United States and other members of the Council
support UNICEF's recommendations to improve the
quality of life for Iraqi women and children. The
Government of Iraq clearly does not. On the contrary, it
seems determined to promote policies to deny the Iraqi
people the full benefits of the Council's mandated
humanitarian programmes, perhaps so as to be able
thereby to continue making the specious argument that
sanctions are to be blame for the suffering that the regime
itself perpetuates.

We agree with the Secretary-General's conclusion
that despite the Iraqi leadership's best efforts to subvert
the Council's humanitarian effort, the oil-for-food
programme continues to provide essential support in the
current situation. The programme has delivered more than
$7 billion in food, medicine, medical supplies and a wide
range of humanitarian goods.

 

The Security Council and the United Nations are doing
their part to help all of the people of Iraq. It is time for the
Iraqi leadership to respond in kind and finally start putting
the welfare of its people ahead of its own narrow interests.
Undoubtedly, and unfortunately, we will hear more bombast
on this subject, perhaps even tonight. But the truth of this
sad situation is for all to see in the Secretary-General's
most recent report to the Council and its strong appeal to
Iraq to implement fully the existing humanitarian
programmes that the Council has already mandated.
