Mr. Gounden: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting me to address the Security Council at this open
debate on silencing the guns. Let me take this opportunity
to congratulate the Government of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea for attaining the high office of the
presidency of the Security Council for the first time in
the country's 50-year history of independence. I would
also like to congratulate you and your Government, Sir,
for using this seat ofpower to focus on one of our major
priorities in Africa - the prevention, management and
resolution of violent conflict in all its manifestations.

Our contribution here today comes after deep
reflection of our 27 years of involvement in assisting to
resolve conflicts in Africa and around the world. Over
the past 27 years, Africa has made huge progress in
evolving a peace and security architecture that started
with a fledgling conflict-management centre at the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and has today
evolved into the African Peace and Security Architecture
of the African Union. As the African Centre for the
Constructive Resolution of Disputes (ACCORD), our
organization has been involved with the OAU since
1993 under the guidance of then OAU Secretary-
General Salim Ahmed Salim, and we have consistently
worked with, and contributed to every incarnation of
the mechanism, inclusive of its current form. All of us
who were involved, including Ambassador Lamamra,
have learned a lot, but, unfortunately, conflicts do
not remain static. Consequently, we have been, and
continue to be, on a steep learning curve. I will point
out shortly why today's open debate is so timely and
why Africa's time is running out fast.

Many conflicts in Africa have been resolved over the
past two decades, starting with my own country, South
Africa, and its negotiated settlement, which culminated
in its first democratic elections, held in 1994. We
have since seen a wave of conflicts resolved through
negotiations, including in Angola, Mozambique, the
Sudan/South-Sudan, Madagascar, Liberia and Sierra
Leone, and recently Ethiopia/Eritrea and the Central
African Republic. Those were all seemingly intractable
conflicts, but they were resolved through negotiation.

There is no doubt that huge progress in the area of
peace and security has been made over the past quarter
of a century in Africa, both in creating institutions
and developing knowledge, skills and expertise to
resolve conflicts. Our own institution, ACCORD - a
specialized conflict-management organization - has
trained more than 20,000 people in Africa, many of
whom now occupy high office as presidents, ministers,
senior Government officials, military generals and
civil-society leaders. We have just been ranked by the
annual Global Go To Think Tank Index Report of the
University of Pennsylvania as one of the top 100 thinks
tanks in the world, and the first in Africa. We are still
learning, but we do not lack structures, skills, expertise
or experience in Africa.

It might then be asked: Why do we continue to see
the persistence of conflicts in parts of Somalia and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the emergence of
a South Sudan and Libyan civil war, an increasingly
ungoverned Sahel region and violent street protests
across many relatively stable countries in Africa,
including my own country, South Africa? In this
context of emerging new conflicts, can we silence the
guns by 2020?

The answer is a resounding "no". Were the
aspiration and vision correct? The answer must be a
resounding, "yes". While explaining the 2020 deadline
during the October 2018 high-level workshop in Addis
Ababa on the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative
Mr. Lamamra made the point that,

"In deciding the deadline, there was a need to

balance seriousness and realism".

However, today it is not important to debate the
deadline, but more important to debate the modalities
for silencing the guns. This debate on 27 February
2019, a year before the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the founding of the United Nations, can be meaningful
only if it recognizes that an initiative like Silencing
the Guns by 2020 is merely a mitigation tool that,
in the absence of good governance and the urgent
transformation of the structural drivers of conflicts,
will be meaningless. Many parts of Africa are reaching
a dangerous tipping point, and we are currently in a
race against time. Transformation to deal with the
root causes and the deep structural challenges will
take from 20 to 40 years to address. In the meantime,
protracted conflict ranging from violent street protest
to civil war and from radicalized terror insurgencies
to criminal insurgencies will characterize large
parts of the continent. Robust mitigation, including
silencing the guns, has to be an immediate priority if
we are to arrest the violence and conflict and allow
socioeconomic transformation to take place. Anything
short of that will result in the gradual collapse of law
and order and a deterioration into civil war that will
push Africa's transformation even further back.

The deep structural challenges I speak of are not
new. We are all aware that the vast majority of countries
in Africa have not dealt with poverty, unemployment
and inequality. We have made some progress, but we are
still steeped in poverty, unemployment and inequality.
The main reason is that skills development and
employment creation have not been successful because
there has not been a fundamental transformation
in the structure of Africa's economies for decades.
Most African countries remain largely subsistence
agricultural economies, which have made little to no
progress in moving towards an industrial or services
economy. That occurs amid an exponentially growing
population that is rapidly urbanizing into unplanned
cities that offer no prospects for proper housing, health
care, education, sanitation, water and so on.

That is the main challenge in Africa today.
Introduce guns into the equation and you light the
proverbial time bomb waiting to explode. That is why
we must silence the guns today. That is why we, Africa,
said by 2020, because we knew the urgency of silencing
the guns in the light ofimpending conflicts. The threats
posed by terrorism, criminal syndicates and separatist
movements will continue to challenge our collective
expertise as our Governments fail to exercise sovereign
control over their entire territories.

However, they will be even more challenged in urban
areas, Where they generally exercise sovereign control
but fail to deliver the essential social goods because of
a failure to transform their economies; because of poor
or non-existent leadership and governance; because of
corruption and because they are just overwhelmed at
times with challenges. Our prognosis five years ago was
that the theatre of conflict would shift to urban areas
over the next two decades. Urban conflicts that are
badly managed will result in higher levels of civilian
casualties and make Governments that lose control over
law and order become more authoritarian. That cycle
will have a negative effect on development, thereby
creating a new wave of internally displaced people and
political refugees. That is no longer a prognosis. It is
today's reality.

I know that Council members adopted a resolution
today (resolution 2457 (2019), but what will they do
beyond that? Will they summon the political will of
their member States to halt the flow of illicit weapons,
almost all of which are not produced in Africa? Will
they provide more resources for conflict prevention
and peacebuilding and for building local and national
capacities for conflict prevention and management
so that women, young people, Government leaders,
religious leaders, business people and others can all
be trained to manage conflicts at their source and
prevent the escalation of those conflicts? Will they
ensure that their Member States encourage their private
sectors to turn Africa's extractive industries into
productive industries, while ensuring that competitive
beneficiation benefits local employment and eliminates
poverty and inequality?

We have said much recently, at the World Economic
Forum and in this one, about the fourth industrial
revolution. But will the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo again contribute only their
materials and muscle, or will they also benefit from the
fourth industrial revolution? They will make one of the
largest contributions to the fourth industrial revolution
with the minerals they possess, which are vital to
the revolution.

Unless Council members take collective action so
that each representative here today exercises national
interest through the global responsibility the Chamber
demands, they will not silence the guns. They will
silence only their powerful voices.

