The President (interpretation from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Burundi, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nsanze
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them letter dated
12 April 1996 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council, document S/1996/313.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has taken note of the letter
dated 12 April 1996 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Council on the present situation in
Burundi (S/1996/313), in response to the request to the
Secretary-General in resolution 1049 (1996) to keep
the Council informed on the situation.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned at
the recent degeneration of security conditions and
political cooperation in Burundi. The Council
condemns all acts of violence. The Council is
equally concerned at reported statements calling for
the arming of civilians, which could lead to grave
consequences. The dramatic increase in violence
throughout the country already severely inhibits
humanitarian aid and could have a negative effect on
the donors' capacity to implement development
assistance in support of the search by the people of
Burundi for reconciliation and rehabilitation.

"The Security Council urges the authorities and
all parties in Burundi to set aside their differences
and demonstrate the necessary cohesion, unity and
political will for settlement of the conflict by
peaceful means. The Council calls upon all
Burundians to renounce the use of violence and to
engage in a comprehensive dialogue to ensure a
peaceful future for the people of Burundi.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned at
the widespread purchase and use of weapons by
Burundians, in particular the laying of land-mines.

"The Security Council looks forward to the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in the
report which it requested by 1 May 1996 on the
progress towards commencement of the National
Debate and other initiatives for comprehensive
political dialogue and national reconciliation. The
Council extends its full support for and confidence
in the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and those of former President
N yerere and other envoys to facilitate negotiations to
resolve the present crisis.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General, in accordance with paragraph 13 of
resolution 1049 (1996), to expedite consultations
with Member States concerned and the Organization
of African Unity, as appropriate, on contingency
planning both for the steps that might be taken to
support a comprehensive dialogue and for a rapid
humanitarian response in the event of widespread
violence or serious deterioration in the humanitarian
situation in Burundi.
"The Security Council underlines its commitment The Security Council has thus concluded the present

to follow events in Burundi closely and resolves to stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
consider further all relevant options for an appropriate
response by the international community upon receipt The meeting rose at 12.40 pm.

of the impending report of the Secretzuy-Gcncral."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1996/21.

