Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to start by thanking
the Malaysian presidency for convening this open
debate on children and armed conflict. We welcome
the adoption earlier today of resolution 2225 (2015), of
which Turkey was a sponsor.

As underlined in the report ofthe Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2015/409), the year
2014 saw unprecedented challenges for millions of
children growing up in countries affected by conflict.
The increased momentum achieved by the tireless
efforts of Special Representative Zerrougui has paved
the way for tangible progress. The groundbreaking
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign, led by her Office,
deserves unflagging support. Nevertheless, there
remain significant shortcomings in protecting children
in armed conflicts that require focused attention from
the international community.

Unfortunately, with the changing nature of
conflicts, acts such as mass abductions, torture and
sexual Violence, attacks on schools and hospitals,
limited access to even the most basic humanitarian
requirements and wide-scale displacement have
immense and disproportionate effects on children.
Several of the conflicts we face today in various
geographic locations have revealed the increasing
involvement of non-State armed groups in violating
even the basic rights of children. The appalling crimes
committed by terrorist organizations, such as Daesh
and Boko Haram, must be highlighted in that regard.

Moreover, the Secretary-General's report outlines
the dire situation of Palestinian children, who face
unacceptable violations that contravene international
law. As many delegations have already expressed
today, in the light of the violations committed against
Palestinian children, the list contained in the annex of
the Secretary-General's report is incomplete without
due reference thereto. We agree with the observations
highlighted in the statement recently delivered by the
representative of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.

A display of joint and robust political determination,
as well as concerted action, is our most crucial tool for
addressing the issue of children and armed conflict.
The efforts of the United Nations to provide essential
assistance to children, as well as monitoring and
reporting functions that facilitate better planning,
protection and response, should be supported. The
continued implementation of the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse
by United Nations peacekeeping operations remains
crucial. Furthermore, the decision to include parties
that engage in patterns of abduction of children in
situations of armed conflict in the annexes to the report
of the Secretary-General sends a strong message to
those who perpetrate such unacceptable acts.

As we try to identify tools that we can use to put
pressure on non-State armed groups to prevent any
recruitment or use of children on their part, we should
bear in mind that signing documents with such actors
can lead to exploitation of the issue and encourage
them to use such documents as a means of propaganda
in order to claim legitimacy. We therefore believe that
all international organizations and non-governmental
organizations should refrain from drawing up any kind
of document, including in the form of so-called deeds
of commitment, with terrorist organizations. Instead,
reinforcing the legal framework for the prevention
and punishment of the recruiting activities of terrorist
organizations should be the priority.

I will refrain from taking up the Council's valuable
time to respond to certain baseless accusations made
by the representative of the Syrian regime, which we
categorically reject. We are with the Syrian people, and
we stand by them. Our engagement and assistance take
place in the sight of the international community and
in close cooperation with international organizations,
including United Nations agencies.

The report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict once again revealed the saddening
deterioration of the situation of children in Syria, just
across our border. In fact, as the crisis enters its fifth
year, a generation of young Syrians faces the danger of
being lost to a cycle of violence. I would like to share
some figures with the Council to make the picture
clear for all of us. According to UNICEF, 7.3 million
children are directly affected by the conflict in Syria.
Of those, 3.5 million have become internally displaced
persons, and 5.9 million children inside Syria need aid.
Moreover, 3.5 million children are out of school owing
to the conflict. There are 323,000 children below the
age of 5 who are either under siege or in locations that
are very difficult to reach. In addition, 2 million Syrian
children have fled to neighbouring countries.

Despite all of the challenges, Turkey has pursued
an open-door policy for Syrians fleeing their country
without any discrimination based on religion or ethnic
origin. Approximately 260,000 Syrians are being
accommodated in 25 temporary protection centres
in Turkey. In addition, more than 1.5 million Syrians
continue to live outside those centres in various cities
in Turkey. We cannot overemphasize the fact that
children are among the most vulnerable groups in this
crisis situation. We are extending every possible form
of help to meet the growing needs of Syrian children,
especially in the fields of education and health care.
There are more than 550,000 school-age Syrian
children in Turkey. Around 70,000 are being educated
in classrooms at temporary protection centres. Outside
those centres are almost 480,000 children who need
education. Emphasis needs to be placed on creating
more classrooms and education opportunities for those
children, with the help of the international community.

The most recent clashes in and around Tel Abyad,
which is situated right across from our Akcakale
border crossing, are a source of grave concern. They
have triggered a new influx of displaced people into
Turkey. The forced displacement of the Arab and
Turkoman populations of the northern regions of Syria
is unacceptable and is bound to further deepen the crisis
in Syria. In fact, we informed the Security Council and
the Secretary-General of the situation in a letter dated
14 June.

In conclusion, I would like to underline Turkey's
unwavering support for all international and regional
efforts related to the protection of children.

