Ms. Wensley (Australia): A political cartoon in a
major United States daily newspaper some months ago
depicted the Security Council deep in debate over its
response to a dispute that had already broken into violent
conflict. One delegate is pictured saying to his anguished
Council colleagues, "No, no, no. First comes earnest
hand-wringing, and then comes ineffectual
soul-searching."

 

The reality of the Security Council's role is, as we all
know, considerably more positive. But the cartoonist's
harsh interpretation points to the paradox of effective
preventive action: much of it takes place unseen, and its
success is measured not so much by what happens as by
what does not happen. When it fails, the results are all too
manifest.

It is also true that effective preventive action involves
a complex combination of mechanisms. No single action
can on its own ensure the absence of violent conflict. While
timely remedial action can pull disputing parties back from
the brink of conflict, the most effective prevention ensures
that this point is never reached, and potential disputants are
able to resolve their differences before the use of force is
conceived of as an option.

In a sense, all international cooperation contributes to
prevention, both by creating mechanisms to resolve
differences between us and by addressing in practical ways
many of the underlying causes of conflict. The
interdependent networks of international cooperation in
which we are all engaged, all the time, in economic, social,
humanitarian, legal, security and other fields - even sporting
fields - all play a part in building a culture of prevention.

Strong global norms are a crucial part of this equation.
International law must be consistently applied and
rigorously enforced. The role of the International Criminal
Tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia has
underlined the importance of effective enforcement of
international criminal law, in ensuring that justice is done
and in deterring similar inhuman and criminal behaviour in
the future. The adoption of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court represents a milestone in the development
of a stronger international legal system and a stronger
international culture of prevention.

The network of international non-proliferation and
disarmament machinery is equally important. The Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), arms
limitation and reduction treaties, the Conventions on
biological and chemical weapons and other international
security treaties are all threads in the fabric of our
collective effort to prevent conflict.

When one of these threads breaks, the fabric can start
to fray. That is why Australia, like so many countries
committed to the goal of nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament, was so concerned by the recent decision of
the United States Senate to vote against ratification of the
CTBT. We continue to encourage the United States, and
other countries whose ratifications are required for the
Treaty to enter into force, to take this step quickly.

At a local level, conflict can be provoked and fuelled
by illegal and excessive stockpiling of and trafficking in
small arms. More needs to be done in this area as a
contribution to the prevention of armed conflict, and
Australia is ready to contribute to international efforts to
this end.

Because armed conflict has its greatest impact on the
countries and people immediately around it, conflict
prevention is in part a regional responsibility. There is
great potential for practical, cooperative action to be taken
at the regional level to complement wider international
efforts. Australia is working closely with its Asia-Pacific
neighbours, through the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum (ARF), to explore
ways of preventing disputes escalating into armed
conflict.

The work that the ARF is doing is still at a
relatively early stage, but nonetheless it is relevant to this
debate. There are two aspects to our work. The first is
to develop a common understanding of the concept and
the principles of preventive diplomacy as they might
apply in the ARF context. The second is to explore the
overlap between preventive diplomacy and confidence-
building measures, focusing on two specific practical
proposals: an enhanced good offices role for the ARF
Chairman and the establishment of a register of experts or
eminent persons. On the concept and principles for
preventive diplomacy, a useful input to ARF discussions
has been a set of principles identified by the second-track
Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia Pacific as
being suited to the circumstances of the Asia-Pacific
region. It includes the principles of non-interference,
peaceful methods, consent of the parties to a dispute,
consistency with international law and of course
timeliness.

One challenge ahead is for the ARF to devise a
good-offices mechanism that would be useful in reducing
the likelihood of conflict, while remaining fully consistent
with those principles. The responsibilities and functions
of such a mechanism could include, for example,
initiating contact with the parties in disputes where
conflict is imminent; facilitating information exchange,
exploring underlying issues and causes of conflict;
fact-finding; facilitating contact and dialogue between the
parties in neutral venues; mediation, conciliation and

 

making recommendations to the parties; and contacting
outside experts for advice.

The ARF is also introducing a practical tool that is
both an early-warning and a confidence-building measure.
This is something called the annual Regional Security
Outlook. The document will include voluntary contributions
from ARF participants, identifying what they see as notable
developments in the regional security situation and their
perception of it. A number of speakers this afternoon, I
have noted, have referred to the value of such early
warning mechanisms.

The work of the ARF in promoting peace and security
in the Asia-Pacific region should of course - and I
emphasize this - be seen as supporting and complementing
global efforts to achieve the same goals. But there are
circumstances where regional approaches may be more
appropriate, and there are others where the United Nations
may be better placed to act.

The role of the Security Council is, self-evidently, a
central one, in keeping with its authority under the Charter.
It is a role that must itself build on and complement other
international and regional mechanisms that contribute
collectively to the prevention of conflict. It is an area in
which Australia believes the Security Council can, and
should, do more.

Early warning is one area where the Council could
play a stronger role. Early attention to potential conflicts
not only enables better-informed judgements about
preventive action, it can itself be a powerful moderating
influence on the behaviour of potential combatants.

We have argued before, including in the recent
General Assembly debate on the report of the Security
Council, that the Council should be ready more often to
deal directly with the parties to a dispute. Such dialogue
might take place here in New York or through special
missions, such as the recent highly successful Council
mission to Indonesia to discuss the situation in East Timor,
which was led by Ambassador Andjaba of Namibia and in
which you yourself, Mr. President, participated. Such
contacts, we believe, can help ease tensions, can provide a
very important circuit-breaker for a dispute or can clearly
inform both sides of the risks of escalation and of the
possible responses of the Council and of the international
community should conflict ensue. These contacts can
support and complement the good-offices role of the
Secretary-General and of his special envoys and
representatives.

Effective early preventive action depends in part on
the quality and timeliness of information about potential
sources of conflict. This is where initiatives such as the
ARF Regional Security Outlook can make a practical
contribution. We would very much like to see the
capacities of the United Nations Secretariat strengthened
in this regard, recognizing of course the resource
pressures the Secretariat is under. And we would
encourage the Secretary-General to make greater use of
his authority under Article 99 of the Charter to bring to
the attention of the Council any matter which in his
opinion may threaten the maintenance of international
peace and security. I would note here that the Secretary-
General himself, in his thoughtful opening remarks in this
debate this afternoon, outlined a number of practical steps
that the Council could take.

The Security Council also has special responsibilities
in the areas of preventive deployment and post-conflict
peace-building. The United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force demonstrated the effectiveness of
preventive deployment. The effort that the United
Nations and the international community are making in
support of post-conflict peace-building in Kosovo and
East Timor illustrates the importance of this part of an
overall preventive approach - not just in response to
humanitarian imperatives, but as a crucial tool, used
deliberately in the prevention of recurrent conflict.

We all acknowledge that these are not easy or
straightforward prescriptions. The task of prevention is
a complex and difficult one that requires persistent effort
and vigilance. Like so many other forms of international
cooperation, it also requires political will and a
determination occasionally to confront sensitivities in the
interests of effective collective action - rather than falling
back on that earnest hand-wringing and ineffectual
soul-searching described by the critical cartoonist. It is a
challenge that we believe the Security Council can and
must meet.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation's appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to the
Slovene delegation for taking this initiative. We believe
this debate is a very valuable contribution.

