Mrs. Laohaphan (Thailand): As this is the first
time that I address this body in my new capacity, I
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and to thank you for convening
today's open debate on Timor-Leste.

Thailand has taken a keen interest in the issue of
Timor-Leste, for that newest Member of the United
Nations is not only a neighbour in our immediate
region, but also a proven case of success for United
Nations peacekeeping operations and nation-building
exercises. That a country could become independent
and recognized in its own right in just a few years owes
much to the will and determination of its people and
more, perhaps, to the collective efforts of the United
Nations and individual countries in helping bring into
existence a new State.

The birth of a nation is always a complex and
arduous process, entailing sacrifices and pain while
procuring great joy and pride for its people. Nurturing
a nation torn by conflicts and violence until it becomes
a stable, self-reliant and responsible international
citizen is an even more daunting task that demands an
extended period of international support, as well as
necessary economic and technical assistance. The
United Nations needs to ensure that peace and security
continue to prevail and become irreversible in Timor-
Leste, as a safe and secure environment is a
precondition for a country to embark on smooth
economic and social development. The question is:
What assistance does Timor-Leste need at the moment
and to what extent should we provide it?

Thailand welcomes the Secretary-General's report
on UNMISET (S/2004/117) and appreciates the
assessment of the situation on the ground presented by
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno. My delegation
listened attentively to the statement of Mr. Jose Ramos-
Horta, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Timor-Leste, as well as to the views expressed by
Council members and other Member States. Although
opinions diverge as to the scope and nature of Timor-
Leste's security requirements, a common view
emanating from around the table is that we must make
sure that the gains made over the past several years in
Timor-Leste are consolidated and that the security
environment is sound before UNMISET's eventual
withdrawal from the field.

Given the general volatility of a nascent country
and the complexity of the whole nation-building
exercise while the rule of law and institutions are still
being strengthened in Timor-Leste, it is in the interest
of the international community that the United Nations
should remain engaged in that country for a further
period. Thailand therefore supports a continued United
Nations presence, as suggested by the Secretary-
General.

Thailand has always played a very active role in
assistance to Timor-Leste since 1999. Our long-
standing commitment to assisting Timor-Leste is
demonstrated by our involvement in international
peacekeeping and peace-building operations from the
United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) to
the current UNMISET. Thailand now maintains 62
police and military personnel in Timor-Leste,
comprising demining experts, medical officers, military
observers and administrative officers. In that regard,
Thailand would also like to reaffirm its readiness to
continue to take part in United Nations peacekeeping
efforts in Timor-Leste after 20 May 2004.

The Secretary-General himself has repeated time
and again that there can be no peace without economic
development and no peace or economic development
without social justice. Lasting peace still remains
elusive and a distant hope in Timor-Leste, a country
that continues to grapple with prevalent poverty and
hunger, a high illiteracy rate, an inadequate public
health system and infrastructure and a fledgling
democracy. However, the country is not without
potential for growth and stability. If we are serious
about achieving in time the eight targets set forth in the
Millennium Declaration, we have to help Timor-Leste
as well as other countries that are less fortunate and
less equipped than we are to carry out their national
economic and social development.

The Government of Thailand is conscious of the
complementarity existing between peace and
development and desires to promote and strengthen
human security in Timor-Leste and throughout our
region. We welcome and encourage Timor-Leste to
have more interaction with the Association of the
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and to participate
in the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF). We have also
offered bilateral technical and economic assistance to
Timor-Leste in diverse fields, covering agriculture,
public health, fisheries, trade, investment, banking and
insurance, tourism, internal security and energy. I am
happy to report a positive trend emerging from the
bilateral programme of assistance that we have
undertaken for Timor-Leste and its people, and it is our
hope that our training programmes will enable students
and officials to become valuable human resources that
are crucial for their country's sustainable economic and
social progress.

It is my sincere hope that more can be done to
help Timor-Leste survive and thrive on its own. The
Security Council can contribute to that end by
extending the mandate of the United Nations presence
in Timor-Leste a while longer, as recommended by the
Secretary-General. Undoubtedly, a stable, democratic
and prosperous Timor-Leste will further reinforce and
contribute to regional as well as global peace and
development.

