Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): I
would like at the outset to extend my thanks to the
Secretary-General for the important recommendations and
valuable remarks contained in his latest progress report on
the situation in Angola. I would also like to express our
most profound appreciation to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Maitre Blondin Beye, for the
constructive and sincere efforts he has made and continues
to make towards establishing peace in Angola.

We meet here today following a number of positive
developments in Angola. Such developments should neither
be denied nor underestimated, particularly on a political
level. It has become clear that the peace process in Angola
has entered its last crucial stages. All that remains to be
resolved is the setting of certain pending military issues.
We hope that the anticipated meeting in Angola between
President dos Santos and Dr. Savimbi will contribute to the
settlement of these questions.

It is the view of the Egyptian delegation that the
breaking of the current stalemate, which is obstructing the
complete implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, hinges on
the strong political will of UNITA to be transformed into
a political party and abandon war options as well as all
practices that slow the implementation of the peace
accord. We are convinced that this will not be possible
unless the international community brings pressure to bear
on UNITA's leadership.

Egypt has followed with concern the escalation of
tension in the northern parts of Angola in recent weeks.
In this connection, we would like to express our
agreement with the assessment made two days ago by
Maitre Beye that the only guarantee of the non-recurrence
of tension in the area will be the Angolan Government's
ability to extend full military and administrative control
over all its lands.

In this connection, the Egyptian delegation would
like to emphasize how important it is for the international
community to consider seriously UNITA's remaining and
undeniable military capabilities. It is also important that
it monitor the liquidation of its special guard forces and
"mining police".

My delegation supports the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's report regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola (MONUA). Its mandate will begin tomorrow, as
stipulated in section VII of the report. In this connection,
we wish to highlight the importance of maintaining
military units within the new mission until all the military
questions to which I referred are resolved. I believe this
opinion is shared by a number of countries contributing
either military observers or police to MONUA. There is
no point in unnecessarily exposing their lives to danger.

The demobilization of some 100,000 soldiers by both
parties and their reintegration into civilian life pose a
challenge that is obstructing the implementation of the
peace agreements. Here we support the participation of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in
the development and implementation of training and
employment projects that will have an impact in the very
short term, in order to absorb demobilized soldiers. Such
programmes are vital, particularly in a country with an
unemployment rate of 45 per cent. We hope that donor
countries will offer technical and financial assistance so
that these programmes can be implemented without
further delay.

My delegation reiterates its full support for and
appreciation of the work of UNDP and the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs in the implementation of plans to
develop Angola's national capacity to carry out demining.
We hope that UNITA will help in reopening the main

 

roads that remain closed. Assistance in demining is one of
the achievements of UNAVEM. III, and we are duty-bound
to commend its performance and the sacrifices made by its
personnel over the years.

We support the Secretary-General's recommendation
on the establishment of a United Nations observer mission
in Angola with an initial mandate through October 1997.
The Egyptian delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Council.

