Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In calling for this extraordinary meeting of
the Security Council, Russia bases its position on the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, in which rule
2 clearly states that the President shall call a meeting
of the Security Council at the request of any member
of the Council at any time to consider any issue.
It is crucial that we understand that the Ukrainian
delegation's counter-demand that we initiate a separate
meeting under a different agenda item is nothing but
an attempt to avoid responsibility for undermining
international security. The agenda item proposed by
Ukraine is inappropriate. I would like to ask if anyone
has even read the letter of the Ukrainian Permanent
Representative in question. The situation described in
it refers us to events of four years ago and has nothing
to do with what happened in the region yesterday.

What did happen on 25 November was that the
Kyiv regime made a direct threat to international peace
and security by ordering the Ukrainian Naval Forces to
carry out an aggressive act of provocation with regard
to the Russian Federation's State border, violating key
provisions not only of international maritime law but
also of common law, including the Charter of the United
Nations, provisions that require that all States respect
other States' sovereignty. The fact that this violation
occurred - and moreover through manoeuvring in a
narrow strait, a fairly dangerous method - could and
did create risks to the normal movement of vessels in
those waters. Needless to say, such banditry had to
be stopped, and the international community has to
understand where Kyiv's actions are leading.

We urge our partners on the Security Council not to
take on any responsibility for the Ukrainian authorities'
dangerous behaviour. If this forum continues to be
used to cover for the Ukrainian regime's military
provocations and to blame Russia for exercising its
right to defend its borders, the Council's authority will
suffer irreparable damage.

