The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Germany, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Nikola Spiric', Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to a seat at the
Council table.

Mr. Nikola Sv'piric', Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to Mr. Nikola gpirie,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Matussek
(Germany) took the seat reserved for him at the
side ofthe Council Chamber


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Christian
Schwarz-Schilling, High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

It is so decided.
I invite the High Representative to take a seat at
the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to photocopies of document S/2007/253,
which contains the text of a letter dated 3 May 2007
from the Secretary-General transmitting the thirty-first
report on the implementation of the Peace Agreement
on Bosnia and Herzegovina. I should like to note for
the benefit of members that non-English language
versions of that document have unfortunately not been
issued at this time. The presidency has requested an
explanation for that, so that we may explain to the
members of the Council the reason for that lapse.

I should also like to draw the attention of
members to document S/2007/268, which contains the
text of a letter dated 8 May 2007 from the Secretary-
General transmitting the ninth report on the activities
of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Christian Schwarz-Schilling. As this is
the last briefing that Mr. Schwarz-Schilling will
present to the Council in his capacity as the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, I wish, on
behalf of the members of the Council, to express our
appreciation to High Representative Schwarz-Schilling
for his important contribution to the consolidation of
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I now give him the
floor.


