Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on the
effective manner in which your country is guiding the
work of the Security Council this month.

According to information provided by the United
Nations and humanitarian organizations, more than
180,000 persons have died in Darfur since October
2003 as a result of atrocities, malnutrition and disease.
In addition, it is estimated that approximately 2 million
people have been displaced to overcrowded, unsanitary
refugee camps, and another 200,000 refugees live in
extremely harsh conditions in Chad.

Humanitarian assistance organizations and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
estimate that, since the beginning of this year, some
10,000 people have died every month in Darfur.

In the face of this massive humanitarian disaster,
Peru welcomes the peace agreement signed on 5 May
in Abuja between the Government of National Unity of
the Sudan and the Sudan Liberation Movement. We
congratulate the African Union and all the countries
that helped to finalize the agreement. We hope that the
commitments agreed at Abuja will be undertaken
without delay. However, for that to happen, the Abuja
agreement will have to be inclusive. We must ensure
that the other groups such as the Justice and Equality
Movement and the minority faction of the Sudan
Liberation Movement become parties to the agreement
so as to ensure the effectiveness of the ceasefire.

The Abuja agreement must be strengthened on an
urgent basis. For that reason, we believe that the
Council should undertake four urgent tasks.

The first relates to the humanitarian issue. Peru
takes the view that lack of humanitarian assistance
translates into loss of human life. The United Nations
and specialized agencies such as the World Food
Programme, among other specialized bodies, urgently
require support so that they can provide the population
with food, water and medicine. It is estimated that
approximately $90 million will be needed to finance
humanitarian assistance programmes.

The second task facing the Council concerns
security. Along with humanitarian assistance, we must
strengthen the African Union Mission in the Sudan
(AMIS). This is a matter of vital importance, because,
unfortunately, earlier ceasefires were not observed. We
must prevent such a situation from recurring and the
conflict from reigniting, given in particular the
profound lack of trust between the parties on the
ground.

The third task is urgently to dispatch a technical
mission of the United Nations to Sudan in order to
assess the situation, with a view to the participation of
a United Nations peace force.

The fourth task is the deployment of a United
Nations peace operation in Darfur. To that end, we
believe that planning should begin immediately for the
transfer of the peace operation, with a more robust
mandate that is focused on the protection of civilians,
and with a better equipped, more mobile force with
deterrent capacity. The primary purpose of such a
mission would be to give effect to the Abuja peace
agreement and, above all, to protect the civilian
population.

I have no doubt that, now that the peace
agreement in Abuja has been signed, the Government
of National Unity of the Sudan will cooperate with
respect to the deployment of a United Nations force in
Darfur. Nor do I have any doubt that the Government
of the Sudan will do its best to halt attacks on United
Nations personnel, AMIS personnel and humanitarian
assistance personnel in displaced persons camps.

Peru endorses the draft presidential statement
supporting the Abuja peace agreement; calling for the
strengthening of AMIS; promoting the planning of a
United Nations operation in Darfur; and expressing its
deep concern over the deteriorating humanitarian
situation.

