Mr. Simonovic': I thank you, Madam President,
for the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
human rights situation in Ukraine.

On 8 October, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights issued the sixth
monthly report on the situation of human rights in
Ukraine, based on work of the United Nations human
rights monitoring mission in Ukraine, which covered
the period from 18 August to 16 September. Today, I
will highlight some of the report's key findings. I will
then focus on recent developments, since the cut-off
date of the report.

During the reporting period, the 5 September
ceasefire agreement was adhered to only in terms of
an absence of large-scale offensive actions. While
some areas in the conflict zone reported calm, such as
Luhansk city, artillery, tank and small arms exchanges
continued on a daily basis in other places, with Donetsk
city, especially around the airport, and the towns of
Debaltseve in the Donetsk region and Shchastya in the
Luhansk region being the major flashpoints.

The number of military and civilian casualties
continues to grow. The current registered death toll
of the conflict in the east, as of 21 October, is at least
3,724 people, which includes the 298 victims of the
Malaysian plane crash. Let me add that that number
covers killings registered by available resources and
that the actual number is likely to be significantly
higher. Approximately nine people have been killed per
day since the ceasefire agreement. At the height of the
fighting over the summer, an average of 42 people a day
were killed. The current death toll per day is close to
the level of that from mid-April to mid-July, which was
slightly above 10 people a day.

Residential areas continue to be indiscriminately
shelled by various artillery and multiple rocket-launch
systems. For example, the 1 October rocketing of the
centre of Donetsk hit a bus and killed six civilians
and wounded another 25. On 14 October, a funeral
procession in the village of Sartana, near the city of
Mariupol in the Donetsk region, was hit by a rocket
that killed seven civilians and wounded 18. Similar
incidents have been reported on an almost daily basis.

Recent reports of the use of cluster munitions in
residential areas are alarming. Owing to their wide
impact radius, cluster munitions regularly have an
immediate indiscriminate impact when used in areas
with a civilian presence. Their use in such situations
constitutes a violation of international humanitarian law
and may amount to a war crime. The Government has
denied the use of cluster munitions when approached by
the Human Rights Monitoring Mission on that matter.
It is imperative for the reported use of cluster munitions
to be investigated promptly and thoroughly, as well as
the reports of indiscriminate shelling of residential
areas by conventional weapons.

Armed groups continue to terrorize the population
in areas under their control, committing killings,
abductions, torture, ill-treatment and other serious
human rights abuses, including the destruction of
housing and the seizure of property. They continue
to abduct people for ransom and forced labour and to
use them in exchanges and simultaneous releases of
detainees with the Ukrainian Government. They also
continue to practice forced mobilization of civilians
and threaten the local population with execution.

There have also been continued allegations of
human rights violations committed by some volunteer
battalions under Government control, which have been
performing police functions in some of the towns
and villages taken back by the Government. We have
continued to urge the Government to exercise more
control over all of its forces, including the volunteer
battalions, and to ensure accountability for any
violations and crimes committed by their members.

The humanitarian situation in the areas controlled
by the armed groups remains precarious, especially in
the Luhansk region. Despite the ceasefire, many people
in the conflict area have remained for a second month
deprived of regular access to water and electricity, with
limited access to health care and educational services.
Humanitarian assistance largely depends on volunteers
and a few international organizations, namely the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
Medecins Sans Frontieres. I would like to take this
opportunity to express my sincere condolences to the
ICRC on the loss of one of their staff members in an
attack in Donetsk city on 2 October. Perpetrators of that
and other violations of international humanitarian law
must be brought to justice.

The ceasefire has encouraged many internally
displaced persons (IDPs) to return to their homes
in the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk. Some went
simply to collect belongings; others have remained in
their homes. Those who have returned face serious
difficulties besides the volatile security situation, as
private property has been destroyed or damaged, and
employment is limited, as many business or industries
have been closed. According to the State Emergency
Service of Ukraine, as of 24 October, the overall number
of registered IDPs has reached a peak of 430,059. A
large number of displaced persons remain unregistered.

The conflict in the east has triggered a wave of
solidarity among Ukrainians towards IDPs, but the
capacity of host communities to continue to absorb
IDPs has been shown to be weakening. While most
IDPs continue to live from their savings, some of them,
especially those from Crimea, still have no access to
their deposits in Ukrainian banks. On 20 October, the
Ukrainian parliament, the Verkhovna Rada, adopted
a law on internally displaced persons. That is a
welcome development. As we wait for it to be publicly
promulgated and signed by the President, we very much
hope that it will provide meaningful guarantees to
IDPs, including access to health care, employment and
shelter. With our partners, including in particular the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, we will monitor its implementation.

In recent weeks, there has been an increase in direct
action by the Right Sector and other activists to publicly
remove allegedly corrupt officials or former politicians
of the former Party of Regions. Some of those acts have
involved violence against individuals, particularly when
officials were manhandled into rubbish containers. In
the Kharkiv region, over 12 statues of Lenin have been
toppled by pro-Unity groups since early September.
Such acts, which exacerbate tensions between the
communities, appear in some cases to have been
tolerated by local law enforcement officials.

There are also indications in some areas of
incidents of election-related intimidation and violence
against campaign workers, party infrastructure and
candidates. The lustration law, passed on 9 October,
has been widely criticized both by the Ombudsperson
as well as by civil society. The law is broad in its scope,
enables the lustration of a number of positions, with a
prohibition against allowing current office holders to
maintain or regain those positions. It could in theory be
applied to a million officials.

While it is crucial that the Government take
measures to combat corruption, such measures must
include basic due-process guarantees, and they must be
applied in a non-discriminatory fashion. I encourage
the Government to align the legislation with the relevant
regional standards. These developments have negative
human rights implications and can lead to a deepening
of the divide within the Ukrainian population at a time
when it should move forward with the peace plan and
national reconciliation. In that context, accountability
is not only a prerequisite, but also a cornerstone, of any
lasting peaceful solution to the crisis in Ukraine.

After the 5 September ceasefire, opportunities to
collect the unburied remains of people killed as a result
of hostilities and to identify ad hoc and irregular graves
in the conflict zone have considerably increased. As
a result, hundreds of bodies have been found, but
many of them remain unidentified. The Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights welcomes the efforts that are being undertaken
to establish the identities of the dead and to hand the
bodies over to their relatives as well as to ensure burial
in dignity.

Within that process, the issue of the alleged mass
graves near the village of Nyzhnia Krynka in the
Donetsk region has received extensive publicity. One
of those graves, located near the entrance to the village,
contained five bodies. Two more graves, discovered on
the territory of the Komunarska Mine No. 22, contained
two bodies each. The people whose bodies were found
in the first grave were identified as members of the
armed groups, reportedly killed in action. Currently, to
the knowledge of the human rights monitors, there are
no allegations that they were summarily executed. As
regards the four people from the two graves near the
mine, according to officials of the so-called Donetsk
People's Republic, there exists forensic evidence of
a summary execution. On 15 October, a monitoring
team visited the three locations of the reported mass
graves. The team also interviewed relatives of the
two people whose bodies were reportedly identified.
Their testimonies indicate that those people may have
previously been detained by Ukrainian forces.

The alleged execution of the four people found in
the graves near Komunarska Mine No. 22 needs to be
seriously investigated, and all measures should be taken
to preserve the evidence. Despite the fact that a number
of other graves containing more than one body were
reportedly found in the conflict zone, the human rights
monitors do not have information that those graves may
contain the bodies of victims of arbitrary or summary
executions. If such allegations are made, they need to
be properly investigated.

Accountability is key to reconciliation. Efforts
must also be made to hold accountable members of the
armed groups who have perpetrated grave human rights
violations, including killings, enforced disappearances
and torture. In that context, I welcome the fact that the
12-point Minsk protocol - which includes the passage
of a law on non-prosecution of persons in connection
with the events that took place in some parts of the
Donetsk and Luhansk regions - excludes amnesty
for such crimes as genocide, terrorism, murder, the
infliction of serious bodily injury, sexual abuse,
hostage-taking and human trafficking. However the
law appears to allow amnesty for acts of torture, which
should be clarified in order to bring the law in line with
international norms and standards.

A worrying new tendency in Crimea, in addition
to the previous human rights violations reported, is the
increasing number of cases of enforced disappearance.
In particular, I wish to express concern about the
abduction of four Crimean Tatars during the past
month in Crimea, one of whom has been found dead.
It is imperative that the whereabouts of those missing
persons be clarified and those responsible held
accountable.

The implementation of the 5 September ceasefire
agreement remains fragile. Human rights violations
and violations of international humanitarian law
continue to be committed. There is a clear threat that
we may be facing yet another protracted low-intensity
conflict, as mentioned by Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco. Nonetheless, the 5 September
ceasefire agreement, still presents the most significant
opportunity for a peaceful solution to the situation in
the east.

I firmly believe that the lZ-point Minsk protocol
has its best chances of holding if it is implemented
in line with human rights standards. Almost half of
the provisions of the 12-point Minsk protocol could,
in fact, have a direct positive bearing on the human
rights situation. To contribute to sustainable peace
and facilitate reconciliation, the implementation of the
agreement should be based on respect for the rule of
law and human rights.

I also welcome the decree signed by
President Poroshenko on 15 October regarding the
drafting of national human rights strategy, whose
purpose is to create a mechanism for the comprehensive
protection of human rights. The document requires the
Cabinet of Ministers to oversee the drafting of such
a strategy, with the participation of State authorities,
local government bodies, civil society organizations
and international experts.

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights is working hand in
hand with the United Nations system as a whole, the
Council of Europe, the national human rights institution
and the Government to ensure a comprehensive
approach to United Nations requirements, as part of the
EU association process.

As Ukraine prepares for Sunday's parliamentary
elections, we call on the authorities to ensure that they
are concluded in a free, fair and open manner and in an
atmosphere of tolerance, peace and respect for human

rights.

