Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti) (spoke in French): I take

this opportunity, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of December. I would also like to
congratulate the Austrian delegation for its excellent
work last month. My delegation hails Burkina Faso's
outstanding work as a member of the Security Council
over the past two years and for its tireless efforts to
reconcile the positions of all parties in conflict in order
to reach negotiated, just and consensus-based
solutions.

For my delegation, the adoption of the resolution
that we are discussing today, resolution 1907 (2009),
has a special dimension, as it was under an African
presidency of the Security Council that a draft
resolution which is crucial for several African
countries in the Horn of Africa was considered and
adopted.

I would like, Mr. President, to highlight the
positive and constructive role played by your
delegation as well as the role played by all members of
the Council. This is a further manifestation of the
growing cooperation between the Security Council and
the African Union, aimed at restoring or maintaining
peace and security on the continent.

Today's resolution was adopted on the basis of
the decision adopted at the thirteenth session of the
Assembly of the African Union, held in Sirte, Libya,
which called on the Security Council to impose
sanctions on foreign actors both within and outside the
region, especially Eritrea, providing support to the
armed groups engaged in destabilization activities in
Somalia, undermining all efforts towards reconciliation
in the country and the region, and expressed its
concern at the lack of cooperation by Eritrea in
implementing resolution 1862 (2009), which was
adopted in January 2009.

I can thus say that there has been a convergence
of views between Security Council members and the
African Union on the lack of cooperation and dialogue
on the part of the Eritrean authorities, who have shown
nothing but disdain and denial and have continued their
destabilizing actions in our region, in spite of the offers
of good offices made many times by these two
organizations. This convergence of views led the
Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities
pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations by
adopting the draft resolution that was before it today.

(spoke in English)

Djibouti and Eritrea are two neighbours who have
unfortunately had uneasy relations since Eritrea
attained nationhood in 1991. It may be recalled that the

territory now occupied by Eritrea was the subject of
previous contention between the two countries in 1996.
At that time, Eritrea produced a fictitious map
purporting to show that that area was part of that
country. Naturally, Djibouti vehemently objected,
questioning the authenticity and veracity of the map,
and immediately brought the matter to the attention the
Security Council, at which point Eritrea retreated and
officially withdrew the map.

Again, only a couple of years later, in the midst
of intensive mediation efforts by an African Union
select committee of senior African leaders during the
flare-up of hostilities between Eritrea and Ethiopia,
Eritrea's leader, out of sheer contempt and audacity,
directed baseless accusations against the late former
President and father figure of my country, who was a
member of the select committee. Our reaction was,
"enough is enough", and we severed diplomatic
relations with Eritrea.

This lasted a few years before another
rapprochement and restoration of relations occurred.
But as we have bitterly found out to our utter dismay,
reliability and consistency are attributes that are in
serious short supply in Asmara. Thus, hardly a decade
had elapsed before we found ourselves engaged in a
military confrontation in early 2008 against the
backdrop of a sudden and inexplicable occupation of
parts of my country - Ras Doumeira and Doumeira
Island - by Eritrean forces.

As Council members will recall, both my
President and the Prime Minister of Djibouti have
addressed the Council - on 23 October 2008 and
24 June 2008, respectively (see S/PV.6000 and S/PV.5924) - in order to underscore the seriousness of
the tense situation that resulted in many deaths, many
wounded and many prisoners taken on both sides,
following the military clash that occurred on 10 to
12 June 2008. My Government left no stone unturned
and had exhausted all avenues, involving all regional
and international organizations in resolving this crisis.
Notably, the Security Council, the African Union, the
League of Arab States, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference acted swiftly, calling for an immediate
ceasefire, strongly condemning Eritrea and demanding
that all forces be withdrawn to the status quo ante.
Djibouti heeded the calls and withdrew its forces to the
status quo ante. On the other hand, not only did Eritrea
reject all calls, but it consistently responded to all
entreaties from any party with denial, indifference and
thinly disguised contempt.

The conclusions of the fact-finding mission
dispatched by the Security Council were clear,
unmistakable and far-reaching, and represented a
damning indictment of the regime's erratic behaviour
and on its dishonest and deliberate distortions of fact.
Dissatisfied with the obvious procrastination and
obstinacy of Eritrea over its continued occupation of
Djiboutian territory despite repeated calls by the
United Nations and regional organizations, the Security
Council imposed its will through resolution 1862
(2009) of 14 January 2009, which demanded that
Eritrea implement specific actions within six weeks,
after which the Council would decide to take
appropriate actions. However, in less than 24 hours,
Eritrea, true to its character, rejected the resolution,
dismissing it as ill-considered, unbalanced and
unnecessary.

It is inconceivable that a year has passed without
any implementation of resolution 1862 (2009), a major
decision of this Council, thanks, perhaps, to forces
favouring the status quo for the time being and perhaps
to others believing in the linkage fantasy. But all
underestimate the growing bitterness and frustration of
my people. Addressing the Council in October last
year, my President insisted:

"The impasse imposed on us by Eritrea is
intolerable and unacceptable. The provocation
and inexplicable invasion of our territory are
totally unacceptable... Continued inaction in
whatever form will not only encourage but
reward Eritrea's attitude. That would leave my
country with but one option: the option of war."
(S/PV.6000, 17.4)

The Government and people of Djibouti today,
however, rejoice and warmly welcome that justice has
been done at last with respect to the unprovoked, naked
and blatant aggression against my country by Eritrea
almost two years ago. As a small, peace-loving and
pragmatic nation in the midst of a turbulent region,
Djibouti unmistakably pinned both its hope and faith in
the central tenet of this Organization - preventing
wars under a collective security arrangement whereby
an aggressor of any one State is considered to be an
aggressor against all other States, which act together to
repel the aggressor.

It is thought that only a set of coordinated and
punitive measures, targeting primarily the regime's
civilian and military leadership, can force it to make
unpalatable choices. Given Eritrea's legendary
intransigence and defiance, and the pretence of
righteousness that pervades its propaganda machine,
which churns out dubious statements practically every
day, doing nothing was never an option for this
Council. Sanctions against Eritrea have too long been
inevitable.

Rarely has a sanctions resolution come before the
Security Council involving three countries and, for that
matter, impacting a whole region. Such is the
significance of today's landmark, historic resolution
that hopes are already high in the Horn of Africa that
we might be at the beginning of the end of the
prolonged, destructive, senseless and wasteful wars
and hostilities that have uprooted tens of millions of
people, depriving them of their basic rights to life,
education, development and to peace and security. That
is why the measures outlined in today's resolution
target only the Eritrean regime's destructive role in
Somalia and its infringement of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of my country, without adversely
affecting the people of Eritrea, who are ravaged by
extreme pestilence and misgovernment.

Nobody, including Eritrea itself, has any illusion
about the facts it deliberately wanted to create on the
ground - implanting itself in the sovereign territory of
Djibouti entirely for ulterior motives, as it clearly
reveals in its letter of 23 November 2009 addressed to
the President of the Security Council:

"The delegation of Eritrea also wishes to
seize this occasion to stress the importance of the
final and binding demarcation decision that was
awarded by the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary
Commission. The matter cannot remain shelved
in perpetuity if peace and stability are to take root
in the region. Not only is it important on its own
merit, but it is at the heart of the turbulent
situation in the Horn of Africa, including the
current difficult relations between Djibouti and
Eritrea." (5/2009/602)

Continuing this weird and implausible argument,
Eritrea
"urges the Security Council not to ignore the real
issue behind many conflicts in our region and to
take concrete measures to ensure that Ethiopia

abides by its treaty obligations and international
law and withdraws its troops from sovereign
Eritrean territories that it is illegally occupying"
(ibid.)

Unabashedly, Eritrea is saying loud and clear to
this Council that it is justified in continuing to illegally
occupy the sovereign territory of the Republic of
Djibouti as long as Eritrea is at loggerheads with
Ethiopia. That is the challenge facing this Council.

For the one and a half years since the clash
10-12 June 2008, Eritrea has been stonewalling in
providing information about the conditions and
whereabouts of Djibouti's prisoners of war, numbering
19 soldiers, including a senior officer. Access has been
consistently denied to the International Red Cross And
Red Crescent Movement and to other well-meaning
delegations, countries and individuals. Overall, Djibouti
lost 27 soldiers in this conflict, with 119 wounded. We
have humanely treated and continue to treat Eritrean
prisoners of war in our custody, allowing access to all
concerned. We demand that Eritrea, as a State Member
of the United Nations, accept its international
obligations under the Third Geneva Convention.

For the first time since Somalia plunged into
anarchy and degenerated into a country where feudal
warlords and Islamist insurgents compete for power,
there is an overwhelming consensus within the region
on the way forward to bringing about peace and
security in Somalia. Likewise, other members of the
international community have extended necessary
recognition and support to the Transitional Federal
Government. Overall, there is a major recognition of
the need to improve and strengthen Somalia's security
sector - incrementally, although we should not
squander the momentum.

Indeed Somalia, and Mogadishu in particular, are
currently a challenging environment for all. One
wonders, in the light of the growing and deadly
insurgency, whether the United Nations can be
persuaded to re-evaluate its role in Somalia. More to
the point, one wonders whether the meticulously
observed three-phase approach is compatible with the
overall changing scenario on the ground. It is pertinent
in this respect to note what the Economist magazine
exhorted in its issue of 8 December:
"Until someone has the courage and the
equipment to intervene decisively on a large
scale, Somalia will remain the world's murkiest

failed State, with ordinary Somalis trapped in
their misery."

Eritrea has been warned repeatedly by the
international community to desist from providing
support to acts that threaten peace, security and
stability in Somalia and that prevent or block the
implementation of the Djibouti peace process. The
Council's action in adopting resolution 1907 (2009)
today therefore underscores its determination to put an
end to destabilization activities against Somalia by
Eritrea and other foreign actors.

