Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate,
continuing the series of open debates in the Security
Council over the past few months, addressing different
aspects of sustaining peace.

I would also like to state that Slovakia fully
aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier by the
observer of the European Union.

The United Nations is embarking on a process of
major reform that is bound to revitalize the Organization
in all three pillars of its work. The maintenance of
international peace and security stands at the very core
of the United Nations. It is not a coincidence that it
has been anchored in the very first section of Article
1 of the Charter of the United Nations. Building on
the spirit and upholding the principles of the Charter,
we shall continue to aspire to high goals. Breaking the
conflict cycles and arriving at sustainable solutions
also mean that we need to continually evolve and adapt,
in particular the ways and means that we have in our
United Nations toolbox.

Peacekeeping missions represent the flagship
activity of the United Nations, but they should not be
mistaken as a goal in itself. In each and every scenario,
we need an overarching strategy that aims at achieving
a sustainable solution grounded in a firm political
agreement. Slovakia has been an active troop- and
police-contributing country, having so far served in 19
United Nations missions with more than 7,500 men and
women. Currently, our men and women in military and
police uniforms wear the blue helmets in Cyprus, in
the Golan Heights and in Haiti. We intend to continue
in this endeavour and actively engage in peacekeeping
operations in the years to come.

Peacekeeping missions are a very valuable tool
that needs to be employed with utmost attention
and responsibility. We need to make sure that the
peacekeeping operations will continue to restore the
hope of the people and promote the credibility of the
United Nations - not the opposite. We highly commend
and subscribe to such initiatives as the Kigali Principles
and the upcoming voluntary compact to eliminate
sexual exploitation and abuse. Being a peacekeeper
means being accountable and holding yourself to the
highest standards.

We need aspirational goals and sustainable solutions
and, for that, we need adaptable mandates - that is
using our tools in an effective way at a given moment
and under specific circumstances. The mandates need
to evolve and adapt so as to reflect operational and
political realities on the ground. We shall always keep
in mind the entire continuum of the conflict cycle,
thinking one step ahead, but also looking one step back.
That means that before we engage in a peacekeeping
effort, we need to know why the conflict broke out, why
the prevention endeavour did not work out, and also how
we plan to arrive at a sustainable, long-term, durable
solution. In other words, we need to ask questions such
as the following: what are the benchmarks of progress?
And, what is our exit strategy?

Peacekeeping represents only one ofthe ingredients
of the recipe for a sustainable solution. Maintaining
peace and security is a complex endeavour, where
various strands of United Nations assistance have
their relevant place. We cannot overemphasize the
importance of internal United Nations coordination. To
do so, peace operations need to be part of an integrated
approach. Missions must be linked to other available
instruments for promoting peace, security and stability,
including integrated planning, and implementation and
assessment to ensure consistency and coherence. The
High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
made important recommendations on reforming and
strengthening United Nations peace operations through
an effective political strategy, improved design and
implementation of mandates and enhanced partnerships
to make them much more effective, agile and responsive
to the current realities.

For over 10 years now, Slovakia has identified
security sector reform as one of the key elements for
effective conflict prevention and successful post-
conflict rehabilitation and stabilization. The lessons
learned from many peace operations and missions
clearly show that a nationally led and inclusive security
sector reform process can progressively deal with
the root causes of insecurity and fragility and create
an enabling environment for sustainable peace and
development to prevail. In addition, security sector
reform is directly linked to the protection of civilians
and the rule of law - two other critical tasks that have
become an integral part ofalmost every peace operation.
There is also a close linkage with peacebuilding.

In conclusion, let me say that it is clear that in the
current security environment the United Nations can
no longer solely rely on traditional methods to counter
emerging threats and challenges. We need to continue
being innovative, to adjust and remain flexible. We
need to face the new challenges before spoilers disrupt
delicate peace processes, before we risk losing even
more Blue Helmets and, more importantly, before peace
on the ground is endangered.

