Mr. De Laiglesia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
appreciate the opportunity offered to my delegation to
participate in this open debate on the activities carried
out by the three Security Council Committees
specialized in the fight against terrorism. At the outset,
I wish to note that Spain fully aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
European Union.

Terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations,
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security. Acts of terrorism are
unjustifiable wherever, whenever and by whomsoever
committed.

The United Nations system has carried out
important work in the fight against terrorism and
should continue to play an important role as the
guarantor of international law. The implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
adopted by consensus by the General Assembly in
2006 (resolution 60/288), is a valuable tool against the
global threat of terrorism. The Security Council should
carry out its work in a way that is complementary to
the efforts of the General Assembly, which should in
general be the pre-eminent forum for the international
community to formulate its responses to the global
problems of our time.

I reiterate Spain's firm commitment to fighting
all forms of terrorism, regardless of its motivation or
manifestation, and my Government's wish to see this
objective be a permanents priority on the agenda of the
United Nations.

It is essential to work at the national and
international levels to prevent and combat this scourge.
In doing so, we must not neglect to address the
underlying causes of terrorism, such as radicalization.
The Alliance of Civilizations initiative, noted in
resolution 1963 (2010), which Spain promoted as a

11-3390]
tool for enhancing understanding among countries,
societies and individuals, can be useful in this regard.

Moral and political reasons compel us to provide
assistance and support to the victims of terrorism. The
convening by the Secretary-General of a new
symposium in support of victims of terrorism, as a
continuation of the one convened in 2008, would be
much appreciated by Spain. On this matter, we also
hope the Security Council will provide the necessary
continuity to its intention expressed in resolution 1566
(2004) regarding assistance to victims of terrorism
through establishing an assistance fund or a practical
assistance mechanism, as set out in the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy adopted by the
General Assembly (General Assembly resolution 60/288).

I would like to thank the Chairmen of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for the information provided and the work they
have carried out together with their respective groups
of experts.

First, Spain would like to highlight the work of
the 1267 Committee. We value the efforts to increase
the transparency of the review and updating of the
names of persons and entities on the sanction regime's
Consolidated List. The adoption of Security Council
resolution 1904 (2009) led to an improvement in the
application of the sanctions regime in response to
concerns expressed by national and regional courts.

The creation of the Office of the Ombudsperson
is starting to bear fruit. Ms. Prost presented her first
report to the Security Council (S/2011/29) early this
year and the Security Council, in its presidential
statement adopted on February 28 (S/PRST/2011/5),
recalled the obligation to ensure that the Office
continues to perform its work effectively, to which the
renewal of its mandate in June will contribute.

Spain wants to highlight as well the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to
monitor compliance with resolutions 1373 (2001),
1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010) and to facilitate technical
assistance to countries that request it. We welcome the
dialogue, in the context of fighting terrorism, between

11-3390]
the CTC and relevant bodies promoting and protecting
human rights, such as the Council of Europe.

Similarly, we want to highlight the new strategy
devised by the Executive Directorate to enhance its
role as facilitator of technical assistance and to
undertake a permanent dialogue between donor and
recipient States, in the interest of greater efficiency.
The adoption of resolution 1963 (2010), which
extended the mandate of the Executive Directorate,
will enable the Directorate to increase its participation
in the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force and make it the pre-eminent facilitator of
technical assistance, strengthening States' capacities
and thereby reinforcing the desired integral nature of
the fight against terrorism.

The proliferation and possession of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors or States outside
the scope or in violation of international law constitute
serious threats to international peace and security. We
express our support for the efforts of the 1540
Committee to design mechanisms for monitoring the
implementation of that resolution and its work to
extend its universal application. Spain welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1977 (2011), which
extends and strengthens the mandate of the Committee
in the essential framework of full and strict compliance
with the obligations and commitments incumbent upon
Member States in matters of arms control, disarmament
and non-proliferation in all its aspects of all weapons
of mass destruction and their delivery systems. In
this context, Spain wants to highlight the work of the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and
calls for increased cooperation among all stakeholders
with expertise in combating nuclear terrorism.

I conclude by expressing Spain's appreciation for
the efforts of these three Committees to improve the
effectiveness of their work. It is also encouraging to
see the growing awareness that all measures taken must
respect the rights of individuals. With this essential
respect for human rights, the whole international
community must demonstrate its firm determination to
face down the barbarity of terrorism.

