Mr. Manis (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We are
meeting here today once again to consider the tragic
deterioration of the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, due to the refusal by Israel, the
occupying Power, to abide by the relevant Security
Council resolutions, which call upon it to withdraw
from the town of Ramallah and other Palestinian
towns. Israel's reaction was to respond to the Council's
resolutions with increased repression and by
surrounding the Church of the Nativity.

My delegation would like to begin by thanking
Secretary-General Kofi Annan and by expressing our
appreciation for his tireless efforts to put an end to the
deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories following Israel's aggression. His most
recent effort was the earlier statement he made to the
Council. My delegation supports his proposal calling
for the dispatch of a multinational force to Palestine, in
the hope that it will receive support and be
implemented rapidly by the Council in its quest to
maintain international peace and security.

We join our voice to those of all who have asked
for an international inquiry into the war crimes carried
out by Israel, the occupying Power, against Palestinian
civilians, first and foremost with respect to the crime of
genocide perpetrated in the Jenin camp. We all heard
the statement that Mr. Roed-Larsen, the Secretary-
General's Personal Representative in the Middle East,
made to the press following his visit to the Jenin camp,
in which he described the destruction of the Jenin camp
as unimaginable and the situation created by the Israeli
forces in the camp as a disaster "horrifying beyond
belief". The Secretary-General referred to this in his
statement to the Council today.

On television we have seen doctors warn that
there are people beneath the ruins who are slowly
suffocating because the occupation authorities refuse to
help them. Dead bodies are lying all over the camp,
which could spread disease. Such a crime against
humanity should not go unpunished by the
international community. The same can be said about
the criminals, who should not go unpunished.

We have reaffirmed in previous statements to the
Council that the Council must act quickly to impose
compliance with its resolutions. We reaffirm our appeal
today, particularly following the failure of all
diplomatic efforts, to bring pressure to bear on Israel to
withdraw from the occupied Palestinian territories. The
Council must assume its responsibility and compel
Israel to abide by the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, and to apply it in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The Council must also bring
pressure to bear on Israel to cease preventing the
transfer of the wounded and the provision of medical
and humanitarian assistance to the victims of daily
bombings.

The Israeli occupation forces act as if they were
above the law and above United Nations resolutions.
This is encouraged by the fact that the Security Council
has not taken punitive action under Chapter VII of the
Charter against the war crimes, the State terrorism and
the genocide of Palestinian civilians. That is why Israel
continues its policy of aggression and threatens peace
and stability in the region. I repeat, that is why the
Council must assume its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
also important that Israel immediately implement
Council resolutions and cease its aggression against the
Palestinian people. Otherwise, the Council will have
proved itself able to impose sanctions only on weak
and vulnerable States, and will thus have lost its
credibility.

