Mr. Zenenga: Allow me to express my good wishes
for the holy month of Ramadan.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM) began the new year facing a security crisis
as a result of the mortar attack on the United Nations
compound on 1 January and a political crisis as a
result of the expulsion of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom on the same
day. The two incidents severely disrupted mandate
implementation and the Mission's engagement with the
Federal Government of Somalia. They also elevated the
security risk level for United Nations personnel and left
our staff deeply demoralized.

We immediately prioritized the safety and security
of our staff, while concentrating our efforts on mending
relations with the Federal Government and putting
mandate implementation back on track. Working
together with the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia (UNSOS) and the United Nations country
team, we have taken measures to provide more secure
accommodation and working space for our staff and
to strengthen our resilience to mortar attacks. I thank
UNSOS for the support that it has provided.

However, a lasting solutionution to the continuing
security threat will come from denying Al-Shabaab the
space and opportunities to prepare and launch attacks.
The United Nations system and international partners
are working together to enable the Somali security
forces to take control of areas used to launch mortars
and to support the implementation of a comprehensive
Mogadishu security plan.

We are making good progress on resetting
UNSOM's relations with the Federal Government.
Building on Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo's visit
to Mogadishu in February, my discussions with Prime
Minister Hassan Khayre have been constructive. We
have agreed on arrangements to restore and strengthen
the Mission's engagement with the Government, and the
Prime Minister has assured me of his commitment to
strengthening the relationship ahead of the arrival of the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

There will be challenges on the road ahead and
there are still issues that will test the relationship with
the Federal Government. But we are certainly in a
better place than we were at the beginning of the year.
Mandate implementation is back on track, particularly
in the areas where we deliver technical support.
Those include preparations for the 2020 elections, the
constitutional review process, capacity-building of the
police and contributing to the planning for ongoing
security operations, including stabilization activities.
Working together with other international partners, we
are also using our good offices to encourage dialogue
between the Federal Government and the federal
member states.

Despite the challenging security environment and
the recurrent political crises, as well as the capacity
constraints and Challenges of managing political
obstacles to its reform agenda, Somalia has remained
on a positive trajectory. During the reporting period the
country made significant progress on its economic and
security sector reforms. There was also progress on the
inclusive politics agenda, including the constitutional
review process and preparations for the universal
suffrage elections.

At the spring meetings of the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank in April,
participants commended Somalia for the achievements
on its economic reforms. The satisfactory completion
of the third staff-monitored programme has enabled the
design of a fourth such programme that will pave the
way for the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative
decision point, anticipated in early 2020.

The Federal Government decided to apply the
same rigorous approach to bring accountability and
transparency to the security sector. For instance,
biometric registration of all Somali National Army
soldiers was completed on 3 March. All 16,000
registered soldiers now receive their salaries directly
into their bank accounts. That has cut out middlemen
and reduced corruption and ensures the regular payment
of salaries to military personnel. It also paves the way
for rightsizing the National Army.

In parallel with those security sector reforms, the
Federal Government launched military operations in
Lower Shabelle region to advance the transition plan,
degrade Al-Shabaab in strongholds that are contiguous
to Mogadishu and thereby stop the recent increase in
Al-Shabaab attacks in Mogadishu. In an unprecedented
development, the current military operations,
supported by the African Union Military Observer
Mission in Somalia, UNSOS and international partners,
have catalysed joint planning and the systematic
generation of capable, accountable, acceptable and
affordable Somali National Army units. They have also
demonstrated the value of a comprehensive approach
to security by incorporating stabilization and policing
elements in military operations and have reinvigorated
implementation of the transition plan.

Technical preparations for universal suffrage
elections in 2020 are making progress. The process of
identifying potential voter registration sites began this
month. The National Independent Electoral Commission
opened offices in most of the federal member states.
The draft political parties bill and the electoral bill
were approved by the federal Cabinet and submitted
to Parliament. However, the electoral bill remains a
contentious issue with the federal member states. The
adoption of those bills is absolutely essential for the
political road map to remain on track, and we urge all
stakeholders to work towards reaching agreement that
can be translated into parliamentary approval in the
coming months.

A technical revision of 9 of the 15 chapters of
the Somali Provisional Federal Constitution was
undertaken. That is a significant achievement.
However, progress will ultimately be measured
against political agreements between the leaders of
the Federal Government and the federal member states
on key areas of the Constitution, including power- and
resource-sharing.

Important progress has also been made on human
rights. Following the violence that resulted in civilian
casualties during the elections in South-West State last
December, both the Federal Government and the South-
West State authorities completed investigations into the
killing of civilians. South-West State also conducted
reconciliation meetings with the communities involved
and agreed to pay reparations to the families of
the victims.

On 18 May, the Federal Parliament ratified the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
The ratification will now go to the President for his
signature. I congratulate the Federal Government on
that important step to promote and protect the rights of
persons with disabilities.

Somalia continues to grapple with significant
challenges. The Federal Government's reform efforts
have encountered inevitable resistance. The economic
reforms and security sector reforms in particular entail
dismantling a war economy that had flourished for
decades. There are many vested interests, which pose
obstacles to increased accountability. Taking on those
vested interests requires not only the determination,
which the Federal Government has shown, but also an
inclusive approach of building relationships with all
stakeholders to demonstrate that the reforms will yield
benefits for the whole nation.

The full and sustainable implementation of
Somalia's priorities hinges on the restoration of
cooperation between the leadership of the Federal
Government and the federal member states. While it was
an important step towards the resumption of dialogue,
the consultative meeting held between the leaders of
the Federal Government and the federal member states
in Garowe from 5 to 10 May failed to reach agreement
on any of the substantive issues and on the date, format

and venue of the next meeting. Together with other
international partners, we continue to encourage the
Federal Government and federal member state leaders
to urgently resume dialogue and cooperation, which
are indispensable for the sustainable implementation
of reforms.

The disputed electoral processes in Galmudug and
Jubaland, scheduled respectively for July and August,
were discussed during the consultative meeting. They
have become a source of concern. As was the case in
South West state last year, the risk of violence is very
high. We continue to urge the federal and regional
authorities to draw lessons from South West state, as
well as good practices from the Puntland elections,
and to manage disputes in the upcoming electoral
processes in a manner that avoids conflict and ensures
transparency and fairness.

The dialogue between Somalia and Somaliland,
which also has implications for the completion of the
constitutional review process, remains stalled. We are,
however, encouraged by the remarks of Somaliland's
President Muse Bihi Abdi on 18 May, expressing his
readiness to promote peace with Puntland, including
through the exchange of prisoners, and to cooperate
with Somalia on issues related to security, trade
and education.

The positive dynamics in the Horn of Africa
region hold great opportunities for Somalia to realize
its strategic and economic potential. However, the
ongoing deterioration in relations between Somalia
and Kenya, emanating from the maritime boundary
dispute, is worrisome. It has implications for Somalia's
State-building and peacebuilding efforts. Dialogue, not
only between Kenya and Somalia but also with other
member States of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, is essential for lowering tensions and for
addressing the fundamental issues that have created the
continuing tensions.

Somalia has immense opportunities to make further
progress in the coming months. For that to happen, its
leaders at the federal and subfederal levels must agree
to work together in a spirit of consensus. Parliament
must focus on passing priority legislation in a timely
manner. All national stakeholders need to collaborate
effectively in responding to the imminent drought
and avert a famine. And key relationships, including
with national stakeholders, international partners and
regional Powers, both in the Horn of Africa and in the
Gulf, should be nurtured. The trajectory is upward and
positive. We can all work together to energize Somalia's
population and their international partners towards
reform and progress.

