Mr. Bailly (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February.

The Ivorian delegation - which I have the
honour to lead in the absence of His Excellency
Mr. Ilahiri Djedje, Permanent Representative of Cote
d'Ivoire to the United Nations, who is on mission in
the context of the implementation of the Ouagadougou
Political Agreement - is pleased to make its modest
contribution to today's open debate on children and
armed conflict.

Instability and internal conflicts lead to
uncontrolled population movements. Children, that
important sector of the vulnerable population in our
countries, must thus fend for themselves, sometimes
without parents and teachers, and thus without
education and health care. Hence, we have witnessed
the phenomenon of child soldiers, whether as a result
of their own will, for the simple reason of survival, or
as a result of recruitment. With regard to the latter
case, the report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/757)
states that the recruitment of children and internal
displacement are closely linked.

Here, I should like, on behalf of my delegation
and on my own account, to congratulate Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon on his reading of the Ivorian
crisis. I should also like to welcome the positive
approach of the Security Council and the cooperation
that it has shown in formulating resolutions on C6te
d'Ivoire - particularly the most recent resolution,
1795 (2008), to mention just one.

It should also be noted that, in countries beset by
armed conflict, many children and young people suffer
not only from war-related violence, but also from the
devastating effects of HIV/AIDS. That is why my
delegation commends UNICEF's actions throughout
the country. Congratulations go also to United Nations
agencies, including the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire, the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Food Programme, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the World Health Organization for all their
activities on the ground to make their contributions in
the area of children's protection.

A country such as ours, which makes peace its
second religion, nearly toppled in the horror of an
endless war. Very fortunately, the Ivorian parties
understood the trap of armed conflict and made a firm
commitment to end that situation in order to devote
themselves to the real battle - combating poverty and
underdevelopment - by becoming involved in the
process of achieving the Millennium Development
Goals.

Faced with the deteriorating situation of the past
five years, His Excellency Mr. Laurent Gbagbo, the
Ivorian head of State, took the welcome initiative of
engaging in direct dialogue with the former rebels,
which led to the Ouagadougou Agreement, which was
endorsed by the Economic Community of West African
States, the African Union and the Security Council.
Thanks to the implementation of the Agreement and of
the recommendations of the Security Council, everyone
in Cote d'Ivoire is pleased to see that no Ivorian parties
are now listed in the annexes to the report of the
Secretary-General. No substantiated evidence of the
active recruitment or use of children by armed groups
has been found.

My Government has thus been recognized for all
its actions to protect children, and it intends, more than
ever before, to redouble its efforts in this sphere -
members of the Council may be certain of that. Here,
my delegation considers that, as the Secretary-General
suggests in his report, task forces on monitoring and
reporting should continue their work, supported by a
verification commission, in order to ensure that this
trend continues.

On Tuesday, 5 February 2008, my delegation took
note with interest of the draft conclusions adopted by
the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. These clearly reflect the qualitative
developments in the political situation in Cote d'Ivoire.
We welcome the close cooperation in which we were
involved, and we encourage the Working Group to
continue its noble mission on situations around the
world that continue to be matters of concern.

My delegation is also pleased that, following the
visit to our country by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, C6te d'Ivoire
is no longer numbered among the countries in which
child soldiers are to be found. Ms. Coomaraswamy
deserves my delegation's praise for her appropriate and
convincing working methods.

The Ivorian Government is aware that the future
of the nation depends on the quality of its young people
and has taken a number of concrete measures, including
the following. In November 2005, the National Armed
Forces of Cote d'Ivoire formulated an action plan to put
an end to the phenomenon of the child soldiers who had
fought at their side. Today, the integration of young
people falls within the "reintegration" element of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme being implemented under the Ouagadougou
Agreement. The national DDR programme, which is
being supervised by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and UNICEF, provides for a
reintegration plan adapted to the needs of young
victims of our country's armed conflict. The Civic
Service envisioned in the Ouagadougou Agreement will
welcome all young people who have become familiar
with the handling of weapons in war. In August 2007,
the President of the Republic signed a decree on the
organization and functioning of the Civic Service.
For those reasons, my delegation wishes again to

request the international community to help Cote
d'Ivoire to combat impunity throughout our territory.
We are aware that the Ivorian judicial administration
has not covered the whole of our national territory
since the beginning of the crisis, on 19 September
2002. We all consider that since the courts, the police
and the gendarmerie have not been redeployed in areas
formerly occupied by the Forces Nouvelles, it would
not be appropriate to speak of impunity or law and
order. Likewise, the Ivorian Government still expects
an exemption from the United Nations regarding the
non-lethal weapons that are essential for equipping our
law enforcement agencies.

Cote d'Ivoire is eager for peace and respects
human rights in general and the rights of the child in
particular. With the on-the-ground experience we have
gained in five years of crisis management, our country
is at the disposal of the international community to
share that extraordinary experience, especially with
countries still in situations of armed conflict.

The Ivorian parties - led by His Excellency
President Laurent Gbagbo and Prime Minister
Guillaume Soro, and under the watchful eye of His
Excellency President Blaise Compaore of Burkina
Faso, to whom we express our gratitude - are striving
to bring the country out of crisis, through the
organization of credible, transparent elections. This is
in the interest not only of our country, but also of the
entire West Africa sub-region. To that end, the Ivorian
Government looks to the United Nations for greater
political, material and financial support to help it
redeploy the general administration and the judicial
administration, including the police and the
gendarmerie, in the areas formerly occupied by the
Forces Nouvelles.

In conclusion, my delegation urgently appeals to
the United Nations, and in particular to the Security
Council, to put a permanent end to the phenomenon of
child soldiers, which poses a threat to international
peace and security, either through prevention or by
effectively addressing crises that arise anywhere in the
world.

