Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America): I
thank Mr. John Ging for his briefing.

All eyes are now on north-western Syria, and we
are gravely concerned about the threats to civilian
lives should the regime and its allies undertake a wider
offensive in Idlib province. Tensions are rising there,
and so is the violence. In recent weeks alone, hundreds
of civilians have already lost their lives, many of them
women and children. Education authorities reportedly
have suspended all school activities for several days
in cities near Idlib due to hostilities. Syrian regime
military operations in Idlib, particularly with Russian
military support, would escalate the conflict and
further undercut the Security Council's efforts to work
towards a political solution to the conflict.
We are also profoundly troubled by reports that the
regime is continuing its practice of targeting medical
facilities, an egregious and ruthless tactic flagrantly
in defiance of international humanitarian law and
specifically in violation ofresolution 2286 (2016). There
is no excuse to claim ignorance about the locations of
those facilities under the deconfliction mechanisms
that are in place. Doing so only adds to the lies, crimes
and countless accounts of human tragedy that have
defined this conflict over the past seven years.

The United States takes seriously the warnings
from Special Envoy of the Secretary-General De
Mistura and the Regional Humanitarian Coordinator
that a military operation in Idlib and surrounding areas
would not only endanger the lives of many of the more
than 3 million civilians sheltering there, but would also
severely interfere with humanitarian partners' ability
to deliver lifesaving assistance. Unless the Astana
guarantors - Russia, Iran and Turkey 4 uphold their
own established de-escalation zone in Idlib province to
stop the regime's imminent assault, those civilians will
have nowhere left to turn to seek safe refuge or aid.

The United States is also deeply concerned that
the regime may again use chemical weapons against
civilian populations as part of its assault on Idlib, with
devastating consequences for humanitarian conditions
on the ground and further eroding the international
regime prohibiting the use of chemical weapons. As we
made clear in our joint statement to commemorate the
anniversary of the regime's deadly sarin gas attack in
Ghouta, the United States and our allies, France and
the United Kingdom, will respond appropriately to any
new chemical-weapon attacks by the Al-Assad regime.

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees assesses that conditions
in Syria are not yet conducive for large-scale refugee
returns. Despite the assessment of the United Nations,
however, the Al-Assad regime has called on Syrians
around the world to return home, but has done little to
create the conditions necessary to make that a reality.
In fact, the regime continues to make the country a
threatening and dangerous place for its own people
by routinely blocking United Nations cross-border
humanitarian access, stalling the United Nations-led
political process in Geneva and proceeding with air
strikes and ground offensives - placing millions of
civilians in peril.

As the leading donor of humanitarian assistance
for Syria, the United States supports aid that reaches
4 million Syrians across all 14 governorates every
month, and we will continue to provide that support to
the Syrian people. If our Russian partners are serious
about their concern for refugees and other displaced
Syrians, we recommend that they stop enabling the
Syrian regime's ongoing and indiscriminate violence,
maintain the de-escalation areas and allow unhindered
humanitarian access to those in need, in full accordance
with resolution 2165 (2014).

The best and only durable solution to the
humanitarian crisis in Syria is through a credible
political process in Geneva that leads unalterably
to constitutional reform, United Nations-supervised
presidential and parliamentary elections and a political
transition that genuinely reflects the will of the Syrian
people, as well as accountability for human rights
abuses committed during the conflict. Those goals
often seem out of reach, but we owe it to the Syrian
people to support every effort to make them a reality.

