Mr. Pereyra Plasencia (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to thank the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the two Tribunals for the detailed and
comprehensive reports presented on the work carried
out over the past six months.

Peru holds a firm position of respect for
international law, defence of human rights and
opposition to impunity. Those are the central elements
of our foreign policy. In accordance with those
principles, we support the work of the International
Criminal Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda.

We welcome the efforts that both Tribunals and
Prosecutor's Offices are undertaking to comply with
the timetable set out in their completion strategies.
While we recognize the difficulties of precisely
predicting particular stages in that context, we appeal
to them to continue doing what is necessary to comply
with the timetables envisaged in the completion
strategies. However, I must stress that in this process it
is essential to establish the proper balance between the
need to meet the deadlines and the need to observe the
strictest standards of due process.

In order to render justice for the victims of the
atrocities being considered by both Tribunals and to
comply with the completion strategies, the full
cooperation of States is fundamental. More than 10
years have passed since the Security Council created
the International Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda, and important leaders accused of having
committed serious crimes still remain at large. That
situation can continue no longer. The fugitives must be
arrested, and, once they are in the custody of a State,
that State must make the accused available to the
Tribunal as soon as possible. Other forms of
cooperation - such as, inter alia, access to documents
and witnesses - are also essential to ensure that trials
are not unnecessarily delayed.

Another important element in complying with the
completion strategy is the appropriate referral of cases
involving intermediate- or lower-rank accused to
competent national jurisdictions. To ensure that such
referrals are successful and that national judicial
proceedings accomplish the task of putting an end to
impunity, it is crucial that the referral process be
accompanied by the capacity-building of national
judicial systems. We recognize the work being carried
out by both Tribunals in that regard, and we urge that
those processes receive the necessary international
assistance.

The strengthening of national judicial systems
will not only have an impact in terms of trials referred
from the International Tribunals; it also has the
potential to have a significant long-term impact in
terms of the effectiveness of the rule of law and
improvements in the administration of justice in the
countries involved.

With regard to the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), we emphasize that an
independent audit of the United Nations Detention Unit
is being carried out. We hope that the recommendations
it produces will soon be implemented.

The Security Council, at the request of the ICTY
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
has approved various measures aimed at accelerating
their work and facilitating compliance with their
completion strategies. My delegation is prepared to
continue to consider such requests and to provide the
Tribunals with the support necessary to put an end to
impunity for the horrendous crimes committed in the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

