Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank Special Representative Moussa for
his briefing and for all his efforts on behalf of stability
and peace in the Central African region.

Since its founding, more than a quarter century ago,
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) has been a constant
source of terror and suffering. Tens of thousands of
Africans have died because of its rapacious violence,
and countless young people have been compelled to
serve as underage soldiers and sex slaves.

We commend the progress achieved against the
LRA over the past several months and welcome the
renewed vigour with which a number of regional and
international partners have taken on the LRA threat.
We would all like to see the day when Joseph Kony and
those indicted with him are brought to justice and we
can pronounce the LRA a thing of the past. Important
gains are being made, but that day of reckoning is not
yet here and experience warns that we should take
nothing for granted.

For our Government, what makes the LRA threat
a key issue on the Council's agenda is our belief
that, with sustained engagement, it is now within the
international community's reach to eliminate the LRA
threat entirely. It is essential, therefore, that we remain
united in our determination to crush the LRA, which
has proven its willingness to wait out the international
community and to exploit to its advantage every
opportunity to regroup, such as the increased instability
in the Central African Republic over the past year.
We cannot allow the LRA to believe that it will get a
reprieve to continue intimidating and terrorizing local
populations in countries where institutions are already
fragile, governance is weak and the scale of human
suffering is high.

Success in those efforts will have ramifications that
extend beyond the LRA. Indeed, coordinated efforts
against the LRA by regional States, the African Union
(AU), the United Nations and the entire international
community serve as one ofthe best models ofan African-
led security initiative, bolstered by international
support, bilateral partners, the Security Council and
civil society. My Government specifically commends
the AU Regional Task Force's armed contingent from
Uganda, the Democratic People's Republic of the
Congo and South Sudan for ramping up operations and
increasing their cooperation in recent months. Their
efforts have placed unprecedented pressure on the
LRA, reducing the number and intensity of attacks,
fragmenting its forces, encouraging defections and
shrinking by 25 per cent the size of the population
displaced by LRA-related violence over the past year.

The United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) has the vital job of coordinating
United Nations activities in the region. We urge the
Secretariat to provide Special Representative Moussa
with the necessary staff and support, including at least
one full-time staff member dedicated to counter-LRA
efforts within UNOCA. We also commend the Special
Representative and AU Special Envoy Madeira for their
diplomatic efforts to ensure the resumption of Task
Force operations in the Central African Republic, along
with more wide-ranging efforts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Their partnership is not only
crucial to the success of counter-LRA efforts overall,
but also provides a useful model for collaboration
between the AU and the United Nations.

We also encourage the United Nations Missions in
the South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to work more closely with the AU Regional Task
Force to protect civilians, provide logistical support
and persuade LRA members to lay down their arms.
The United States is fully committed to doing its part,
and will continue to provide military advisers, airlift
support and civilian protection assistance to counter-
LRA efforts. We are proud of the contribution that our
special forces and other military and civilian personnel
are making to the joint effort, and hope that partners
such as the European Union will also maintain their
backing for the AU Regional Task Force.

As the LRA threat diminishes, we cannot turn our
backs on the communities that have been terrorized
by it for so long. We should begin planning now for
the day after that on which Joseph Kony and the LRA
are a thing of the past. We are concerned about reports
that several international aid organizations have
withdrawn from LRA-affected areas in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In that regard, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the World
Bank will be crucial to support for the recovery of
LRA-affected populations. The International Working
Group on the Lord's Resistance Army, co-chaired by
the United States and the European Union, recently
identified telecommunications, road rehabilitation and
support for civil society as priority areas for support for
recovering communities. We call on global donors to
contribute to those efforts.

As Special Representative Moussa has rightly
pointed out, the LRA does not operate in a vacuum,
and a number of pressing issues that affect the region
as a whole also merit our attention. The most worrying
aspect is the ongoing security, human-rights and
humanitarian crisis in the Central African Republic.
The United States Government remains committed
to finding a speedy solution that will allow for the
protection of civilians, the restoration of security and
State authority and humanitarian access in that country.
We believe that adherence to the February 2015 election
cycle laid out in the Libreville agreements remains
critical to the long-term success of stabilization efforts
in the Central African Republic. We also note that close
cooperation between the AU Regional Task Force and
any AU peacekeeping mission deployed in the Central
African Republic will be essential.

UNOCA's efforts to combat disturbing regional
trends such as the threat of terrorism, increased
trafficking in conventional weapons, ivory poaching
and a surge in piracy through the Gulf of Guinea are
also welcome. My Government strongly supports
efforts by UNOCA to mobilize regional action on those
issues.

In conclusion, I note that we are in the midst of a
pivotal moment in the Central African region. If today
we apply the necessary forethought to invest adequate
attention and resources in a number of crises brewing
across the region, whether they involve the LRA, the
broader human-rights and humanitarian crisis in the
Central African Republic or preventing the scourges of
terrorism and piracy from taking deeper root, we have
a real opportunity to save countless lives and precious
resources, and to help to usher the region towards the
stability and prosperity that its people deserve.

