Ms. Rice (United States of America): I would like
to start by underscoring the condemnation ofthe United
States of the terrorist attack on the United Nations
compound in Mogadishu. Our deepest sympathies go
to the injured as well as the families of the deceased
and the people and Government of Somalia.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate on conflict and
natural resources. I would also like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson, Mr. Annan, Ms. Anstey
and Ms. Grynspan for their briefings.

Since 1990, at least 18 armed conflicts have been
fuelled by the exploitation of natural resources. At least
40 per cent of all intra-State conflicts over the past
60 years have a link to natural resources. The Security
Council is currently dealing with several countries in
conflict where natural resources have played a central
role. From diamonds in West Africa to coltan in the
Great Lakes region, the irresponsible exploitation
of, and illicit trading in, natural resources have
financed conflict, motivated antagonists and increased
susceptibility to conflict by fomenting corruption and
competition for wealth. For evidence we need look no
further than the horrors perpetrated in Sierra Leone in
the 19905, or the current conflicts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Central African Republic.
Moreover, the illegal exploitation of extractive
resources often contributes to the unravelling of post-

conflict peacebuilding processes. Conflicts associated
with natural resources are twice as likely to relapse in
the first five years. Societies that cannot responsibly
manage the wealth of their extractive industries are at
higher risk of instability and Violence.

In short, the illegal extraction of, and trade in,
natural resources are directly related to international
peace and security and to the Council's business.
National Governments must lead in responsibly
managing their countries' natural resources for
the benefit of their peoples, but the international
community must support them in doing so by reducing
the opportunity for corruption and helping to strengthen
national Governments. The United States actively
promotes responsible behaviour on the part ofAmerican
companies in line with the United Nations Guiding
Principles on Business and Human Rights. In July
2010, the United States Congress enacted legislation
aimed at diminishing the potential for mineral-supply
chains to contribute to violence. Companies listed on
United States stock exchanges must now submit annual
descriptions of their due diligence on the sourcing
and chain of custody of conflict minerals from the
African Great Lakes region. That legislation also raised
transparency standards in the extractive industries by
requiring the disclosure of payments to Governments
for the commercial development of oil, gas and mineral
resources by certain companies. We welcome last
week's vote by the European Parliament to adopt a
similar rule.

The United States also supports several related
global initiatives. The Kimberley Process, which the
United States chaired last year, strengthens governance
in international trade in mineral commodities. Since its
inception, it has helped to reduce the trade in conflict
diamonds to less than 1 per cent of the world's total
rough-diamond trade, down from an estimated 15 per
cent in the 1990s. Multiple stakeholder partnerships
among Governments, the private sector and civil
society, such as the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative (EITI), are making significant progress
in addressing the link between extracted resources
and conflict. The United States urges all countries to
embrace the EITI principles of revenue transparency
and to support the Voluntary Principles on Security and
Human Rights initiative, which promotes the adoption
by oil-and-gas and mining companies of operational
security measures that respect human rights.

However, intergovernmental regimes and
multi-stakeholder partnerships are necessary but not
sufficient. The Security Council must act as well.
Since the Council last addressed natural resources and
conflict, in 2007 (see S/PV.5705), it has reinforced
the Kimberley Process's actions on sanctions regimes
for diamonds in Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia, and it has
endorsed due-diligence guidelines on conflict minerals
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have also
imposed and lifted a timber ban in Liberia and imposed
a ban on charcoal exports from Somalia. In addition, in
April 2012, under the presidency of the United States,
the Council called on the United Nations system to
strengthen Member States' capacity to secure their
borders in order to combat the transnational flow of
illicit goods that can fuel conflict and breed insecurity
(see S/PV.6760). Whether the Council is imposing
sanctions, authorizing field missions or supporting
mediation efforts, it must continue to give attention to
such threats.

Natural resources remain indispensable to many
countries' economies. When managed and traded
responsibly, they can accelerate development and
improve living standards for millions. But when
exploited for the benefit of the few, or co-opted for
nefarious purposes, they can fuel corruption, violence
and conflict. States fortunate enough to be endowed
with such wealth owe at least this to their people, and we
who sit on the Council owe it to them notjust to discuss
the challenge it presents but to act in the numerous
real-world cases where the illicit extraction of, and
trade in, natural resources threatens international
peace and security.

