Mr. Miyet: At your request, I should like to
introduce to the members of the Security Council the first
report on the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL), which is contained in document
S/ 1999/ 1223 and which was issued on 6 December this
year. I should also like to update the Council on relevant
developments that have occurred since the preparation of
the report.

As described in the report, progress has undoubtedly
been made in the implementation Lome Peace Agreement
of 7 July 1999. On the political level, a Government of
National Unity, comprising members of the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) and the Armed Forces Revolutionary
Council (AFRC), was sworn in on 2 November.

The rebels are now part of the Government and
share in the responsibility for moving the country forward
on the road to peace, reconciliation and development.

Another positive development is the registration of
the RUF as a political party on 22 November, now called
the Revolutionary United Front Party (RUFP). However,
the party still has to adopt its statutes and set up office.
It is hoped that the RUF will give priority to transforming
its military structures into a purely political party. Such
efforts would be deserving of support and encouragement
by the international community.

After a long delay, the RUF and the AFRC have
now also appointed their representatives to the Joint
Monitoring Commission (JMC) and the Ceasefire
Monitoring Commission (CMC). The first joint meeting
of the JMC and the CMC was held on 7 December.

I would like now to turn to the programme of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants. That programme, which is supported by the
British Department for International Development (DFID)
and the World Bank, is now picking up steam. It is hoped
that this momentum can be maintained. The Secretary-
General has been in touch with the President of the World
Bank, Mr. Wolfensohn, to discuss means to improve the
interaction between the World Bank, UNAMSIL and
other stakeholders on the ground.

As a result of public appeals by Mr. Foday Sankoh,
a significant number of ex-RUF combatants have come
forward to join the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme. Similarly, on 1 December, after
an appeal by Mr. Johnny Paul Koroma, 158 ex-Sierra
Leone Army combatants, including 77 child soldiers,

 

reported for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
in the Occra Hills area. Last week, Koroma visited Kabala
and encouraged the AFRC fighters there to lay down their
arms. This week, Mr. Sankoh did the same in Fadugu. But
we have to note that despite these appeals, the response up
to now has been very slow. To summarize, almost 5,000,
or over 10 per cent of an estimated 45,000 combatants, are
now taking part in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme. However, the various armed
groups have yet to provide detailed information on the
strength of their military forces.

At the same time, the disarmament process is difficult
and will require a concerted effort as well as vigilance by
all involved. The estimated large numbers of ex-combatants
and the complex nature of the programme's management
require continuous and close coordination between the
Government and the various national and international
actors to ensure that the programme can be implemented
promptly and without any disruptions to stability in the
country. The United Nations stands ready to assume its role
in this regard. UNAMSIL has been instructed to assist the
Government of Sierra Leone in preparing plans for the
destruction of weapons surrendered by ex-combatants.

After a period of unrest, the situation in the Lungi and
Port Loko disarmament camps is now relatively quiet. In
the last few days, the National Commission for the
disarmament process has disbursed about $25 to each of
500 ex-combatants in the Lungi camp. This money is
supposed to address some of the immediate needs of ex-
combatants. On 6 December, a "pre-discharge orientation"
programme began in the Lungi camp and was received
enthusiastically by the ex-combatants. In this regard, it
would be important to find ways and means of keeping the
period of encampment as short as possible and to expedite
the preparations for the reintegration of ex-combatants.

(spoke in French)

I should now like to turn to some causes for concern
which still remain. The Secretary-General in his report has
described a number of causes of concern for the future. The
security situation in the country remains volatile, although
in recent days the situation has seemed to stabilize
somewhat. In early October, the RUF moved several
hundred fighters from Kailahun to Makeni, which had been
under joint RUF/AFRC control. The town was subsequently
attacked and taken over by the RUF. Fighting between the
RUF and AFRC also took place around Lunsar and
Rogberi. In addition, there were reports of frequent attacks
by armed groups on Villages and roads throughout the
country. In particular, attacks in the area of Kimbia
reportedly caused up to 1,000 persons to flee into Guinea.

Another source of concern relates to Mr. Sam
Bockarie, one of the RUF commanders in the eastern part
of the country, who has made several public statements
that could give rise to some doubt as to the strength of
his commitment to the peace process. Efforts are now
being undertaken by the Government, the RUF leadership
and UNAMSIL to provide him with the necessary
clarifications about the Lorne Peace Agreement and the
disarmament programme.

More recent sources of concern were several public
statements made in the last day or two by Mr. Foday
Sankoh himself in connection with the arrival of United
Nations troops and their role in the disarmament process.

Lastly, since it is reported today in the press, I
should like to inform the Council that two doctors from
the non-governmental organization Doctors Without
Borders have been detained in the Kailahun region.
Mr. Bockarie has voiced his dissatisfaction over the
disarmament process under way. Efforts are now being
made on the ground by the Government and United
Nations representatives in order to achieve the speedy
release of the two doctors, and perhaps it might be
desirable for the Council itself to voice the need for their
release.

Another source of concern for the entire United
Nations family, for non-governmental organizations and
for Governments is the human rights situation, with too-
frequent occurrences of rape, looting and harassment of
and attacks on civilians. Furthermore, both the RUF and
the AFRC have to date shown great reluctance to release
adult and child abductees. Only some 1,000 adults and
children have been released so far. Considerable numbers
of civilians are still in captivity, and there are reports of
continuing abductions. UNAMSIL issued a strong appeal
to the parties to take immediate action to end the abuses,
the human rights violations and the attacks against
civilians. We also continue to urge Government
authorities and ECOMOG to protect the civilian
population to the extent possible, and wherever possible.
In this regard, it should be recalled that a Ghanaian
ECOMOG soldier was injured recently when his unit took
part in the defence of a village against an attack by a
rebel group at Pepel island, 20 kilometres east of Lungi.

Still with reference to human rights, the Human
Rights Commission and the Truth and Reconciliation

 

Commission envisaged in the Lorne Agreement have yet to
be established. As described in the Secretary-General's
report, UNAMSIL and the Government of Sierra Leone are
working closely with the office of Mrs. Mary Robinson, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, to
prepare the ground for the establishment of these two
important commissions.

My final point relating to the various sources of
concern is that the humanitarian crisis in Sierra Leone
continues: the delivery of humanitarian assistance has been
seriously hampered by the outbreaks of violence in various
places. Assistance efforts by the humanitarian agencies
continue to be obstructed by a variety of threats and by the
procedures that must be carried out vis-a-vis various groups
in order to gain access to many areas. These procedures are
arbitrary and at this point there is no automatic access for
non-governmental organizations. In addition, some national
and international humanitarian personnel and experts
continue to suffer harassment, assault and even at times
detention at the hands of the rebel forces. The Lome Peace
Agreement clearly commits all former parties to the conflict
to providing safe and unhindered access for humanitarian
interventions. Clearly it is important that this access be
given without further delay; this would also send a message
to the Security Council.

I turn now to the question of the deployment of
UNAMSIL. Since the preparation of the report, significant
progress has been made with regard to the deployment of
the military component of UNAMSIL. Nevertheless, efforts
continue, in close coordination with the contributing States
involved - to which I take this opportunity to convey my
gratitude - to expedite the deployment so that the
component can begin its work very soon.

The Force Commander, Major-General J etley of India,
arrived in Freetown on 7 December. The Force
Headquarters, including logistic, administrative and security
elements, all provided by India, have also arrived this week.
The Indian battalion and rapid reaction force, comprising
some 1,200 troops, will be arriving in three batches in the
course of this month, and the deployment of this Indian
contingent should be completed by the end of the year or
by early January 2000. Over half of the Kenyan battalion
is already on the ground, and their deployment should be
completed by this weekend.

As members of the Council are aware, the Secretary-
General has approached several Governments now
contributing troops to ECOMOG with a view to securing
their participation in UNAMSIL. In this regard, the
battalion from Ghana, already on the ground as part of
ECOMOG, will be reinforced to meet United Nations
specifications and, pending the final necessary
administrative arrangements, will be brought under United
Nations command by the end of this month.

Since October, the Secretariat has also been engaged
in intensive discussions with the Government of Nigeria
and with other ECOWAS countries, including the Gambia
and Guinea, in order to expedite the deployment of their
military personnel. After the necessary information on
important logistical details that the Secretariat received
from the Nigerian authorities late last week, we hope that
2,000 fresh troops and 50 military observers from
countries with which we have been in consultation can be
brought in before the end of the year.

It is therefore important, as members of the Council
are aware, that ECOMOG continues to play a major role
in providing security at Lungi and at Freetown as well as
in assisting the process of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants, as envisaged in the
Lorne Agreement. The Secretary-General has continued to
be in touch with regional leaders, in particular President
Obasanjo of Nigeria, to emphasize the importance that
ECOMOG maintain in Sierra Leone a credible force of
several thousand troops so that the process can proceed
under the best possible conditions.

The Secretary-General warmly thanks ECOMOG and
the contributing countries for their continued efforts and
for the sacrifices they have made to support the
Government and people of Sierra Leone. The Secretary-
General also renews his appeal to donor countries to
provide ECOMOG, in a way that consolidates its
presence, with the support needed during the coming
phase of its operations to effectively perform the tasks
assigned to it.

(spoke in English)

I would like to conclude by saying that in spite of
several serious concerns which I have outlined just now,
we believe that there is perhaps also cause for some
cautious optimism. It is clear that the commitments of the
parties to the Lome Agreement will be put to the test in
the coming crucial period. Now that the main mechanisms
for ceasefire monitoring and disarmament are almost in
place, the responsibility for advancing the peace process
in Sierra Leone and keeping the momentum in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
rests with the parties, in particular the rebels. The United

 

Nations, in close cooperation with ECOMOG, stands ready
to do its part.

