Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting, the purpose of which, as we see
it, is not only to review progress to date but also to
determine priorities, forms and methods for the
subsequent work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). Not only the quality of work of the Committee,
but also the specific contribution of each State to
building on anti-terrorist cooperation, will depend on
our ability to do so in a timely and proper manner will
depend not only on the quality of the work of the
Committee but on the specific contribution of each
State to building on anti-terrorist cooperation. You, Mr.
President, have successfully taken over the
chairmanship of the CTC, and we believe that, under
your leadership, the Committee will continue to work
in an organized, effective and, most importantly,
creative way. You are deserving of our highest
appreciation.

Thanks to the efforts of members of the Council,
CTC experts and Secretariat staff, and active
cooperation on the part of the vast majority of
countries, the Committee is successfully complying
with the obligations set forth in resolution 1373 (2001)
and has assumed its rightful place as the central
coordinating body in the process of establishing a
global anti-terrorist structure. This has been facilitated
by the time-tested principles and methods of our joint
work: openness, cooperation and impartiality.

It has become a useful tradition in our meetings
to focus particular attention on the conceptual and
practical aspects of developing the work of the CTC.
We hope that this meeting will prove to be no
exception in that respect. The search for fresh ideas and
constructive solutions will continue on the basis of
compliance with generally recognized principles and
norms of international law and consideration of the
legitimate interests of individual States and the entire
international community. The intensive phasing-in of
the second and third stages of the CTC's work, calling
for identifying the effectiveness of the work done by
national administrative institutions designed to
suppress terrorist activity and to hand over terrorists
and their accomplices to the justice system, will mean
an increased workload for members, experts and
Secretariat staff.

In this regard, I would like to make several
observations. Compared with the harmonization and
unification of legislation, which, in general, is
proceeding successfully, we have at out disposal
scarcely any standard anti-terrorist models that, when
applied, would be equally effective in all countries.
Looking for solutions in specific situations will require
individual approaches. In circumstances Where the
CTC has no adequate financial or management
resources in that respect, specific focus must be placed
on stepping up the Committee's cooperation with
profiling, regional and sectoral organizations. They
have information and resources to facilitate the
implementation of various projects in specific
countries.

Setting in motion all of this potential across the
board will allow us not only to resolve specific
challenges with maximum effectiveness and to avoid
duplication in our work, but to take on the practical job
of establishing a global and comprehensive system to
counter terrorism.

Russia fully supports the efforts of the CTC to
establish permanent working contacts with 17
international organizations, as well as the Committee's
plans to increase the list of its partners. Particularly
promising is the CTC's cooperation with the activities
of the Group of Eight's counter-terrorism body, which
was established to flesh out the existing multilateral
anti-terrorist mechanisms and to provide support to the
CTC in implementing resolution 1373 (2001).

We hope that, overall, the second meeting of the
CTC with international organizations, which will be
held on 7 October in Washington, will give further
impetus to the strengthening of our joint work.
Providing technical assistance to those States that
require it must remain one of the key priorities of our
anti-terrorist activities. We believe that one way to
resolve this issue could be to establish, under United
Nations auspices, an international fund to combat
terrorism.

As we make the transition from stage B to
stage C - to use the terminology of the CTC - the
Committee must learn to work at variable speeds,
taking into account existing differences in national
anti-terrorist capabilities. Evening these out will
require not only financial resources, but time. Those
States that are more advanced, however, must not wait
complacently for those lagging behind to catch up.
They must be moving forward constantly under the
leadership of the CTC, in prompt implementation of all
the measures that are called for under resolution 1373
(2001).

