Mr. Arrocha Ruiz (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking the Peruvian
presidency for its initiative in proposing today's timely
debate, a very significant one in the history of the
Security Council, which draws our attention to the
importance and need to ensure that we take greater
responsibility for dealing with the challenge of the
youth, peace and security agenda, to which my country
is deeply committed. We listened with interest to
Mr. Graeme Simpson's presentation of the independent
progress study on youth, peace and security (see S/2018/86) and its recommendations, and we agree with
his assessment that stigmatization and stereotypes have
no place in that process. We also welcome the special
call for inclusion in the statements by the youth leaders
from Haiti and the Central African Republic.

Resolution 2250 (2015), which was adopted
unanimously by the Security Council in 2015, is
unquestionably one of our points of reference in
recognizing the role that young people can and should
play in preventing conflicts and violence and, even more
so, in consolidating peace processes. It is therefore our
duty to meet those expectations with concrete action
and to lay the groundwork to promote the inclusion
and participation of young people as strategic allies in
building a safer and more just world.

In support of resolution 2250 (2015) and as a
contribution to the progress study, in May 2017 Panama
hosted the first regional consultation on youth, peace
and security for the Latin American and Caribbean
region, in which we welcomed the more than 60 young
people who met to discuss a single agenda - preventing
violence and conflict and promoting and strengthening
peace. Beyond confirming the security challenges
that young people are facing in Latin America and the
Caribbean, the meeting demonstrated the potential
of young people to make a concrete contribution to
developing alternative mechanisms that involve them as
dynamic actors in working to achieve the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. We are also pleased to
report that in March we welcomed the Secretary-
General's Envoy on Youth to Panama for a meeting
putting in context young leaders' motivation and
involvement in transforming the development agenda.
As people have already said, the current generation of
young people have a greater wealth of scientific and
technological resources available to them than ever
before, so our efforts to involve this generation must
live up to the expectations of the globalized society that
they are dealing with. We are also seeing how young
people can be dangerously and damagingly exposed
to transnational crime, including, most worryingly,
terrorism networks.

Young people are clearly a priority for my
Government. That is why we have committed to
strengthening our national education and gender-equity
agendas as factors that are extremely important to our
society's homogeneous growths. To that end, we have
developed a series of initiatives aimed at empowering
our young people to become active stakeholders in
formulating public policy. We know that investing in
education and human capital is a determining factor in
young people's development.

As you say in your concept note (S/2018/324, annex), Mr. President, the impact of conflict on young
people is not homogeneous because the realities they
encounter vary greatly depending on the region where
they live. Today, well into the twenty-first century,
we have seen with horror the rising numbers of young
women who are victims of violence, exploitation and
sexual abuse, especially in regions of armed conflict. In
View of these global challenges, Panama is committed
to its inter-institutional strategic youth plan for 2015
to 2019, which was specifically developed to improve
young people's participation in conflict prevention and
security efforts, with the support of non-traditional
actors, civil society and private-sector stakeholders, in
order to form a multisectoral alliance focused on the
same goals.

By focusing on six fundamental areas, my country
aims to ensure social inclusion through access to
education, technology and job training; access to
quality health care and a healthy environment;
the prevention of violence; decent housing; equal
opportunities and access to credit; and access to the
arts, sports and culture, among other things. Through
specific programmes such as Bilingual Panama, we are
creating tools to give young people better opportunities
in the workplace, while our universal grant programme
is designed to help prevent school dropouts and in
particular to ensure that everyone can obtain a primary

education. In addition, since prevention is the key to the
success of such efforts, we have focused on renovating
sports complexes, thereby fostering a culture of sport
as a tool for promoting peace.

In January 2019, Panama will host World Youth
Day, an event that seeks to build a better world by
bringing together young people from all over the globe
around the common objective of working to achieve a
culture of peace by overcoming cultural and religious
barriers. In the presence of Pope Francis, a leader in
promoting a vision of faith and understanding, and as
a country with a humanitarian calling, Panama will
once again open its doors to global youth to provide a
space for dialogue and an exchange of views on peace,
tolerance and conflict prevention.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming Panama's
commitment to actively and constructively contributing
to the youth, peace and security agenda in order to
maximize the collective efforts that offer us the tools
we need to prepare our youth for what is unquestionably
a more globalized world.

