Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
We would like to echo the congratulations offered
by the representative of Equatorial Guinea on the
victory of Russia's football team and wish the team
continued success.

We are pleased that Mr. Iliichev is present at
today's meeting. He is the Director of the Department
of International Organizations of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Russia and a long-time friend of the
Security Council.

(spoke in English)

I would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for her semi-annual briefing to the Council
and for her efforts to uphold international rule of
law, justice, transparency and accountability. I also
welcome His Excellency Ambassador Omer Dahab Fadl
Mohamed, Permanent Representative of the Republic
of the Sudan, to the Chamber.

We took note of the twenty-seventh report of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court pursuant
to resolution 1593 (2005) and would like to make the
following observations.

Kazakhstan welcomes Khartoum's commitment to
stability in Darfur and to strengthened cooperation with
the United Nations and the African Union (AU). Such
efforts have resulted in the continuing improvement
in the security and humanitarian situation in Darfur,
an overall reduction in intercommunal clashes and the
consolidation of Government authority throughout the
area. Our delegation believes that those positive results
would not have been achieved without respect for the
national ownership, sovereignty and independence of
the Sudan. We encourage the Government of the Sudan
to maintain that positive momentum and to continue to
work diligently with the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United Nations
country team to advance the peace process, address
the root causes of the conflict and achieve peace and
prosperity for the entire Sudanese population.

Kazakhstan is confident that constructive and
inclusive dialogue, in accordance with the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, is the only way to
establish peace and stability in Darfur. We encourage
the Court to join regional and international efforts
to reach the objectives of the Doha Document by
supporting the Sudan's capacity to promote the rule of
law, address impunity and protect human rights.

In conclusion, as a member-observer of the African
Union, Kazakhstan underscores the critical role of the
AU in resolving the crisis in Darfur and its return to
peace and justice. We therefore suggest that the Court
take into consideration the unified position of the
African Union and establish dialogue with the Open-
ended Ministerial Committee of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs on the ICC.

Lastly, we believe that our joint efforts and mutual
trust among all parties and institutions will definitely
lead to a stable, peaceful and prosperous Sudan.

