The President: I want, in my capacity as
President, to thank very warmly all my colleagues who
have expressed their congratulations and their
commitment to support and cooperation. That will be
essential, and as President I appreciate it very much.
The strength and credibility of the Council will depend
on the solidity of its unity.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Italy.

First of all, like previous speakers, Italy strongly
appreciates Mr. Moreno-Ocampo's briefing and
reiterates its full support for the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and its Prosecutor.
Italy reaffirms its strong conviction that the fight
against impunity for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law must be a
priority of the international community. Such grave
violations must be prosecuted and punished either at
the national or the international level. That is a must,
not only because such violations are intrinsically
outrageous, but also because they represent a
continuous threat to international peace and security.

Bearing that in mind, the Security Council, in its
resolution 1593 (2005) - as many others have noted
here around the table, but I think it is good to recall
once more that decision of the Council, just to send the
strong message that all of us want to send - decided
to refer the situation in Darfur to the International
Criminal Court, stating that "the Government of Sudan
and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur, shall
cooperate fully with and provide any necessary
assistance to the Court and the Prosecutor pursuant to
this resolution" (resolution 1593 (2005), para. 2).

Cooperation is a dynamic process that requires an
ongoing dialogue between all the parties concerned and
mutual confidence to establish productive relationships
based on mutual respect. That cannot be achieved
without the fulfilment of obligations deriving from the
United Nations Charter and other relevant provisions
of international law. We are concerned by the reported
lack of cooperation of the Government of the Sudan in
the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005).

Italy commends the efforts made by various
national and international actors to bring a
comprehensive and lasting peace to Darfur. It must be
noted, however, that those efforts have not been
sufficient to relieve the civilian population from
violence and suffering. In particular, further efforts
have to be made to establish accountability for crimes
committed in Darfur, starting with the execution of the
arrest warrants issued by the ICC last April.
I think it is important to keep in mind what
several previous speakers have highlighted - the
multidimensional nature of the process. We have the
political dimension, the security dimension, the
development dimension, the humanitarian dimension
and the human rights/rule of law/no culture of
impunity dimension. All those tracks, as has been said,
are mutually reinforcing. Mutually reinforcing means
that it is not a zero-sum game. It is not, for example,
that if we accelerate on the political track, we have to
dccelerate on other tracks. I think we have to keep that
in mind.

The execution of ICC arrest warrants should not
be seen as the sole purpose of the cooperation process,
as has been said by other speakers before me. The
prosecution of all the alleged perpetrators is of crucial
importance in preventing further offences and in
settling accounts with the past. We understand that
investigation activities are still going on in Darfur, and
in that regard Italy notes that the Prosecutor has
informed the Council that his Office "has also
documented attacks committed by rebel factions that
warrant further investigation by the Office".

Finally, we strongly support a response of the
Council, as has been mentioned by others, to the
briefing heard today in order to reaffirm resolution
1593 (2005) and the need for all parties to the conflict
in Darfur to cooperate fully with the International
Criminal Court, including in the execution of the arrest
warrants. I hope that we will be able to send a strong
message.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12. 05 pm.
