Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal congratulates Angola, a brotherly
and friendly African country, on its assumption of
the presidency for the month of March. We also take
this opportunity to congratulate Angola's predecessor,
Venezuela, for the excellent way in which it conducted
the work of the Council last month.

Senegal champions the ideal of a world without
nuclear arms and calls for the total prohibition of
nuclear testing and the launching of ballistic missiles.
It was in that spirit that Senegal co-sponsored and
voted in favour of resolution 2270 (2016) in order to
condemn the recent activities of North Korea, which
constitute a threat to the nuclear non-proliferation
regime. Senegal therefore welcomes the unanimous
adoption of the resolution because, among the new
provisions contained therein, there are restrictions on
the export of certain minerals and other rare metals,
unless the funds generated by those exports are used
for the subsistence of the North Korean population
and not to fund Pyongyang's nuclear and ballistic-
missile programmes. We also note the prohibition on
the import of aviation and rocket fuel, as well as the
complete embargo on arms. Moreover, we stress that all
goods destined for North Korea will undergo stringent
inspection, which will without a doubt make it possible
to increase pressure on the regime, in particular since
the resolution steps up sanctions on banks and foreign
assets and introduces restrictions on air links to North
Korea. The resolution imposes new trade restrictions
and prohibits vessels suspected of transporting illegal
cargo to North Korea from entering ports.

As we have all observed, the text significantly
strengthens already existing sanctions against
Pyongyang due to the fourth nuclear test and the missile
launches of 6 January and 7 February 2016, respectively,
in violation of several Security Council resolutions. We
hope that the persons and entities newly added to the
sanctions list, including North Korea's space agency
and intelligence services, as well as the new measures
referred to previously, will strengthen the effectiveness
of the sanctions regime this time. Indeed, the previous
sanctions did not prevent the progressive improvement
and expansion of the nuclear and ballistic missile
capacity of Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
which continues to flagrantly violate the resolutions
and repeated demands of the Council to respect
its international obligations in this area in a clear,
irreversible and verifiable manner.

In conclusion, my delegation should like to stress
that sanctions are not our objective; better yet, they are
a means or a lever available to the Council to maintain
international peace and security. We hope that these
measures will contribute to the strengthening or, more
specifically, the resumption of talks in the Korean
peninsula for the good of the international community.

