Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola) (spoke in French):
Allow me to commend you, Mr. President, for a very
rich French presidency of the Security Council this
month and for the choice of the theme of this morning's
debate. I would also like to congratulate and welcome
President Faustin Touadera, who has honoured us
with his presence today and with the living example
of a country that gives us hope for the possibility of
emerging from crises, thanks to the President's clear-
sighted leadership of the Central African Republic at
the present time.

(spoke in English)

Would like also to thank the Secretary-General for
his opening remarks and Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
who spoke to us from Geneva, for his insightful and
comprehensive briefing to the Council.

There is wide agreement on the postulate that
prevention is the most effective way to address
potential conflict situations; that States bear the
primary responsibility for the protection of its civilian
populations and that the international community plays
a subsidiary, but very important, role in addressing
these serious issues. The latest report of the Secretary-
General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2016/447) outlines how civilians account for the vast
majority of casualties in today's armed conflicts, which
are characterized by high levels of brutality and a
disregard for human life and dignity. Civilians are killed,
severely injured, maimed, tortured, taken hostage and
disappeared. They are abducted, forcibly recruited into
armed groups, displaced from their homes, separated
from their families and denied access to the most basic
necessities in targeted and indiscriminate acts. Sexual
and gender-based violence is widespread in schools,
while direct attacks on schools and hospitals have
become commonplace.

Humanitarian needs have reached a peak with over
60 million people displaced, owing to conflicts, and
over 80 per cent of United Nations humanitarian funding
directed to respond to conflicts, and humanitarian access
remains a key challenge, limited or restricted as it is
in many complex situations. Humanitarian and health-
care workers are deliberately targeted and international
humanitarian law is permanently violated against a
backdrop of prevailing impunity. For these reasons, we
fully share the Secretary-General's View that ensuring
accountability should be a priority since most parties
in today's armed conflicts consistently disregard their
obligations under international humanitarian law by
deliberately targeting and brutalizing civilians and
attacking civilian infrastructure, while widespread
impunity deprives victims of any kind ofjustice.

The report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) underlines the
protection of civilians in armed conflict as a core
principal of international humanitarian law and a moral
responsibility of the United Nations. We acknowledge
that the crucial role of peacekeeping operations in the
protection of civilians is an important element of the
global commitment to prevent and resolve conflicts.

Angola welcomes the commitment of the Secretary-
General to involve the United Nations and the Security
Council in particular in situations of escalating
risks to civilians. In countries where United Nations
peacekeeping operations are deployed, the missions'
capacities to fulfil their mandates must be ensured,
especially the protection of civilians. In fact, we are of
the view that the credibility of a given peacekeeping
mission depends on its capability and resolve to act
when civilians are under threat.

The High-level Panel calls for sustained, predictable
and flexible funding mechanisms in support of
peacekeeping operations. Since most peacekeeping
operations are deployed on the African continent, we
join the Panel in recommending the strengthening of
the United Nations-African Union partnership in order
to guarantee a more effective protection of civilians,
particularly in African Union-led peacekeeping
operations. The case of the Central African Republic
clearly illustrates the importance of this and the
example and the testimony presented to the Council by
President Touadera is quite clear on this.

That is why Angola welcomes the adoption, in 2015,
ofthe Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians as
a tool to assess the effectiveness of the implementation
of the protection of civilians mandates and enhanced
accountability. Timely coordination between missions
and humanitarian actors is crucial in pursuing enhanced
strategies, as those partners often work closely with the
communities, especially internally displaced persons.

Engagement with the local communities in the
promotion and protection of civilians is also vital.
Community alert networks and community liaison
assistants are of crucial importance in understanding
perceptions of threats at the community level with a
View to reducing risks and understanding how they
should be addressed by peacekeeping operations.
We welcome the deployment of senior advisers on
the protection of civilians in all missions, with an
advisory role on the development of strategies and in
coordinating protection of civilian mandates. Another
measure that has demontrated great effectiveness is
the deployment training of peacekeeping personnel on
the protection of civilians, in particular children and
women, and on conflict-related sexual Violence, in
accordance with United Nations standards, mandates
and the rules of engagement.

We reiterate the key importance of ensuring
political solutions to conflicts by non-coercive means.
We recall that preventive diplomacy remains the most
effective way of reducing the risk of armed conflict and
protecting civilians.

Finally, we highlight the critical importance
of improving the accountability, transparency and
performance of United Nations peace operations. The
proper conduct and discipline of personnel are crucial
to their credibility and effectiveness. The United
Nations should continue to advocate the political and
peaceful settlement of disputes, in accordance with the
Charter, at the core of the international effort to prevent
and resolve conflicts and protect civilians.

