Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (Spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank the Secretary-General's
Special Representative and Ambassador Tanin for
their outstanding presentations. I would like to begin
my statement today by condemning this morning's
deplorable attack in Kabul against the parliament
of Afghanistan. My condemnation is twofold: first,
because it was an attack on innocent people; and,
secondly, because it was an attack on all of Afghan
society and on all ofthe country's parliamentary groups,
which, I would recall, were democratically elected. It
took place at a particularly important moment, because
those groups were deciding on the appointment of
the new Minister of Defence and agreeing on the
extension of the parliament's legislative functions. The
Security Council and the members of the international
community must therefore be more united than ever
in their condemnation. As the Security Council's
penholder on Afghanistan, Spain is circulating a draft
press release that we trust will be adopted today.

My statement will focus on five main areas
related to Afghanistan: first, recent developments,
the Government and the elections; secondly, security
matters; thirdly, questions related to reconciliation;
fourthly, the situation in the region and its new
involvement in the country; and, fifthly, the Tripartite
Commission. Before I move on, I should say that Spain
aligns itself with the statement to be made later by the
representative of the European Union.

In the three months since the Security Council
last met on this issue (see S/PV.7403), there has been
continued progress of the Afghan Government, which
I welcome, on the road of reform and the consolidation
of the gains already made, in accordance with the will
of the Afghan people, expressed through the ballot box.
It is essential to continue on that road. I would like to
reiterate once again Spain's support for President Ghani
and the national unity Government. We also welcome
the fact that the process of forming the Government and
appointing the remaining high-level positions is nearing
completion, and I listened with particular interest to
Ambassador Tanin's words regarding the participation
of women in that process. We also welcome the
impetus given to the practical implementation of the
Government's work through tools such as the lOO-day
action plans of the various ministries.

Much remains to be done, however, and the
challenges ahead are considerable. The implementation
of the reforms, in particular the electoral reform, which
remains pending, must be accelerated. The postponed
parliamentary elections must be held and, above all, the
gains of recent years must be preserved. In this new
phase, as in previous phases, Afghanistan can count on
the support of Spain and the international community
as a whole.

With regard to security, we are concerned by the
increase in insurgent violence and terrorist acts, whose
perpetrators clearly hold Afghanistan and Afghans in
contempt. We deplore the increase in the number of
civilian victims of the conflict, which is reflected in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/422), and we
are concerned by the persistent reports of the presence
of foreign terrorist fighters. We must not be daunted,
however, just as the members of the Afghan security
forces and bodies, who are paying a high price for
valiantly and resolutely performing their mission,
are not daunted. Spain reiterates its commitment to
supporting those forces and bodies through the Resolute
Support Mission, which provides security training,
advisers and assistance.

With regard to the reconciliation process, progress
must be made as quickly as possible towards national
peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan, and I would
emphasize that we must involve the Taliban more. The
process must be Afghan-led, as Ambassador Tanin
rightly said, or it will quite simply not succeed. It
must also, however, preserve the gains made over the
last 14 years, particularly in the area of human rights
and, above all, women's and girls' rights. We therefore
welcome the guarantees provided in that regard on many
occasions by President Ghani and the high priority that
his Government will give to the respect and promotion
of human rights in Afghanistan.

I will now move on to the role of the region, about
which Ambassador Tanin spoke in detail. We also
welcome the newfound dynamism of Afghanistan
and its neighbours, which have recently given a new
dimension to regional affairs. As a supporting country
of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, Spain is utterly
convinced of the importance of that new dimension for
the stability of the progress made in Afghanistan. We
particularly welcome the substantive steps taken by
Afghanistan and Pakistan to enhance their cooperation
in the face of their common challenges and shared
threats.

Lastly, I would like to mention the Tripartite
Commission, which comprises representatives of the
Government of Afghanistan, the international donor
community, and UNAMA and United Nations agencies.
The Commission is to examine the role, structure and
activities of all United Nations entities in Afghanistan,
as requested of the Secretary-General by the Security
Council in its resolution 2210 (2015) and in response to

the interest in the matter expressed by Afghanistan. In
its capacity as penholder, Spain would encourage the
Government of Afghanistan to exercise its irreplaceable
leadership in that process, without which the expected
result will not be achieved within the desired time
frame.

