Mr. Daeic' (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation providedby the delegation): Iam surprisedatMr. Hoxhaj's
words. Kosovo is not in a position to lecture anyone
about international law, considering that it unilaterally
declared independence from our country without any
kind of agreement. Do we want to re-examine the past
or talk about the future? I do not know why Mr. Hoxhaj
is involving Serbia in his discussion with Russia. If
he has something to say against Russia, what kind of
joint Russian-Serbian activity is he talking about? He
is misusing this meeting of the Security Council for the
purposes of purveying classic propaganda.

When we were in Berlin two years ago, we talked
about peace and security and about consolidating and
normalizing the situation. Does Mr. Hoxhaj think this
is his contribution to that? In the more than 10 times I
have been here with Prime Minister Thaci I have never
discussed such things with him. I would therefore
like to ask every other member of the Government of
Kosovo to try not to be more Catholic than the Pope.
I want our relations to be normalized. Serbia does
not participate in any acts of aggression anywhere in
the world. If our citizens go to Syria and Iraq or our
Islamist citizens participate in jihadist activities, we
would condemn that most strongly, and the same goes
for those who volunteer to be on the side of pro-Russian
forces in Ukraine.

But I believe that what Mr. Hoxhaj is doing in
using this Security Council meeting to lecture others,
including Serbia, is a classic example of abuse of that
privilege. Today we are discussing Kosovo and the
situation of human rights there. We are discussing the
commitments that Kosovo has made under the Brussels
Agreement that I myself signed, together with Hashim
Thaci. What about the Agreement's stipulations on an
amnesty law and on the creation of a community of
Serbian municipalities? What is going on with that? I
am trying to arrive at agreements and an understanding
so that we can move forward and make progress.

I think the representative of France put it best when
he spoke to Mr. Hoxhaj in Pristina, but I agree that
what he said also applies to Belgrade. He said that we
cannot face our future if we do not shine a light on our
past - but do we want to continue to live in the past?
We want to reach a political solution with Kosovo. Does
the representative of Kosovo believe that the solution
has already been found? Kosovo unilaterally declared
independence, which some other countries now
support. The President of the Security Council invited
all members to recognize the independence of Kosovo,
and I did not react, although I believe that it is very
much in contravention of international law. Yesterday,
Council members discussed the issue of declarations of
independence in other parts of the world without the
agreement of the country that is being divided. Today,
however, we talked about the fact that Serbia has really
paid a lot for its mistakes. Are we going to continue to
live in the past, or does the representative of Kosovo
want to move forward? Otherwise I do not see the
reason for this discussion.

I believe that the representative of Kosovo and I
will not resolve the world's problems. We will not
resolve the crises in Syria, Ukraine or in Iraq. However,
let us resolve our own crisis. I advise the representative
of Kosovo to devote himself to that endeavour.

I have never exercised the right of reply in the past.
It was not until now, when the representative of Kosovo
did so, that I, too, am now replying. I think we should
be careful about what words we utter in this Chamber.
I did not want to insult any member of the Security
Council. I wanted to be nice and polite to my colleagues
with whom I participated in the Brussels negotiation
process. I had several meetings with Prime Minister
Thaci. Together we signed the Brussels Agreement.
Yesterday we were in Berlin, where we discussed the
future with Angela Merkel and the representatives of
all of the countries of the Western Balkans. However, if
our future is to be determined only by what happened
in the past, it is useless to talk about the future.

We respect everything that Mr. Hoxhaj said.
I think that he is just trying to provoke a discussion
about something that does not really have to do with
our mutual relations. I do not want to give myself too
much historical importance by saying that my decision
is crucial for the resolution of international crises.

