Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I too would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on taking over the joint
presidency and presiding over the Security Council
for the month of March. We will fully support you in
discharging your duties.

As we have said previously with regard to our desire
for somewhat more interactive discussions, I would like
to thank Mr. Miroslav Lajcak, Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), for circulating the elements of his
statement in advance, which enabled us to prepare for
this debate. His efforts are very much appreciated. I
would also like to underline what the President said
about Mr. Lajcak being a natural bridge between
the OSCE and the United Nations, given his former
and current roles. I think that bodes very well for
cooperation between the two organizations with a view
to ensuring functioning multilateralism. Mr. Lajcak
can count on our full support.

In his briefing today, Mr. Lajcak also made a point
that we believe is key - that his briefing alone will
not change anything. It is crucial to ensure that our
words today are followed by action. In the same spirit,
I was heartened that he cited Ukraine as one of the
most important areas of action, the same issue that we
mentioned in our 12 February debate (see S/PV.8461)
that our Russian colleague highlighted, the question of
humanitarian action in the occupied areas of Ukraine
and the bridge in Stanytsia Luhanska. I mentioned
this two weeks ago, and Mr. Lajcak picked up on the
same issue without us talking to one another, which
demonstrates how important it is. Given that tens of
thousands of people have to cross the bridge every day,
is there a chance to develop a road map or something
similar that we can not only talk about, but actually
implement to repair the bridge? The situation there
is terrible.

Together with France, Russia and Ukraine,
Germany will continue efforts within the Normandy
format to drive the process forward. We also believe
that the Minsk agreements form the basis of that. With
respect to the implementation ofthe Minsk agreements,
my appreciation of what is happening is a bit different
from that of our Russian colleague.

I want first and foremost to pay tribute to the
important work ofthe OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine. Under very difficult circumstances, it does
a tremendous job. About two years ago, a colleague of
the Special Monitoring Mission lost his life because his
car ran over a mine in an area not controlled by the
Government. Overall, the OSCE has continued to do
good work.

Our Russian colleaguejust said that the OSCE should
step up its monitoring activities, but unfortunately it is
all too often prevented from doing that. Last month,
the OSCE sent the latest report on the restrictions of
the Special Monitoring Mission to all OSCE member
States. The report says that in the latter half of 2018, the
number of the restrictions on the Special Monitoring
Mission's freedom of movement rose. The Mission
encountered 720 restrictions and more than a 60 per
cent increase compared to the previous six months.
The majority of all restrictions were denials of access.
Similar to the first half of 2013, the majority of the
restrictions were in the areas not under Government
control - 75 per cent in the areas occupied and under
Russian influence.

At the same time, the report mentions a number
of drones that have been lost, the majority of them
over Government-controlled areas. Those are very
expensive and their loss is costly for the OSCE member
States. I have a specific question in that regard. The
report mentions that passage to Novoazovsk, close to
the border with the Russian Federation, was denied 54
times. Is there any speculation as to why that was the
case? That is a harbour town. Any information on that
would be helpful, although the question is probably
too specific. When I read the report in the context of
freedom of movement, that fact struck me.

With regard to the Sea of Azov, many have
mentioned the violation of international law and the
fact that the release of Ukrainian personnel has still
not happened. As our Russian colleague mentioned,
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission should cover the
whole of Ukrainian territory. Could the OSCE employ a
ship in the territorial waters of Ukraine to better control
the area? So far, there are cars and drones, but perhaps a
ship would also be useful.

With respect to Transnistria, we welcome the fact
that since 2016 there has been a number of concrete
developments in the Berlin Protocol, which is a positive
point we must highlight. I would like to echo what my
American colleague asked. Is there a chance that in
Transnistria we can also now make progress on the
implementation of the political declaration adopted
at the OSCE Istanbul Summit with regard to the
withdrawal of the illegally present troops?

On Armenia and Nagorno Karabakh, we would
like to support the Chairperson's activities there.
Chancellor Merkel just met with the Prime Minister of
Armenia and encouraged him to use his broad mandate
to constructively engage in the peace process. There
again, the OSCE Minsk Group is in the lead, and I
would also encourage the same from the Chairperson.

Let me finish first by taking the occasion to thank

the Ambassador of Equatorial Guinea and her delegation
for their leadership last month. I would also like to echo
what some of those present have said, in particular
the representatives of the Dominican Republic and
Equatorial Guinea mentioned International Women's
Day. In the Chairperson's briefing, he highlighted,
among other things, that he also wants to implement
the women and peace and security agenda. I wonder
if he has concrete plans to include quotas in the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. Also, as our
colleagues from Equatorial Guineajust proposed, in the
mediation talks, the Minsk Group, the 5+2 talks or the
Trilateral Contact Group in Kyiv, can the Chairperson
push a bit more to promote women's participation?

