I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for her valuable briefing and for her twentieth report pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). I also welcome the Permanent Representative of Libya to this meeting. At the outset, I would like to reiterate my country's unwavering commitment to the Rome Statute and to the independent and impartial work of the International Criminal Court - combating impunity for the perpetrators of serious crimes and preventing the commission of such crimes in the future. As a neighbouring country of Libya, a party to the Rome Statute and a non- permanent member of the Security Council, Tunisia remains constructively involved in Libya on the basis of active neutrality by contributing to and cooperating with the International Criminal Court and various actors in order to establish peace, stability, accountability and national reconciliation in Libya. In that connection, as of yesterday, my country has been hosting the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum under the auspices of the United Nations. At the opening of the Forum, the President of the Republic, Kais Saied, reiterated the position of Tunisia that the Libyan crisis must be resolved by upholding the unity of that brotherly country, rejecting foreign intervention and all forms of tutelage, and finding a political solution that springs from the will of all Libyans. We are confident that this inclusive political forum will be an important link in overcoming the current crisis and moving towards a comprehensive political settlement through dialogue and consensus in order to reconcile the parties to the Libyan conflict and achieve social harmony. It is regrettable that, during the reporting period, allegations were made of crimes falling within the jurisdiction of the Court, as stated in the report of the Prosecutor. Those crimes included extrajudicial killings, torture at detention centres, forced disappearances, indiscriminate attacks against civilians and serious violations against refugees and migrants. We are deeply concerned by the mass graves discovered in Tarhouna and south of Tripoli, which are evidence of war crimes. Those discoveries are yet another reminder of the important responsibility of Libyan and international parties to end the bloodshed and impunity, comply with the arms embargo and refrain from interfering in the armed conflict or in the internal affairs of Libya. Tunisia hopes that the agreement on a ceasefire in Libya, concluded in Geneva on 23 October, will be the starting point for the establishment of sustainable peace throughout the country in order to stop the bloodshed, alleviate the human suffering of Libyans as a result of violence and fighting and help create conditions conducive to a political settlement. Tunisia affirms the need to comply with the ceasefire and support its implementation, and calls on all parties to the Libyan conflict to ensure adherence to international humanitarian law and international human rights law with a view to maintaining neutrality and protecting civilians and civilian facilities. Resolution 1970 (2011), together with the Rome Statute, forms the principal frame of reference for the Council's exercise of its powers and responsibilities by establishing a fine balance between fighting impunity and maintaining international peace and security in Libya, and serve as a foundation for the Court's exercise of its independent jurisdiction in the country. We therefore welcome the Prosecutor's continued submission of biannual briefings to the Council. Those briefings allow for greater interaction and coordination between the Court and the Council in order to mutually reinforce each other's mandates. Tunisia appreciates the continued efforts of the Prosecutor and her Office within the terms of her mandate in Libya, despite the constraints and challenges in the performance of her duties on the ground resulting from the coronavirus disease pandemic. We also commend the efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya to facilitate the performance by the Prosecutor and her Office of their functions in Libya and to strengthen the relationship between the two sides on issues of common interest. Tunisia recognizes the problems and challenges faced by the Court in implementing requests for cooperation related to the situation in Libya and welcomes the progress made by the Office of the Prosecutor in investigating and monitoring serious crimes against refugees and migrants transiting through Libya. Tunisia hopes that the work of the Court will strengthen the principles of complementarity and cooperation - as set out in the Rome Statute and in line with the requirements of the Libyan political transition, while preserving the independence and impartiality of the Court. We therefore welcome the continuous engagement of the Court with the Libyan authorities and the commitment of those authorities to coordinating and cooperating with the Court in relation to core crimes, as set out in the Rome Statute. The Court should not perform its functions at the expense of building the capacities of Libyan judicial bodies and strengthening the rule of law in Libya. Effective judicial investigation and prosecution of those involved in the commission of serious crimes should be done in a way that genuinely reflects the principles of cooperation and complementarity enshrined in the Rome Statute.
