The Secretary-General: I appreciate Vice-
President Biden's leadership and strong commitment
on Iraq and on other matters of common concern, as
demonstrated by the very strong statement he has just
made and his own participation in this very important
meeting of the Council.

This meeting is a milestone for Iraq. Its people
have known tremendous hardship. They continue to
struggle with insecurity and appalling violence. They
lack jobs and basic services. But today we recognize
how far the country has come in key aspects of its
journey to normalize its status in the community of
nations.

The Security Council has today decided to end
several major Chapter VII mandates relating to Iraq,
including on weapons of mass destruction and the oil-
for-food programme. We all know the difficult history
on weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. The decision
to lift the country's remaining obligations has brought
this chapter to an end. Iraq has pledged to remain free
of weapons of mass destruction. This commitment is
enshrined in its Constitution. The country has also
joined key international agreements, including the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Biological Weapons Convention, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty. These steps bode well for security and
development in Iraq and the wider region.

The Security Council has also decided to end all
residual activities under the oil-for-food programme.
Here, too, the United Nations will do its part to bring
closure to this long-running, complex and
unprecedented initiative.

I commend Iraq's leaders for their recent
agreements ending months of political deadlock. These
efforts should help pave the way for a national
partnership Government and for the first peaceful
transition between elected Governments under full
Iraqi sovereignty. I urge Iraq's political blocs to honour
their agreements and move swiftly to conclude the
process.

A new Government will face many challenges in
providing stability and opportunity for all Iraqis. It will

have to normalize Arab-Kurd relations in the disputed
areas and ensure the protection of all minorities,
including Christians. It will have to manage oil
production and move forward with the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons.

The new Government will also need to improve
Iraq's relations with its neighbours and the region. In
the same spirit, I encourage Iraq's neighbours to open a
new chapter in their relations with Iraq. The United
Nations is prepared to do its part to support these
efforts and promote peace in a region that has
experienced three major wars in the past three decades.

Indeed, the invasion of Kuwait by Saddam
Hussein's regime, two decades ago, and its legacy
caused widespread suffering among the peoples of both
countries, and in neighbouring States as well. Iraq
bears the primary responsibility for fulfilling its
Chapter VII obligations to Kuwait. I hope that, after
today's meeting and after the formation of a new
Government in Baghdad, there will be new impetus for
the two countries to work together in resolving their
outstanding issues.

I encourage Iraq to quickly reaffirm its
commitment to resolution 833 (1993), with respect to
its land and maritime boundary with Kuwait, and to
fulfil all other outstanding obligations, including with
regard to missing Kuwaiti persons and property,
compensation and the maintenance of boundary
markers. Progress on these fronts should enable the
Council to take up the report I submitted pursuant to
resolution 1859 (2008), and to consider further steps
for the full normalization of Iraq's international status.

At every step of Iraq's political transition, the
United Nations has been Iraq's partner. The United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) helped
in the establishment of the Interim Government in
2004. UNAMI worked hard for the success of two
parliamentary elections and a referendum on the
Constitution in 2005, governorate council elections in
2009 and parliamentary elections earlier this year. I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your strong
support and words of encouragement for the staff of
UNAMI, including Special Representative Ad Melkert.

As highlighted in my latest report (S/2010/606) to
the Council, the Mission will continue, in accordance
with its mandate, to promote political dialogue, provide
constitutional support, monitor human rights, deliver
humanitarian assistance to Iraqi refugees and internally

displaced persons, help build the capacity of Iraq's
electoral institutions and encourage a negotiated
political agreement to disputed internal boundaries.
The new Government and Parliament will no doubt
shape those priorities further.

The country's development needs are
considerable. It remains essential to restore the basic
services that make daily life bearable. Access to
education and health services is likewise critical for the
country's future. Iraq's development vision should also
encompass its mosques, churches and shrines, its
archaeological artifacts, its magnificent history and its
contemporary environment. The United Nations is
eager to be part of this wide-ranging drive to
normalization.

The planned United States military drawdown
will have major security implications for the United
Nations presence. UNAMI is carrying out its work with
greater operational autonomy and is receiving more
assistance from the host country. But Iraq remains a
challenging environment. The Mission will continue to
need strong political and financial support from
Member States.

I deeply appreciate the contributions and
sacrifices of United Nations staff and other foreign
nationals who have helped Iraq through its troubled
times. My message to the people of Iraq is this: You
have suffered too much for too long. I pay tribute to
your resilience. There will be more hurdles ahead, but
you have the wisdom and the capacity to overcome
them. You are now in the lead in your quest for a better
life. The United Nations will continue to stand with
you as an impartial partner. We are determined to fulfil
that mandate and help you find, once and for all, the
path of prosperity and peace.

