Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like first to welcome the presence here of
President Ramos-Horta, Nobel Peace Prize laureate. It
is an honour for us to welcome him here this morning
and to express our admiration for him. Together with
Prime Minister Gusmao, he has for decades been the
incarnation of the hopes and aspirations of an entire
people to independence, and for several years now, the
capacity of that same people to rally to build a peaceful
and democratic future.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing on the situation in Timor-Leste. His
presence attests to the particular importance that the
United Nations attaches to that country, which it has
closely and most successfully accompanied in its
emergence on the international scene for some 10
years. Here, we must also hail the particularly effective
work conducted in the field by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and his team.

The Permanent Representative of the Czech
Republic make a statement on behalf of the European
Union with which France fully associates itself. For my
part, I would like to make a few very brief observations.

A year ago, we met here in the tragic context of
the attacks on the Head of State and the Prime
Minister, designed to destabilize the country. In
contrast to what happened in the spring of 2006, these
events did not endanger the recovery efforts. Progress
that we could barely have hoped for a year ago has in
fact been accomplished, in particular on the economic
level and in security sector reform, as broadly outlined
in President Ramos-Horta's statement. The unity of the
people of Timor-Leste, attested to by the remarkable
figures cited, their solidarity with the Government and
its high regard for the international cooperation are
particularly remarkable because Timor-Leste owes its
success above to the Timorese people and officials
themselves.

However, they would not have been possible
without the commitment of the international
community. Once again, I pay tribute to the vigorous
activities of Mr. Atul Khare, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, and welcome
the very positive role played by the neighbouring
countries, in particular Indonesia, Australia, New
Zealand, Malaysia and Portugal, among others that the
President referred to, whose support to the Timorese
authorities helped to preserve stability in the country.

France, for its part, will continue to support the
efforts of Timor-Leste and the international community
for the development and stability of the country. In
particular, we are participating, in coordination with
the United Nations, in the training of the Timorese civil
guard, which, as President Ramos-Horta said, is a high
priority for the Government.

I recall once again the importance of judicial
reform and the fight against impunity for past crimes,
which are prerequisites of lasting reconciliation. In that
regard, we reiterate our support for the activities of
UNMIT in supporting Timor-Leste's Prosecutor-
General, which are fully within the mandate entrusted
to it by the Security Council.

Consolidating the progress achieved over the past
few months will take time. The reassuring presence of
UNMIT and of international security forces will be
crucial to stability during that period of reconciliation.
Therefore, France supports renewing the Mission's
mandate for a period of 12 months. But that should be
part of a medium-term peacebuilding strategy with the
assistance of the United Nations, to ensure the gradual
assumption of ownership by the Timorese people of the
tasks undertaken today by the United Nations
operation.

Thus, we can realize the wish of the Security
Council to develop better-targeted, and thus more
effective, operations. Once again, Timor-Leste can be a
laboratory of ideas and, as President Ramos-Horta
himself underscored, can prove that the United Nations
also knows how to excel.

