Mr. Naranjo-Villalobos (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): It is a great pleasure for my delegation to
have you, Madam Secretary of State, presiding over this
important ministerial meeting of the Security Council to
consider the general international peace and security
situation in Africa.

The Security Council devotes most of its time to the
African issues on its agenda. Economic and social crises
in Africa give rise to armed conflicts there. Each one of

 

these issues - particularly the serious political and
structural conflicts in sub-Saharan Africa - illustrate the
extent to which the Council's concepts and working
practices have changed in this post-cold-war era and the
interpretation that its members give to its powers,
obligations and duties under Chapters VI and VII of the
Charter.

My country has stressed - in the Security Council
and in various other United Nations bodies - that from the
traditional concept of conflicts between States, or situations
with the potential for international war, we are moving to
a much more integrated and comprehensive View, one of
conflicts posing threats to international peace and security.
This view includes situations of extreme poverty and
economic and social under-development, human rights
violations, massive flows of refugees, civil wars resulting
from ethnic conflicts, extreme degradation of the
environment, terrorism, and even certain socio-political
phenomena such as corruption, drug trafficking and
international crime; it also includes religious
fundamentalism, which in recent years has aggressively
invaded several regions of the world. These topics are now
firmly on the international security agenda.

My country wishes to highlight the way in which
African countries have taken clear leadership in the
resolution of their own conflicts within the context of their
regional and subregional organizations. Costa Rica
encourages Africa to continue in this direction in the
framework of coordination with the United Nations and in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter and
international law.

Costa Rica considers full respect for all human rights
to be of the utmost importance. The message of the
Security Council in this regard should be clear and forceful:
measures taken by the international community to further
peace and security will be significant and enduring only if
unconditional respect for human rights is required as a basis
for solving conflicts.

Costa Rica believes that in no region should ideology,
gender, religion, disputes over political power or conflicts
of an ethnic, racial or cultural nature be used as excuses for
the Violation of human rights or to perpetuate impunity. To
defend this position of principle is to defend the very
essence of the United Nations.

Costa Rica joins in the international recognition of the
African countries that have chosen a democratic system of
government, the rule of law, respect for and protection of
human rights and progress through economic reform as
their best hopes for ending internal and regional Violence
and guaranteeing sustainable growth and development. It
is nevertheless disheartening to see severe economic,
social and political imbalances persist in that continent.
These imbalances will not be eradicated without the will
of Africa's leaders and the decisive support of the
international community.

In my country's judgement, this support must be
offered in a spirit of solidarity, unconditionally and with
a greater emphasis on areas where it is needed for
humanitarian reasons. However, in order to stimulate
democratic consolidation and the rule of law, the
international community should increase its support for
and cooperation with those countries which continue to
make substantial progress on all human rights, in fighting
public and private corruption and in demilitarization and
disarmament.

Allow me to recall some demilitarization and
disarmament measures that have already been suggested
by various international bodies, such as expanding the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms;
prohibiting weapons exports to countries that do not
declare their transfers to the United Nations and to States
that have not signed the major conventions on human
rights, international humanitarian law and disarmament;
and banning the transfer of materials and personnel or
logistical and financial support to States where it has been
shown that their military or security forces have
participated in or contributed to the Violation of human
rights.

Costa Rica believes that countries which produce
and deal in arms should be urged to exercise effective
control of their exports to Africa. The international
community has justifiably demanded, as part of a
concerted strategy, that drug-producing countries put an
end to that scourge by destroying it at its roots, thereby
helping to diminish its impact on consumer countries. Is
it not equally a moral imperative to call upon the
weapons producers and dealers who every year cut down
or irreparably damage the lives of tens of thousands of
innocent Africans to exercise similar restraints so that that
shall occur no more?

Many of the recommendations in the report which
the Secretary-General will present to us in February 1998
will exceed the powers of the Security Council. The
report will therefore also have to go to the General
Assembly and other bodies of the United Nations system,

 

as well as to private humanitarian organizations. Only thus,
with an integral and comprehensive perspective, will it be
possible to establish an effective strategy for the
international community's support for the peoples and
nations of Africa.

After the armed conflicts, we cannot simply require
limitless adjustment, reform and liberalization from the
countries of this enormous continent. If the world really
desires the consolidation of peace in Africa, a broad and
deep programme of social and economic reconstruction will
be needed. Such a programme requires the backing of the
international community, the valuable contributions of non-
governmental organizations and the appropriate context for
firm and lasting peace.

Democracy in the hands of civil authorities will
flourish and acquire its true meaning only where there is
economic justice and social peace. Building these
fundamental conditions and developing the state of law as
the basis for democratic order and national reconciliation is
the greatest challenge Africa will confront in the next
century.

