Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
meeting, as we do every month, to consider the
situation in the Middle East. First of all, we must note
with concern the persistence of the intra-Palestinian
conflict, which continues to claim victims in the
Palestinian population itself.

In addition to the human losses, this conflict, it
must be said, has other consequences at the
humanitarian and economic levels that obstruct the
peace process. Economic activity in the occupied
territory, including the Gaza Strip, is being greatly
affected by the closure of businesses and the loss of
tens of thousands of jobs. Under those conditions, the
risk of a permanent collapse exists and must be
avoided.

Therefore, the international community must, in a
constructive spirit, ensure the provision of

humanitarian aid to the Palestinian people and continue
its efforts to raise their standard of living, which
continues to deteriorate dramatically. In addition, the
Israeli authorities, without compromising their
security, must guarantee the flows needed for the
movement of persons and goods and must not reduce
the activities of the people of this region to dependence
on humanitarian assistance.

The other main task continues to be ensuring
effective administration throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory. That is essential in order to
prevent deterioration in the quality of daily life, to
control attacks against Israeli civilian targets and to
prevent internal arms trafficking. In that context, we
highlight the appointment of Mr. Tony Blair, former
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. We are
convinced that his leadership, in fulfilment of his
mandate, will contribute to the strengthening of
Palestinian institutions, particularly in key areas for the
population such as education, health and security.

Moreover, we believe that Israel must also take
steps on the ground, particularly by suspending the
establishment of new settlements in the occupied
territories and by beginning to dismantle and halt the
construction of the separation wall, whose presence
and significance are contrary to the agreements and the
spirit of coexistence and peace. As has been said, the
obstacles to the movement of Palestinians hamper
efforts to reduce tension and cause severe economic
and social deterioration.

On the diplomatic front we recognize the positive
dialogue between President Abbas and Prime Minister
Olmert and we encourage its continuation, particularly
taking into account the initiative of the United States
President George Bush to hold an international meeting
this autumn to re-launch the Palestinian-Israeli peace
process and move towards the objective of establishing
a viable and independent Palestinian State. Peru's wish
is that the initiative will draw in all those actively
involved in the process and that the agreements
reached will be binding on all those involved, so that
the peace process may be implemented in an effective
and comprehensive manner.
It is also necessary to bear in mind that the
question of the occupation of the Syrian Golan remains
pending and that the door to negotiations between the
parties must remain open in order to reach a solution.

On the subject of Lebanon, we are concerned by

the continuing political crisis in the country that issues

primarily from the actions of armed groups acting

outside State authority. The Lebanese political forces

must resume national dialogue leading to an agreement

and to the restoration of the sovereignty of the State
throughout its territory.

Peru welcomes the recent unanimous renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon and we reiterate our tribute to the troops who
perished in the line of duty. We condemn the armed
groups that attacked the United Nations Blue Helmets.
We also reiterate our call to fully respect the Blue Line
and to cease all acts that violate sovereignty on both
sides of the Line and constitute a threat to security.

My delegation hopes that the recommendations of
the Lebanon Independent Border Assessment Team can
be implemented soon and calls on the Government of
Lebanon to continue its endeavours.

On the subject of the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon, we welcome the recent decision by the
Netherlands Government to host its headquarters.

As is apparent, the overall situation is precarious
and its signals are contradictory. My delegation hopes
that the combination of efforts of the various political
actors committed to seeking a solution, particularly
within the Middle East, will make it possible to resume
dialogue on all necessary fronts - which is the only
way to reach just, comprehensive and permanent
solutions to the long-suffering region.

