The Secretary-General: A dramatic crisis in
Gaza and southern Israel has now reached its fifth day.
08-67507
The civilian population, the fabric of Gaza, the
future of the peace process, stability in the region and
goodwill among people throughout the world: all are
trapped between the irresponsibility displayed in the
indiscriminate rocket attacks by Hamas militants and
the disproportionality of the continuing Israeli military
operation. We will be further threatened if the conflict
continues or escalates to a new phase of deadly
violence.

I am profoundly troubled that the call of this
Council, issued nearly four days ago, for an end to the
violence has gone unheeded. I wish to underline in the
strongest possible terms the world's call for an
immediate ceasefire that is fully respected by all
parties. This must be achieved now. The parties must
step back from the brink. All this violence must end.

As a result of the crisis and the violence,
conditions for 1.5 million people in Gaza today are
nothing short of terrifying. The people of Gaza are
living under heavy bombardment, which has targeted
Hamas facilities, smuggling tunnels and other Hamas
infrastructure, as well as the former Palestinian
Authority security structure, government buildings,
residential homes, mosques and businesses. More than
300 people lie dead, among them at least 60 women
and children. Over 800 are wounded.

In southern Israel, there has been a continuous
stream of rockets fired from Gaza by Palestinian
militants. Longer-range rockets have been used by
militants, hitting major Israeli cities, with hundreds of
thousands of people now in range. Four Israelis have
died since Saturday and over 30 more have been
injured. Schools have closed and daily life in southern
Israel is extremely difficult, as Israelis live in constant
fear of rockets, which have hit homes and schools.

Let me be clear: I condemn unequivocally and in
the strongest possible terms the ongoing rocket and
mortar attacks by Hamas and other Palestinian
militants. But I also condemn the excessive use of
force by Israel. All parties must fully uphold
international humanitarian law. It is the civilian
populations that are bearing the brunt of this
escalation, and there must be swift and decisive action
by the international community to bring to an end their
suffering.

All parties must address the serious humanitarian
and economic needs in Gaza and take necessary
measures to ensure the continuous provision of
08-67507
humanitarian supplies. Without the violence stopping,
it is extremely difficult to get food to people who need
it. It is too dangerous for civilians to leave their homes
to seek urgent medical treatment, buy supplies and
assist people in distress. Conditions for parents and
children in Gaza are dangerous and frightening.

I wish to pay tribute to United Nations staff in the
area, who are working hard under deeply adverse
conditions to address urgently the humanitarian
situation of Gazans. I am pained at the death, injury
and damage that United Nations personnel and
premises, as well as others associated with our
programmes, have sustained.

I also pay tribute to the efforts of donor countries
which have come forward and pledged their support.

Pursuant to assurances given to me by Prime
Minister Olmert and Foreign Minister Livni of Israel
and the continuing close cooperation between United
Nations agencies and Israeli authorities on the ground,
some humanitarian aid is passing through the Kerem
Shalom crossing. Today, a total of 84 truckloads,
including 34 for humanitarian aid agencies, entered
Gaza. As a result, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) is opening seven emergency distribution
centres with a skeleton staff to distribute recently
donated wheat flour starting tomorrow.

However, the Karni crossing and the Karni
conveyor belt, which UNRWA urgently requires to
open to bring in Wheat grain supplies, remain closed, as
do the Nahal Oz fuel pipelines. There remains a
shortage of wheat grain, which exacerbates a shortage
of bread in a situation in which two thirds of Gaza's
population were already reliant on some kind of food
aid prior to this escalation. Fuel shortages have led to
the closure of the Gaza power plant and power
shortages for up to 16 hours a day. To address the
shortages of food and fuel, the Nahal Oz and Karni
crossings must be opened. Unless there is an
immediate end to the violence, the humanitarian
situation will deteriorate significantly.

I urge all members of the international
community, in particular those in the region, to exert
what influence they have on the parties to end this
violence now. Yesterday, at the Quartet meeting, I
stressed the need for decisive action. I welcome the
efforts under way, including by Arab and European
3
leaders. But I must repeat: not enough has been done,
and more is urgently required.

There must be an immediate ceasefire that is fully
respected by all parties. This must create new
conditions on the ground that ensure at last that
crossings into Gaza Will be reopened, that rocket
attacks and weapons smuggling will end, that we will
pursue political dialogue, and only political dialogue,
to reunite Gaza with the West Bank, and that the root
cause of this suffering - the absence of Israeli-
Palestinian peace - is ended.

Even as this crisis rages, let us never forget the
underlying issue: there must be an end to occupation,
an end to conflict and the creation of a Palestinian
State. Let us not lose sight of our goal: two States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security, and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the region, based on Security Council resolutions
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), the
principle of land for peace, the Madrid terms of
reference and the Arab Peace Initiative. This conflict
must end, and it must end once and for all.

