Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): The
adoption of this resolution is an important step, one that
can build confidence between Croatians and Serbs. It is
the first time in this bloody war that land has been
returned by negotiation rather than by bloodshed. The
Agreement envisions a partnership, reflecting the rights of
all ethnic groups while recognizing Croatian sovereignty.
As the Security Council knows, the Agreement
signed between the Croatian Government and the local
Serb representatives is the result of long negotiations on
the part of the United States Ambassador to Croatia, Peter
Galbraith, and the United Nations Mediator, Thorvald
Stoltenberg. These negotiations succeeded only through
the intensive efforts of all involved.

Much more needs to be done, of course, before a
final peace is established. The parties to the 12 November
Agreement concerning Eastern Slavonia, Baranja, and
Western Sirmium have asked the international community
not only to underwrite but also to administer the region in
its transition period. The efforts of United Nations
agencies, concerned regional organizations and
non-governmental organizations will have to continue.
Displaced populations need to be resettled, basic services
repaired and restored and administrative and police
agencies reflecting both ethnic groups created. All
residents of the region will have to learn again to live in
trust. This is a large undertaking which will require
consultation, planning and coordination between interested
parties.

The United States believes that this Agreement will
serve as a critical element of the broader search for
lasting peace in the region. While our task is not over,
and many challenges yet lie ahead, this Agreement
demonstrates the commitment of the parties to pursuing
a peaceful settlement beyond Eastern Slavonia, Baranja
and Western Sirmium.

The efforts of the Security Council established and
enforced sanctions, authorized peace-keeping forces,

 

including the use of force when necessary, and responded
aggressively to human rights violations on all sides. With
the initialling yesterday of the Peace Agreement in Dayton,
Ohio, and with this Agreement we have now adopted, these
efforts have finally come to fruition.

