Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
First of all I would like to thank the head of our
mission, Ambassador Holbrooke, for his briefing on
the Security Council mission's visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and I would like to take this
opportunity to express to him our appreciation for the
leadership, wisdom and dynamism he demonstrated in
the course of the visit. He thus enabled the mission to
carry out the mandate entrusted to it by the Security
Council.

The Council's decision to send a mission to the
region reflects the importance that it attaches to settling
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It also demonstrates the Council's desire to actively
oversee the implementation of its resolutions.

Like all the other members of the Council who
took part in the mission, my delegation endorses the
observations and recommendations contained in the
report of the mission. We believe that they deserve the
full attention of the Security Council, the membership
of the United Nations and the Secretariat. I would like
to focus on a few points.

The visit made it possible to engage in direct
dialogue with the parties on the implementation of
resolution 1291 (2000) and the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement. We urged the parties to choose peace and
stressed their obligations in this regard, but we also
took into consideration their expectations and
concerns.

We heard positive and encouraging words from
the leaders whom we met. President Kabila shared with
us his Government's devotion to peace and his desire to
give full support and cooperation to efforts under way
to restore peace.

The ceasefire established in the agreement
reached by the parties on 8 April in Kampala is a step
forward on the path to peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but as yet it is fragile. The
military developments that occurred in Kisangani and
around the town during the mission's visit show the
precariousness of the situation. As Ambassador
Holbrooke said, the Council's mission made an active
contribution to defusing the situation in Kisangani. We
believe that during this decisive stage additional efforts
at the political and military levels on the part of the
parties, as well as constant and active support and
follow-up on the part of the international community,
are necessary.

We welcome the fact that all of the parties have
emphasized the urgent need for the rapid deployment
of phase II of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) so
as to avoid any vacuum that might imperil the
ceasefire. Clearly such a deployment requires firm
commitment on the part of all the parties. As a
beginning, the signing of the status-of-forces
agreement between MONUC and the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in the presence
of the Security Council mission, was significant.

Both President Kabila and the other Congolese
parties and members of Congolese civil society that we
met in Kinshasa reiterated their support for the inter-
Congolese dialogue. We hope that the persisting
differences - in particular with regard to the venue of
the dialogue - will be eliminated as soon as possible
so that dialogue can commence on a solid basis. We
call upon the Congolese parties to fully cooperate with
the facilitator. We have already noted that the broad
majority of interlocutors prefer that the dialogue take
place on Congolese territory.

I would like to emphasize, as the report does,
that, as regards the promotion of lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, there is a close
connection between progress in the inter-Congolese
dialogue, deployment of MONUC and the
implementation of other military aspects of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement.

Another issue our mission took up was the
exchange of prisoners of war. Beyond the humanitarian
dimension, this exchange would contribute to
promoting trust among the parties. We welcome the
positive reaction of all the parties to this issue. We
believe follow-up should be carried out with the
assistance of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) so that this expressed determination will
be converted into actions as soon as possible.

Among the other questions that the mission raised
with the parties was the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and other wealth of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The mission recommends that the
Council rapidly set up the group of experts whose
establishment it has been considering. We expect the
Council to reach a decision on this subject very soon.

The visit of the Security Council mission made it
possible to begin a constructive dialogue with the
parties that is worth sustaining. The proposal to
convene the Political Committee in New York, under
the Council presidency of Ambassador Jean-David
Levitte, in June, would provide a new opportunity to
continue this dialogue with a view to yet further
supporting the peace process.

In conclusion, I, too, would like to pay tribute to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to the Force
Commander, Major General Diallo, and to all the
MONUC staff for their tireless efforts to ensure the
success of MONUC.

