Ms. Rice (United States of America): Thank you,
President Sleiman, for Lebanon's leadership in
bringing us together today to discuss this very
important subject.
The late Dag Hammarskjold pursued a vision of a
United Nations that would move from what he said was
a "culture of reaction to a culture of prevention". That
unfinished task lies before us today. Some 1.5 billion
people now live in countries shaken by conflict, and
few of those countries will see even one of the
Millennium Development Goals met.

The World Bank's annual World Development
Report puts the cost of the average civil war at some
$65 billion, or just over half of the global aid budget.
While recent years have seen an unparalleled drop in
global poverty, countries devastated by conflict and
violence have been left out of that trend. Poverty is a
major driver of conflict. Let me highlight just one
statistic. In countries where the average person earns
only $250 per year - the poorest of nations - the
scientifically proven risk of civil conflict within a five-
year time frame is 15 per cent. By contrast, in countries
with a per capita income of $5,000 per year - middle-
income countries - the risk of civil conflict over the
same five-year period is less than 1 per cent. Economic
growth and development must therefore be viewed as
key to our strategies for preventing conflict.

It is especially difficult to prevent violence in
societies struggling concurrently with crushing
poverty, crumbling institutions, rampant discrimination
and deep-seated suspicions among ethnic or religious
groups. Any one of those maladies on its own is
difficult to address, but the mix is combustible and
requires a comprehensive approach.

We say that often, but today the Security Council
has given that mantra greater definition. The draft
presidential statement we will adopt squarely addresses
the links between security and development. Moreover,
it provides an outline for a comprehensive approach,
including several core elements for long-term conflict
prevention, including sustainable development, poverty
eradication, national reconciliation, good governance,
gender equality, the end of impunity, the rule of law
and, I would argue, most notably democracy and
respect for human rights. Those are the conditions most
often found in peaceful societies. Their absence creates
conditions conducive to conflict. We ignore them at our
peril.

Yet, as we dedicate ourselves to more
comprehensive and long-term conflict prevention, we
must be mindful that peace, prosperity and democracy
cannot be achieved quickly or endure if imposed from
outside. The solutions to the root causes of conflict
must be home-grown. The United Nations cannot do
what others must do for themselves, but it can play an
indispensable supporting role.

The United Nations has vital conflict prevention
work to do on five fronts in particular. The first is early
warning, information and analysis. The United Nations
system has a significant presence in many countries
where the conditions conducive to conflict are rife. The
United Nations is thus well-placed to provide early
warning of potential concerns and to help us better
understand and anticipate what makes each situation
unique. Too often, we resort to cookie-cutter solutions,
as if each case were the same as the last, because we do
not know enough and we are reacting too late. The
United Nations knowledge should help us to act earlier
and smarter.

But the United Nations itself sometimes struggles
to find the best experts, and itself has limits to its
knowledge and information-gathering capabilities. The
United Nations must therefore work more closely with
Governments, regional and subregional organizations,
non-governmental organizations, academics and other
capable actors based on their comparative advantages.
To be truly effective, it must be able to draw upon all
sources of information.

Secondly, we need vigorous, sustained diplomacy
and mediation to prevent violence or its escalation.
Intensive diplomatic efforts by the Secretary-General,
his senior envoys and key staff in the field can pull
adversaries back from the brink, especially when
backed by a united international community. The
United States continues to strongly support the robust
use of the Secretary-General's good offices and special
political missions to avert war. We strongly support
efforts to build and strengthen the cadre of seasoned
envoys. We welcome the United Nations recent efforts
to work together with regional envoys and independent
mediators when helpful. We urge the United Nations
and other international actors to recruit more women as
envoys, special representatives and chiefs of field
missions.

Thirdly, diplomacy requires leverage, and that
means both carrots and sticks. The credible threat of
consequences for aggressors and others who refuse to
abide by their international commitments should
include, when necessary, the imposition of targeted
sanctions. Effective mediation does not mean just
listening to all sides; it also means acting firmly when
needed so as to back diplomatic efforts. Here, the
Security Council has a particular responsibility,
including helping to mobilize wider political support
for diplomatic efforts and moving swiftly in the face of
emergencies.

Fourthly, societies emerging from conflict
continue to face the greatest risk of more bloodshed,
even with the presence of peacekeepers. Peace
operations are on the front lines of United Nations
prevention efforts, and they must be thought of
accordingly. We should cease to make false distinctions
between peacekeeping and prevention. In fact, they are
inextricably linked. The investments we make to
strengthen the ability of peacekeepers to detect
breakdowns in a peace process, to sound the alarm
bells in times of crisis and to quickly redeploy forces
to dangerous hotspots are indeed investments in
conflict prevention.

Fifthly, while the United Nations and other actors
can do a great deal through diplomacy and
peacekeeping operations, our long-term objective must
be to enable countries to prevent conflicts by
themselves. The United Nations, together with regional
organizations and the wider international community,
must help countries to walk the long, difficult road
from war to peace. We support making greater use of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund in more countries rattled by conflict. The high-
level review of international civilian peacebuilding
capacities commissioned by the Secretary-General
contains many good ideas and we look forward to their
prompt implementation.

All these instruments can save lives. They
provide hope and, when employed effectively, can
make a meaningful difference in the world. But they
require us to overcome our differences and unite
behind a common resolve in the Chamber. So let us
summon the political will to confront the atrocities
unfolding before our eyes, from Syria to Southern
Kordofan. Let us revitalize our will and ability to
prevent conflicts before embers start to blaze.

