Mr. Park In-Kook (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation to you,
Sir, for allowing me to participate as the last speaker in
this meaningful open debate.

Today marks an important Council meeting on
this topic, following the fruitful meeting in January
(see S/PV.6467), at which the Council agreed on a
press statement that voiced support for the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
(SC/10154). My delegation is of the view that there is a
true necessity to holistically address the underlying
causes of conflict in Somalia that go beyond piracy. We
note that peace and security in Somalia are intrinsically
interlinked with the country's unstable political
situation, lack of development and ongoing
humanitarian crisis. Finding ways to address the
interdependence among those issues should be
faithfully pursued in a comprehensive and synergistic
manner by the Council in order to help the people of
Somalia, while simultaneously bolstering peace and
security in East Africa.

Regarding the political situation in Somalia, the
Republic of Korea recognizes the great need for the
Council to continue to help the Somali people work
towards the realization of post-transitional governance.
Communication with all key stakeholders must be
continued with a view towards August, when the
Transitional Federal Charter expires. In this regard, the
role of regional organizations continues to be
important. Indeed, the Council should continue to work
alongside the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development as the transitional process
winds down.

In a similar vein, the international community
should scale up its training and equipping of the
Somali security forces. Wholeheartedly supporting the
security institutions of the Transitional Federal
Government is crucial to the fight against terrorism,
especially as fighting has intensified in Mogadishu in
the past few weeks and the overall significance of the
unification between Al-Shabaab and Hizbul Islam
remains unclear.

My Government continues to be deeply
concerned over the continued activities of pirates and
armed robbers who attack commercial and
humanitarian vessels alike and engage in hostage-
taking in the waters off Somalia. Acts of piracy and
armed robbery against ships off the coast of Somalia
continue to be of grave concern not only to the
countries of the region but also to countries of other
regions, including Korea. In January, a Republic of
Korea navy rescue operation, responding under the
mandate of resolution 1851 (2008), successfully
engaged pirates in the Gulf of Aden and rescued
21 sailors onboard a Korean commercial vessel.

The Republic of Korea believes that piracy is a
serious transnational crime that poses a threat to
regional peace and stability. Pirates and armed robbers
off the coast of Somalia not only threaten the safety of
commercial maritime routes and international
navigation, but also jeopardize the prospects of
bringing relief to hundreds of thousands of Somalis
who already face immense humanitarian problems.

In this connection, the Republic of Korea is
deeply concerned about the humanitarian situation in
Somalia and its cyclical relationship with piracy. My
delegation notes the February report of Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Valerie
Amos, warning of a deepening crisis in malnutrition as
a result of the crippling drought. With that in mind, the
international community should increase humanitarian
aid across the board. The $4.5 million in delivered aid
by the United Nations in January and the $60 million
in additional allocated aid are a good start, but more
needs to be done for the people of Somalia as an
already dangerous humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate further.

Likewise, recent reports of the International
Committee of the Red Cross point to 2010 as the year
with the most registered casualties in Mogadishu,
further compounding the humanitarian situation on the
ground. Quite simply, those who are facing the highest
unemployment and malnutrition rates in the world and
no viable economic options will continue to join piracy
activities and armed groups as a means of survival.

However, sustained development can be achieved
only in a stable security environment. In this
connection, peacekeeping must continue to play an
integral role in buttressing the security environment in
Somalia with a view to promoting sustained
development. My delegation supports the activities of
the African Union Mission in Somalia and calls on the
Council and the greater international community to
continue to facilitate its mission on the ground with
increased resources and political support. Ensuring the
deployment of an additional 4,000 troops at the earliest
possible date should be a prioritized short-term goal.

With a view towards longer term development
and as the Security Council has recognized before,
economic and social opportunities can also be obtained
through disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, and can be useful tools to bridge the gap
between insecurity and development. Current
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
activities in Somalia should be strengthened to this
end.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
request that the Security Council continue to remain
proactive and vigilant on the complex and interrelated
issues in Somalia. The Republic of Korea fully
supports the efforts of the Security Council and the
international community to continue to implement all
relevant resolutions. It is our great hope that peace and
security will be attained in Somalia and that a better
life, fostered by true economic and political
development and a marked improvement in the
humanitarian situation, will be achieved for the Somali
people.

