Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
important meeting. I thank the Secretary-General,
The Most Reverend and Right Honourable Justin
Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Ms. Mossarat
Qadeem, Co-founder of PAIMAN Alumni Trust, for
their valuable briefings. I also thank the delegation of
the United Kingdom for its concept note (S/2018/586, annex).

I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to former Secretary-General Mr. Kofi Annan. He was
a pillar of mediation efforts for the peaceful settlement
of disputes.

My country's delegation hopes that today's
deliberations will allow us to establish an objective and
binding approach that places an absolute priority on the
peaceful, mediation-based settlement of disputes and
comprehensive political settlements that are strongly
supported by the Security Council and the international
community, in particular international and regional
relevant partners. The Security Council should also
play its role in maintaining international peace and
security, achieving sustainable stability and security in
accordance with the Council's mandate and Article 2,
paragraph 3, and Articles 33 and 36 of the Charter of
the United Nations.

We underscore the importance of the Council's
presence in promoting efforts to settle disputes
peacefully, because even if mediators are objective and
impartial, the support of stakeholders, in particular
the Security Council and regional and subregional
organizations, is needed. Needless to say, the objective
and impartial positions of the Security Council towards
the parties to a conflict remain the cornerstone ofits role
in settling conflicts. We also believe that the Security
Council should remain united and condemn parties that
prolong conflicts, in particular non-State actors.

The Sudan welcomes regional and international
initiatives to settle disputes peacefully and, in particular,
those of the African Union (AU), which continue to be
developed. Those initiatives have achieved tangible
results in finding African solutions to African problems
within Africa. We must support such initiatives aimed
at maintaining peace and security pursuant to Chapter
VIII of the Charter, which attaches a central and key
role to regional organizations in maintaining regional
peace and security.

Furthermore, regional and subregional
organizations, as well as neighbouring countries, are
always the best placed and the most capable of acting
as mediators. That is particularly true when internal
conflicts become increasingly complex and when they
spill over national borders and include other actors
at the regional and international levels. The fact that
regional and subregional organizations are also aware of
the geopolitical, social, cultural and natural dimensions
of such conflicts further highlights the importance of
their role.

In that context, the Sudan welcomes the Joint
United Nations-AU Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, established in
April 2017. The Framework aims at developing the AU
capacity and promoting mediation mechanisms and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, while emphasizing the
role of women and the 2030 Sustainable Agenda for
Development, as well as the AU Agenda 2063.

The role of regional and subregional organizations
is effective. I would highlight the role of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
in the mediation for a peaceful resolution ofthe conflict
in South Sudan. Recently, it led to an agreement
between the parties to the conflict, in particular with
regard to governance and security measures, following
the agreement on a comprehensive ceasefire. There
remain some outstanding details, and there are ongoing
attempts to achieve an understanding on those issues.
The initiative of President Al-Bashir of the Sudan,
delegated by the leaders of IGAD countries, has
played a decisive role in achieving that agreement,
which was signed on 5 August in the presence of the
Presidents of the States members of IGAD, as well as
the representatives of the Secretary-General and of the
African Union.

My country's delegation hopes that regional and
international efforts to promote the role of mediation
in the peaceful settlement of disputes and in the
exchange of best practices to that end will be stepped
up in the future. We need to build the capacity of
developing countries for mediation in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, as well as that of regional and
subregional organizations. It is also necessary for the
reform process within the United Nations today, which
prioritizes prevention, to pave the way for increased
international cooperation in that regard. I also wish to
underline the complementarity of the efforts of regional
organizations, on the one hand, and of the Security
Council, on the other. All parties should work in the
same direction so as to achieve the desired objective.

