Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2006/906)
and his Special Representative, Mr. Rucker, for his
excellent briefing. I also welcome the presence of
Ms. Raskovic-Ivic, President of the Coordination
Centre of the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and
Metohija, and thank her for addressing the Council.

The question of Kosovo has now reached a
crucial stage. We have noted that, since the beginning
of this year, with the joint efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government,
some progress has been made in implementing the
standards. However, challenges remain in areas such as
security guarantees, the return of refugees and ethnic
harmony.

Given the situation on the ground in Kosovo, we
believe that there can be hope for Kosovo's future only
if the momentum for standards implementation is
maintained and a breakthrough is achieved in
establishing a harmonious and multi-ethnic society. We
hope that the Provisional Institutions and their leaders
will, with UNMIK's assistance, overcome the current
difficulties and implement the standards in a
comprehensive and effective manner. The other parties
concerned should also provide positive cooperation.
The future status process for Kosovo has been
under way for nearly a year. With the assistance of
Mr. Ahtisaari, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
the Serbian Government and the Kosovo authorities
have engaged in contacts and carried out dialogues and
negotiations at various levels and in various places.
While some progress has been made, the parties
continue to hold opposing positions. Despite the great
difficulties facing this endeavour, China believes that it
is extremely important and that the efforts should
continue. That will help to push the future status
process in the right direction.

China is concerned about the individual incidents
of violence that have occurred recently in Kosovo. We
hope that both sides will exercise restraint and continue
their dialogue in a flexible, pragmatic and constructive
spirit in order to find a mutually acceptable solution.

We have also noted that Special Envoy Ahtisaari
has indicated that he will submit a conclusive report
early next year. We hope that his recommendations will
play a constructive role in resolving the question of
Kosovo's future status.

The question of Kosovo is sensitive and
complicated; it has a direct bearing on peace and
stability in the Balkans and the neighbouring regions.
Whether the question of Kosovo can be appropriately
resolved is a source of concern to all. In resolving the
question of Kosovo, we need to listen to the views of
all parties, especially those of neighbouring countries.
We must be mindful of the possible impact that the
modalities of a settlement could have on neighbouring
regions. Any settlement must lead to a lasting
resolution of the question of Kosovo; it must not create
new turmoil or have a negative impact on the stability
of other regions.

China has always abided by the principle in
international law that the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all countries must be respected.

The international community and the Security
Council should be impartial on the question of the
future status of Kosovo and encourage both sides to
seek a mutually acceptable plan through constructive
negotiations on the basis of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

