Mr. Ambrazevich (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
1 would like to congratulate you, Sir, on Russia's
accession to the presidency of the Security Council
this month and on tomorrow's national holiday in the
Russian Federation.

This is an appropriate time to hold an open debate
in the Security Council on such an urgent concern as
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Allow me
to express our conviction that all nations should take
the lead in reduc ing the need for such operations.
Since it was founded, the international community has
worked to improve the shape and operating methods of
the United Nations, so that the Organization can be in
a position to best respond in a timely manner to the
challenges and threats facing humankind.

Within the whole range of United Nations activities,
we note the particular importance of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. United Nations peacekeeping
operations today remain one of the key stabilizing
factors in areas of tension, and it is clear that the
nature of conflicts today has changed significantly. On
many occasions, non-State armed groups and terrorist
organizations have used cutting-edge technology to
achieve their criminal goals, and conflicts have been
assuming a cross-border nature.

New challenges and threats require the United
Nations to be flexible and respond appropriately,
including in accordance with the appropriate mandates
for conducting operations and in terms of training
and equipping peacekeepers with up-to-date materiel,
resources, weaponry and technology. In that regard,
we note the work being undertaken within the United
Nations to adapt the format of peacekeeping operations
to new realities, including through further cooperation
with regional organizations and the use of specialized
divisions and new technology. We are convinced,
however, that United Nations peacekeeping operations
must be conducted with strict respect for their mandates.
Above all, that requires respect for such principles as
sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs
of the host State.

Belarus has pursued a consistently responsible
policy with respect to the maintenance of peace and
security. A clear instance of that arose in 1993, when
Belarus became the first country of the former Soviet
Union to relinquish position of nuclear weapons.
In recognition of the importance of participation in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, Belarus is
contributing thereto to the best of its ability. It has
deployed representatives in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon.

The issue of sending its troops overseas is of great
sensitivity to Belarus. We lost approximately one-third
of our population in the Second World War, and incurred
further significant losses in the Soviet operation
in Afghanistan. Drawing lessons from history, the
potential broadening of Belarusian participation in
United Nations peacekeeping will therefore require the
full support and understanding of public opinion in our
country. We are carefully studying at the State level
the possible expansion of our participation in United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

