Ms. Shalev (Israel): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your leadership of
the Council for the month of July. I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco for his
informative briefing.

I shall begin my statement by citing from a letter
sent by courageous residents of Khirbat Salim to the
President of Lebanon in the aftermath of the explosion
in their village earlier this month. The letter appeared
in the Lebanese newspaper Al-Mustaqbal on 16 July.

"The explosion of the arms depot in our
town Khirbat Salim is a most dangerous and
worrisome matter, which brings into the open
what everyone is trying to black out, to obfuscate
and to conceal, namely illegal arms and their
storage in our civilian areas and in basements
near our children by an organization that has
begun to pose a threat to our interests and to our
tranquil lives.
"The policy that we are adopting thus far, of
concealing what is happening in reality, due to
various security pretexts, in effect allow the
armed elements to fulfil their interests at the
expense of the welfare and the prosperity of
people of the Lebanese nation."

The letter continues:

"To the leaders of Hizbullah we say: we are
not so naive. We distinguish very well between
the sounds of regular fire and the sounds of an
explosion of cluster bombs and other explosive
materials. We have had enough of the pain and
the disasters of the so-called victory of July 2006.
If you, as you claim, tie your activity to religion
and Allah, then you must empty the residential
areas of weaponry and ammunition and of all else
that threatens our lives."

This explosion, which occurred 13 days ago,
exposed the world to a dangerous phenomenon that
Israel has been warning about for years. It
demonstrated that the Hizbullah terrorist organization,
together with its two sponsors - Member States of this
Organization - continue to operate actively south of
the Litani river in overt Violation of resolution
1701 (2006), as this Council was informed last week
by Under-Secretary-General Le Roy. This severe
incident - the most grave in a series of Violations by
Hizbullah over the last three years - demonstrates to
the world the volatile reality on the ground.

It further shows the challenges to the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), namely, an
unenforced arms embargo along the Lebanese-Syrian
border and the presence of Hizbullah on the ground.
This terrorist group threatens Israel, Lebanon and the
region, as it continues to build its military
infrastructure, both north and south of the Litani River.

Above all, the Khirbat Salim explosion
demonstrated that the work of the Security Council in
Lebanon is necessary and urgent. In that regard, I
congratulate you, Mr. President, on convening the
consultations and briefing by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations held on 23 July. However,
there is more to be done.

The repeated breaches by Hizbullah of the
Council's demands are indicative of the danger posed
to our region by Iran. From southern Lebanon to Gaza,
the arming, training and financing of terrorism bear the
same certificate of origin: Tehran. The Iranian
Government remains the world's greatest sponsor of
terrorism. It sabotages the peace process. It threatens
the stability of countries in the region.

Moreover, Iran continues to pursue the
development of nuclear weapons, together with long-
range missiles. That is a clear threat to peace and to
security. Such grave realities reflect an unsustainable
future. The Security Council has already addressed that
dangerous phenomenon, but there is more to be done on
this issue, too. We call upon the Council to act urgently
and effectively to put an end to the Iranian nuclear
threat and to stem Iranian terrorist interference. The
Council must consider more effective ways to impose
its arms embargo along the Lebanese-Syrian border. It
should strengthen the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon and the Lebanese armed forces and establish
clear benchmarks to disarm and dismantle Hizbullah.

Turning to Gaza, the Council cannot ignore the
second terrorist front that Israel confronts - the
Hamas rulers of Gaza. We cannot ignore the smuggling
of deadly weapons and arms into Gaza, which, sadly,
hasten a future military conflict. As acknowledged in a
recent report by Mr. Robert Serry, Israel advised that it
had detected the smuggling into Gaza of no less than
330 mortars, 37 rockets, roughly 40 anti-tank weapons,
46 anti-aircraft missiles and 17 tons of explosives.

Those numbers reflect only part of Hamas's
military build-up and demonstrate its desire to provoke
another conflict. The Hamas terrorist organization
continues to reject the terms established by the
international community, namely, recognition of the
State of Israel, an end to violence and acceptance of
previous agreements between Israel and the
Palestinians.

Israel desires peace. Our desire for peace is
rooted in our yearning for a future in which Israelis and
Palestinians will have put an end to the suffering and
bereavement that have afflicted our region for too long.
We seek a brighter future, a future in which Israel and
all of its Arab neighbours can better fulfil their
aspirations and pursue their dream of leading normal,
peaceful and creative lives.

Peace is built solely through direct negotiations
between the parties themselves. Our partners in the
peace process must recognize that Israel has always
been and will continue to be the eternal homeland of
the Jewish people. As Israel's Prime Minister
recently stated, if the Palestinians recognize Israel as
the Jewish State, we are ready to agree to a real peace
agreement - a demilitarized Palestinian State side by
side with the Jewish State.

This year, Israel took a number of successful
security coordination steps that extend Palestinian
movement, strengthen Palestinian security forces and
improve the Palestinian economy. Thus, 152
roadblocks have been dismantled or have extended
their hours of passage. Such measures offer
improvements to the lives of Palestinians in the West
Bank and serve as important confidence-building
measures. A special ministerial committee headed by
the Prime Minister was established to facilitate
economic projects and integration between Israel and
the West Bank. Such efforts, including an industrial
zone in Jenin, an agricultural export venture in Jericho
and the creation of tourist infrastructure along the
Jordan River, are only the beginning. Yet they offer
concrete ways to build a foundation of coexistence in
our region.

Earlier this month, the Quartet's Middle East
Envoy, Mr. Tony Blair, publicly applauded Israel's
concrete efforts to promote peace. He noted that such
steps had not been appropriately commended, or even
acknowledged, by members of the international
community.

Israel continues to call for the immediate
resumption of a political dialogue with the Palestinian
Authority. Israel will continue to build a foundation of
peace that promotes progress on economic, political
and security-related matters. We call upon all our
neighbours to translate into action the spirit of the Arab
Peace Initiative. Admittedly, dangers and risks still
remain. In the West Bank, Israeli and Palestinian
security forces have successfully curbed terrorist
activities. However, such success has not yet
significantly diminished the threat at hand.

We now stand at a critical juncture. One path is
the way of terrorism and hatred. It is the way of
Hamas, the way of Hizbullah and the way of terror. It
is the way of Iran. It offers violence, not vision;
confrontation, not coexistence. A second way lies
ahead of us, as well. It is the way of peace, prosperity
and mutual respect. It is a way that represents a better
future for all in our beleaguered region. It offers hope
to our peoples. Israel, for its part, has made a clear
choice - to pursue the way of peace.
