May I begin by joining others in welcoming you to the presidency. It is good to see your commitment to transparency already in place with the broadcast of the briefing this morning. I thought that was a very useful innovation. I would like to thank China, as others have, for its presidency. It was good to see them also willing to be innovative and open in such challenging circumstances. I also want to thank Special Representative Annadif for his excellent briefing and to join others in welcoming Minister for Foreign Affairs Drame to this discussion. It is good to see the Malian Government engaging at this level with our consultations. The United Kingdom continues to give its full support to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) as it works in challenging and complex circumstances, helping to build the conditions for lasting peace and stability in Mali and so, by extension, in the wider region. The extent of those changing circumstances were underlined again on Monday by the attacks in Bamba, in which many Malian soldiers lost their lives. On behalf of the United Kingdom, I offer you, Mr. Foreign Minister, and the families of those soldiers our sincere condolences. The last three months have seen some long overdue steps towards implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. We join others in welcoming the deployment of the reconstituted armed forces to Kidal, Gao, Timbuktu and Menaka, the completion of the first round of the legislative elections with support from MINUSMA and the revival of the agreement monitoring committee, including, critically, the commitments to increase female participation in the peace process. This is welcome progress, but it does not go far enough. We once again urge the parties to the peace agreement to redouble their efforts and continue to accelerate its implementation, and hope that when the Secretary-General next updates the Council there will be more progress to report. The United Kingdom is also concerned by a number of worrying trends outlined in the Secretary-General's report, including the spread of terrorist activity in parts of the Mopti and Segou regions, increased violence against and exploitation of women and children, as well as increased asymmetric threats against MINUSMA itself. The stark increase in human rights violations and abuses, including among signatories to the 2015 peace agreement, is unacceptable. It is vital that the Mission report in full on such violations and abuses where they occur and that the Government investigate those cases, holding perpetrators to account. Of course, in addition to these concerns, the United Kingdom shares the concerns already expressed by Council colleagues about the potentially catastrophic impact of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in the Sahel. The peak of the outbreak is likely to hit in the middle of Mali's lean season. This could significantly increase the number of those at risk in the region owing to food insecurity, which we already estimate to be at 13.8 million in 2020. The United Kingdom is committed to supporting the international COVID-19 response, including through further funding, mobilizing partners and providing technical assistance. Globally, the United Kingdom is spending $665 million to help in the development of vaccines, treatments and testing, as well as to support the International Monetary Fund in its help to vulnerable economies. In the Sahel, we are working closely with our humanitarian implementation partners to help them continue their work while addressing the extra pressures from COVID-19. In that regard, we welcome yesterday's announcement by the United Nations of a further $6 million of support to strengthen the Government of Mali's response. We are also concerned by reports of COVID-19 cases among the MINUSMA team. COVID-19 will inevitably have implications for MINUSMA itself, whether through requests from the Government of Mali for support in its pandemic response or owing to public health restrictions impacting the day-to-day operation of the Mission. We would welcome reassurance from the Special Representative of the Secretary- General that contingency plans are being drawn up for how the Mission will mitigate those possible impacts on core mandate delivery. In conclusion, while we cannot ignore the potentially disastrous impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, we also cannot let it derail or delay progress towards lasting peace in Mali. Intensified political, security and development efforts are required. The United Kingdom remains committed to playing our part in this, including through the deployment of 250 British troops to Mali later this year. A sustainable peace will not be won by MINUSMA alone; the commitment of all parties to full implementation of the peace agreement and addressing the underlying causes of instability in the region is the only way to ensure long-term security.
