It is crucial that the Security Council continues to exchange regularly on the situation in Syria. The top priority is the implementation of an immediate and sustainable nationwide ceasefire to facilitate the efforts to respond to the COVID-19 crisis. We support the call of the Secretary-General and of his Special Envoy in this regard. It is urgent that it be implemented. We call on all parties to work actively in this direction. The United Nations has to remain at the forefront of these efforts, in accordance with Security Council resolution 2254 (2015). The risk of the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic in Syria is extremely worrying, notably in the north-west and in the north-east. A nationwide ceasefire is the only way to facilitate prevention and response actions to COVID-19. This is all the more necessary as the implementation of the Russian-Turkish agreement of 5 March on Idlib remains fragile and uncertain. We also fully support the call of the Special Envoy for the large-scale release of detainees and abductees, especially political prisoners, as well as immediate access for relevant humanitarian organizations to detention facilities. We call on all parties, in particular the Syrian regime, to ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access to all the people in need. The United Nations agencies and their partners are scaling up their efforts to respond to the humanitarian needs of the population and to the COVID-19 crisis. These efforts need to be supported and enhanced. In this context, the cross-border mechanism has never been so relevant in the north-west. The United Nations Children's Fund and World Food Programme were very clear after their visit in Syria: there is no alternative to the cross-border mechanism. The scale-up of humanitarian deliveries through the two crossing points must continue. France remains determined to preserve that life-saving mechanism. We have committed 25 million euros for 2020 to the humanitarian response in the north-west, including 3 million euros for the COVID-19 response. In the north-east, we deplore that the recent announcement of the regime regarding the cross-line delivery of medical items has not materialized. The attempts of the regime to dictate the conditions for the delivery of aid are unacceptable and in blatant violation of humanitarian principles. It is essential that the World Health Organization convoy in Damascus can deliver aid to all the people in need in the north-east. Urgent steps need to be taken to ensure adequate medical care and protective measures in all places of detention. It is urgent to restart the political process and to broaden its scope to all the elements of resolution 2254 (2015). We support the attempts of the Special Envoy to find an agreement between the parties to resume the meetings of the Constitutional Committee and we welcome today's announcement. However, it is clear that the Syrian regime is unwilling to engage in a credible political process or to engage at all, as the last five months have sufficiently demonstrated. In this context, we call on Geir Pedersen to make it clear to the Security Council when he deems he is no longer able to continue his efforts on the Constitutional Committee. We also urge him to work on all aspects of resolution 2254 (2015), as the political process cannot be reduced to constitutional discussions. The ceasefire is one of these aspects, as are the elections and the conditions for holding a transparent and free ballot. The temporary lull obtained in the north-west must be used for this purpose. In conclusion, I reiterate my call on Russia to convince the regime to abide by a national ceasefire in the context of the COVID-19 outbreak. Our collective cooperation is needed than more ever and we need to tackle the crisis together, despite our disagreements on the Syrian war.
