Ms. Sapag Munoz de la Pena (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank the former Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Antonio
de Aguiar Patriota, and of course the current Chair,
Ambassador Olof Skoog, for their presentations. We
value their assessment of the work and progress of the
Commission and the challenges facing it.

We have taken careful note of the line separating the
problems that the Security Council can and must address
from those that are not part of its responsibilities. In
that light, we feel that the Peacebuilding Commission
can play a useful role in such areas, complementing the
Council's work.

Chile fully supports the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission precisely because it is capable of guiding
peace processes and supporting political transitions
and institution-building, and not just in the immediate
aftermath of conflict. The Commission can, at its full
potential, function as a tool for preventing conflicts and
their recurrence, thereby contributing to the work of
the Security Council. The re-establishment of the rule
of law and the strengthening of national institutions
and the role of civil society in peacebuilding through
processes intended for those purposes, funded by the
Peacebuilding Fund and supported by the country
configurations, make it possible to create conditions in
which the root causes of conflicts can be attacked.

The Commission can also function as an early-
warning tool. In practical terms, it could develop
preventive diagnostics that would enable it to address
the underlying causes of political, social and cultural
destabilization, all of them factors that can lead to the
outbreak and recurrence of conflicts. It is extremely
important that the Commission be able to identify
and address issues of social exclusion and economic,
political and cultural problems and those related to
gender and religion, as well as those stemming from
intolerance and Violent extremism.

In 2015 Chile became a member ofthe Peacebuilding
Commission's Organizational Committee for the fifth
time. This year we join it as a member of the Security
Council, enabling us to see the interaction between
the two bodies close up. In our View, it is vital that the
Council and the Commission support each other, and
we hope that the interactive dialogue to be held this
afternoon will enable us to find opportunities for closer
cooperation while avoiding duplication of tasks.

We also hope that the report on the second review
process of the Commission's architecture will provide
new insights that can help it to consolidate and deepen
its advisory and consultative role, while recognizing
the need for synergies between its review process
and those related to peacekeeping operations and the
Global Study on the Implementation of Resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security. Chile is a
co-Chair of the Group of Friends of the Global Study,
and we hope its recommendations will be taken up by
the system.

In conclusion, and faced as we are with a complex
international scenario, we urge that we continue
working to coordinate the mechanisms that can enable
us to follow up the issues on the Council's agenda. Our
longstanding relationship with the Commission has
shown us that progress can be achieved, but also the
limitations the Commission faces in reaching its full
potential. We believe it is a mechanism that deserves
our support, and in that regard, I am pleased to report
that my country hopes to continue its strong support
for the Peacebuilding Commission and Peacebuilding
Fund.

