Mr. Keating: At the outset, let me to express my
best wishes to members of the Security Council and
to Somalis around the world at the beginning of the
holy month of Ramadan, at time of peace, forgiveness
and compassion.

Events in the past 48 hours in Somalia serve to
highlight the complexity of the situation facing its
people. Today saw the conclusion in Mogadishu of
the National Constitutional Convention, a milestone
marked by strong commitment to an inclusive
constitutional review process with clear and ambitious
targets. That augurs well for strengthening the rule of
law and stability and advancing reconciliation.

Today happens to be the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the foundation of the Somali Youth League.
Celebratory events around the country are highlighting
the needs and ambitions of today's young Somalis,
many of whom lack education and job opportunities
and, as a result, feel marginalized.

In Baidoa, federal member state Presidents are
meeting in the Council of Interstate Cooperation to
prepare for engagement with the Federal Government
on critical issues, such as security, resource and revenue
sharing and relations with Gulf partners.

The African Union (AU) and the United Nations
joint review team are meeting Somali and international
actors in Somalia. The focus of discussions has been
the implications of the national security transition plan
for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

In Beledweyne, humanitarian colleagues are
working round the clock with local authorities and
communities to address the catastrophic consequences
of floods for over 200,000 people. Forces from
Somaliland and Puntland have been exchanging fire in
Tukaraq and the region of S001, with an as-yet-unknown
number of casualties reported. There is a serious danger
that that conflict could escalate, with devastating
implications for local people, as well all Somalis.

There is a lot going on. To its great credit, unforeseen
events are not deflecting the Federal Government
from its determination to pursue an agenda embracing
economic and financial reform, revenue generation,
security sector reform and inclusive politics - all with
a view to an irreversible and positive transformation of
the country's prospects. That agenda deserves timely
and coherent support from the Council and Somalia's
international partners, while recognizing that the
many risks facing the country need to be managed
and mitigated.

The Government has vigorously pursued the
objective of putting the country on a sounder economic
and financial keel. In February the International
Monetary Fund welcomed progress under the staff-
monitored programme and reiterated its support to help
Somalia reach a heavily indebted poor country decision
point as soon as possible.

The High-Level Roundtable on Somalia held
in Washington, DC, on 19 April opened the path
towards a pre-arrears clearance grant. That was a
vote of confidence in the Government's achievements
in engaging with the private sector, improving public
financial management and increasing domestic
revenues. A number of partners are already providing,
or now plan to increase, budget support, including the
European Union, Norway, Sweden and Turkey.

Additional resources are needed to address the root
causes of fragility, chronic poverty and low human
development affecting the majority of the population.
Longer-term investment is needed to build resilience
to climate shocks and break the cycle of recurrent
crises that cause much suffering and undermine the
State-building process.

The humanitarian situation is not as bad as it
was a year ago, but by any global measure it remains
very grave. The gu rains and flooding have affected
more than 718,000 people in the central and southern
regions of Somalia. The consequences of the floods
include large-scale population displacement, economic
damage and diseases, including cholera. A rapid-
response allocation to address flood response of up to
$5.1 million has been endorsed and is pending final
approval. The 2018 humanitarian response plan calls
for $1.5 billion. As of today, the plan is only 24 per
cent funded, and is therefore inadequate to support the
flood relief operations under way. Allow me to use this
occasion to appeal to international donors once again
to provide generous and timely support, while thanking
them for the prompt and unprecedented amount of
funding that enabled the prevention of famine last year.

Success in raising revenues, attracting grants
and budget support provides a firm basis not only for
investment and creating jobs, but also for tackling
Somalia's security and State-building challenges and
strengthening relations with federal member states, not
least through resource- and revenue-sharing agreements.

Insecurity remains a constant concern. Despite
increasing pressure on the group, including an increase
in air strikes, Al-Shabaab has continued to demonstrate
its ability to execute deadly terrorist attacks against
civilian and military targets, including AMISOM,
notably through the use of improvised explosive
devices. The factors that breed terrorism, including
youth unemployment, corruption, a sense of injustice
and unresolved conflicts, cannot be left until later.
The truly formidable challenge facing Somalia and its
AU and other partners is simultaneously to fight the
insurgency and reform the security sector.

The President is leading defence reform. The
Government is taking bold steps, including biometric
registration, payroll reform and operational readiness
assessments, while recognizing that much more
needs to be done. The list includes - as the Prime
Minister phrased it - turning the national security
architecture into construction, agreeing the basis upon
which regional forces will be integrated into the army
and police, passing essential legislation, conducting
asset inventories and weapons management and
developing transparent procurement procedures and
greater accountability.

A measure ofprogress is that the security transition
plan was adopted by Somalia's Council of Ministers
on 19 April. The plan is designed to build Somali
operational and institutional capacity not only for the
armed forces, but also in areas ofthe most basic security
concern to the population, includingjustice, accountable
local governance, freedom of movement and provision
of services. The plan was endorsed by the AU Peace
and Security Committee on 30 April and welcomed by
all partners at the high-level security meeting held in
Brussels on 2 May. The imperative now is to implement
it. Critical will be ensuring national ownership and
leadership of the plan through the National Security
Council structures under Somali leadership.

AMISOM. continues to play an indispensable role,
at great human cost, in protecting population centres,
main supply routes and Somalia's overall political
progress. The Special Representative ofthe Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head
of the African Union Mission in Somalia will shortly
address the many challenges that that entails. Suffice it
to say that a successful security transition will require
not just deep reform of the Somalia security forces,
but also, as the Chairperson of the AU Commission
and the Envoys of the Secretary-General noted,
transformation of AMISOM, whether relating to more
flexible joint operations and combat mentoring, greater
emphasis on policing, adequate enablers and force
multipliers or stronger accountability systems, whether
for assets or relating to human rights. More flexible
operational support by the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia will also be required, together with
predictable financing.

The AU-United Nations joint review is likely to
underscore that the foremost requirement for success is
the need for unity of purpose among Somali actors, as
well as among the Somalis, the African Union, troop-
contributing countries and principal security partners.
The comprehensive approach to security structures is
designed to ensure coherent and coordinated approaches.
Somali politics remain as lively as ever, punctuated
by crises relating to competition for power and resources,
complicated by the weakness of Somali institutions and
ambiguities in the provisional Federal Constitution,
particularly with regard to relations among the three
branches of Government, the growing pains associated
with the emergence of federal arrangements and the role
of untraceable money in the political marketplace. The
most prominent fault lines have related to the impact of
the Gulf dispute, the role of parliamentarians in politics
and relations between the leaders of the federal member
states and the Federal Government. Those issues both
overlap and have distinct contours. The stand-off
between the Federal Government and Parliament was
resolved in early April when the Speaker of the House
of the People resigned. The new Speaker was elected
peacefully and inaugurated this past week. That creates
an opportunity to fast-forward the legislative agenda,
taking advantage of a phenomenon rare in Somali
politics - unity among the President, the Prime
Minister and the Speaker.

But, as with tensions that continue between the
Federal Government and federal member states,
structural deficits may again contribute to future
crises. Those need to be addressed, including through
the electoral law and political party law, while moving
towards a constitutionally compliant forum that brings
the Federal Government and federal member state
leadership together, and measures to regulate motions
of no confidence and impeachment procedures, as well
as nothing less than a campaign to fight corruption.

The role of the United Nations and international
community continues to be to insist upon adherence to
the rule of law, inclusive processes and zero-tolerance
for the use of violence by any party in the resolution of
political disputes. Sometimes that results in us being
accused by one side or another of being biased, but I
believe that the record will speak for itself in terms
of consistent support for a gradual change in Somali
political culture.

Relations among powerful Somali actors are being
tested as a result of the Gulf dispute, with actors taking
positions that accord with their economic interests,
security and political objectives. Somalia needs
respectful relations with all its international partners,
recognizing that it is the prerogative of the Federal
Government to lead foreign policy and that member
states need to be fully consulted if they are to support
policies that have a direct bearing on them.

The best way to minimize the impact of the Gulf
dispute is through greater Somali unity. It is ordinary
Somalis that will suffer the most from a failure by
political leaders to resolves those issues, whether
through the constitutional review or through ad
interim agreements. The upcoming National Security
Council session provides an opportunity to do that
under the President's leadership. Disputes that result
in the reduction of aid flows and economic ties, or
that increase tensions and the risk of violent conflict,
only play into the hands of extremists and retard the
State-building agenda that Somalia has set for itself in
the coming year.

With regard to the dispute in Tukaraq, the facts
are still coming in, but fighting has erupted and there
are reports of deaths and casualties. I associate myself
fully with President Farmajo's call a few hours ago for
an immediate ceasefire and a resumption of political
dialogue between the leaders of Somaliland and
Puntland. In the past few days, both President Bihi
Abdi of Somaliland and President Gaas of Puntland
have assured me that they want to avoid, and cannot
afford, hostilities. The approach of Ramadan makes a
ceasefire particularly important.

At risk is not only the welfare of hundreds of
thousands of people and the possibility of mass
displacement at a time when humanitarian funds are
already low, but the remarkable progress that both
Somaliland and Puntland have made over the years.
Conflict could unravel more than 20 years of relatively
peaceful coexistence. I urge Council members to
engage with all concerned to reduce tensions and
discourage those who may be seeking advantage from
that situation.

The Tukaraq crisis could distract attention from
the progress that has been made in resolving conflicts
elsewhere, notably in Galkayo, which is more peaceful
today than for many years, as well as in Merka in Lower
Shabelle and Galmudug, where, despite the hurdles,
there is forward momentum. The Government is moving
forward with a national reconciliation framework,
supported by the United Nations and other partners,
recognizing that the many conflicts in Somalia,
whether over resources, clan disputes or federal state
formation, need to benefit from the engagement of civil
society, women and youth groups, the business sector,
traditional elders and conflict mediation experts.

Unfortunately, the human rights situation
remains deeply problematic, with many groups being
particularly vulnerable, including women, internally
displaced persons, minorities and journalists. The
signing of the joint programme on human rights in
February was a positive step towards strengthening
protection frameworks. I urge the Federal Government
to move forward the process of establishing the human
rights commission.

The situation of children affected by armed
conflict remains dire, with a marked increase in
abductions and the recruitment and the use of children.
Impunity for sexual Violence continues to be of great
concern. I strongly urge the Federal Government to
enact the sexual offences bill, which will strengthen
the legal framework and reduce impunity for crimes of
sexual violence.

In conclusion, the people of Somalia continue to
face extraordinary challenges. They are fortunate to
have a Government that is serious about tackling them.
Key to its success will be unity among Somali leaders,
complemented by the coherent support of the Council
and the broader international community.

