Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): As we celebrate
the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations this
year, and as conflicts continue to pose grave threats
in many parts of the world, the Security Council
must remain effective in carrying out the primary
responsibility conferred on it by Member States for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Thailand firmly believes that, in order to be effective,
the Council and its subsidiary bodies must be efficient
and transparent, ensure inclusive participation, and
be accountable. Let me share with the Council the
following views.

First, sanctions are important tools for maintaining
and restoring peace and security. To remain effective
in deterring actions that threaten peace and security,
the Council should exercise the utmost care in devising
targeted sanctions. Sanctions regimes should minimize
unintended economic and social consequences. Thailand
welcomes a research-based approach, including the use
of statistical analysis to evaluate and quantify the impact
and effectiveness of sanctions and to provide valuable
guidance for future policymaking. The application of
clear criteria in the listing and delisting of those on
the sanctions lists is also of great importance. In that
regard, streamlined communications with Member
States would effectively help the latter to address the
increasing number of sanctions-related issues. Another
tool to improve the Council's effectiveness is the
Security Council's annual report, which should be more
than a collection of resolutions and statistics and should
include assessments and ways forward.

Secondly, it is important to ensure transparency in

the Council's deliberations. Thailand urges members
of the Council to continue convening public meetings,
thereby engaging the wider membership of the United
Nations, particularly on issues of broad impact and
complexity. Closed meetings and informal consultations
are necessary, but Council members should share
information, developments and outcomes with the wider
membership of the United Nations through frequent
briefing sessions. The Council should also engage
with countries on issues related to their situation that
affect international peace and security. Thailand is in
agreement with the improvements identified by Spain
in the concept paper (S/2015/793, annex) as ways of
making open debates more interactive and productive.

Thirdly, there is no greater threat to the Council's
credibility and effectiveness than the inability to
respond in a timely and decisive manner to prevent
loss of life through mass atrocities. The Council must
remain committed to its obligations and act to prevent
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
The proposal put forward by France and Mexico on
the code of conduct regarding Security Council action
against genocide, crimes against humanity or war
crimes elaborated by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group are reasonable and commendable.
Thailand lends its support to those initiatives.

Lastly, in addition to working with all Member
States towards the noble goals of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Council must also work with
the other organs of the United Nations to enhance
synergies and to avoid the overlapping of mandates.
That aspect will be of particular importance in 2016,
during the selection process for the next Secretary-
General. Thailand supports the essential roles of both
the Council and the General Assembly in a transparent
and inclusive selection process, as outlined in Assembly
resolution 69/231.

