Mr. Braun: I should like to group the numerous
questions that have been addressed to me under several
thematic headings, starting with the question by the
representative of the United Kingdom about the
recruitment of personnel to the Ministry of Interior and
to the police and about their qualifications. I should
like to include in this group the questions by the
representatives of the United States, Chile and Angola.

It is difficult, but not impossible, to recruit
qualified personnel. It seems that work in the police
force is attractive to Afghan nationals, that it is
prestigious and that it has a good tradition. When
candidates were selected for the first intake of 1,500 in
the police academy courses, starting in August of last
year, it was possible to include qualified recruits from
all 32 provinces, providing a proper ethnic mix
reflecting of the population.

The second question by the representative of the
United Kingdom was whether international support for
the police project was broad enough. More
international support is needed, as I said in my
statement. How can it be increased? We have
developed a catalogue of modules, into which the
whole police project has been broken down. It is a
living document that contains numerous modules of
training, reconstruction and equipment details. I have
had an opportunity to share this catalogue with a
number of interested countries by travelling to capitals
that had indicated interest. I would like to use this
opportunity to let the Council know that the catalogue
can be had from our United Nations Mission here in
New York. It can also be had through Council
members' embassies in Berlin, as well as through our
embassy and the police project office at Kabul.

We hold regular meetings in Berlin with countries
that have been participating in the police project. At
the last meeting there were 16 nations present. That is
not a closed group. I would like to invite all members
to let us know whether there is something they can do
in order to support the project. I am pretty certain that
in this catalogue of modules there is one that fits
existing requirements and possibilities.

(spoke in French)

Mr. Guehenno has already made some comments
regarding the question raised by the representative of
France on the presidential decree. Given that this
concerns a presidential decree that is currently being
prepared, it is probably not appropriate to address this
matter in greater detail in an open meeting. However, I
am prepared to share with the members of the Security
Council, during the closed meeting that is to follow
this one, the advice we have given the Administration
in Kabul.

(spoke in English)

The representative of Russia asked about
cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours in
the sector of the police and the services. The
representative of Guinea also mentioned this question
of cooperation, particularly as regards the fight against
illicit drugs. Cooperation has been completely
insufficient in the past. It needs to be developed.

I mentioned in my briefing that the police
information system (POLIS) currently being developed
provides the necessary infrastructure to link Kabul with
the provinces. It also provides the software necessary
to go beyond borders and to link neighbouring
countries into the information system.

A second aspect of regional cooperation is being
studied, including through a project for a regional
police conference on Afghanistan that is slated to be
held in the second or third quarter of this year in a
country of the region that has diplomatic relations both
with Afghanistan and with all its neighbours.

The representative of Mexico asked about the
relationship between national and provincial police
forces. I probably did not make it sufficiently clear in
my statement that the project is for the establishment of
one national police force for the entire country.
Provincial forces will be part of that national police
force. The plan is not to have any independent police
forces in the provinces, as was the case in the past.
There will instead be one single, national unified police
force, under the command of the Government in Kabul,
which, of course, will appoint regional police
commanders who will report to the central Government
in Kabul. As Under-Secretary-General Guehenno has
mentioned, the implementation of this project is of
course one of the biggest obstacles we face.

The representative of China asked about what
could be done to get Afghanistan to take full advantage
of its membership of the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL). Last year, Germany helped
Afghanistan to fulfil the requirements for INTERPOL
membership. That membership came about at the
INTERPOL conference held in October last year. Part
of the police reconstruction project is to build up the
INTERPOL unit in the Afghan Ministry of the Interior.
We hope that, with the development of that project,
Afghanistan will be able to take full advantage of its
INTERPOL membership, which of course has the
greatest relevance in combating the international
problem of drugs.

