Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): Let me first
address the comments and questions of the
representative of France. Ambassador Doutriaux asked
me to comment on the unambiguous conclusion of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia's Committee on
Kosovo that conditions for Serb participation in the
elections were "non-existent" (supra). I think the first
response is that four Serb parties have decided to
register and to request certification. That indicates that
those four parties hope that the elections can result in
true participation by the Serb community in the affairs
of Kosovo.

Clearly, the progress that the Serbs expect will be
gradual - too slow to meet their expectations. As I
think everybody agrees, that progress can come about
only through a gradual approach, such as the one
instituted by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). The pace might be
debated, but I think everyone agrees that it must be
gradual.

Clearly, expectations in three basic areas need to
be addressed. Some questions have symbolic and
emotional dimensions, such as that of missing persons.
Here, several delegations referred to the memorandum
of understanding with the International Committee for
Missing Persons, by which we shall enjoy its
cooperation on DNA testing. That is a practical step
forward that I believe will enable us to make progress
on this distressing issue.

There are certain practical issues that can have a
direct effect on Serb participation in the elections, first
and foremost the question of the return of refugees and
displaced persons. Here, talks are under way on the
pace of such returns. We hope it will be as fast as
possible. But we know we must take the security
situation into account, for nothing would be more
harmful to the restoration of trust than returns taking
place under poor conditions and endangering the safety
and security of Serbs who return to Kosovo.

The modalities for these returns can be a subject
for discussion. The long-standing position of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and of UNMIK is that those who return
should go back to their places of origin. We know that
in some instances that could cause practical problems,
because their houses are occupied or because the
returnees would be isolated in places where it would be
difficult to guarantee their safety and security. I believe
we must address these issues pragmatically and
consider how to act in line with basic principles while
adapting to the specific conditions of Kosovo.

Here, I note that there have been some
encouraging signs. An association of displaced persons
from the Pec region has requested to register for the
elections; this is an encouraging sign. It shows that
here too there is the expectation and the belief that
progress can be made.

The third essential area that many have spoken
about is, of course, security. This is still the paramount
concern of UNMIK. I will not repeat what I have
already said in this regard. I think I have stressed that
progress is being made. We have, I believe, an
approach that will be increasingly effective, as is
beginning to be seen in very concrete terms.

Finally, as regards the involvement of Serbs in
the electoral process, I think the basic issue is whether
the Serbs want to have an influence from within on the
reconciliation process and on the administration of
Kosovo. I think the prospects for the November
elections offer this possibility. They offer the
possibility for a truly multi-ethnic Kosovo, where
participation in the management of public affairs will
be both the result of a reconciliation process and an
instrument for such reconciliation. Bringing the
communities to the same table in one Assembly to
discuss together matters of common concern to them,
and thus obliging them to enter into dialogue, instead
of having a kind of parallel administration of their
affairs, will help to create conditions that will
strengthen the reconciliation process. I recognize,
however, that this will take time.

