Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My
delegation would also like to thank Mr. Annabi for his
briefing containing up-to-date and very useful
information. On 18 August 2003, the Security Council,
in complete unanimity, condemned the unjustifiable
and often lethal incidents described by Mr. Annabi.
The Council firmly called for finding the perpetrators
and bringing them to justice so that they can be held
accountable for their crimes. I welcome the
mobilization that seems to be growing among the
population today, to help the police in their
investigations.

I also recall that on 3 July 2003, Mr. Steiner
presented to the Council the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on Kosovo (S/2003/675). It was an
exhaustive assessment of the efforts of the United
Nations to normalize the situation in the province. That
assessment, although largely positive, did include some
reasons for concern due to certain problems that
Mr. Steiner underlined in his introductory briefing on
that day. Those problems have grown since then, as we
noted in Mr. Annabi's statement today. My delegation
believes that those problems stem from the persistence
of intolerance, hatred and instinctual reactions based on
identity, which fuel partisan rivalry, injustice, violence
and, as a result, insecurity.

The population of Kosovo dreams of peace and a
reconciled society of solidarity that shares a common
vision of happiness. As well, as the Council observed
on the ground last month, the population is aware of
the international community's firm commitment and of
the enormous sacrifices its men and women make out
of goodwill. Those men and women work with the
population day by day with determination to ensure the
stabilization and reconstruction of Kosovo and the
reconciliation of the entire population. Establishing a
safe environment that has been disarmed and demined,
ensuring protection and freedom of movement,
facilitating the return of refugees and displaced
persons, creating conditions for a lasting settlement of
the problem - I could go on, but Council members are
well aware that these issues are the tasks set forth in
resolution 1244 (1999). All of those objectives disturb
the extremists on all sides, who are pleased only when
the situation is confused and out of control.

It is the United Nations that has established
conditions that have given rise to, or strengthened, the
hopes and dreams of the Kosovars. Over and above the
duties imposed on it by the Charter, the Organization
has a specific moral commitment to successfully
conclude its mission in Kosovo. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Harri
Holkeri, has stated that the incidents in question will
only strengthen our resolve to establish the rule of law
for the people of Kosovo.

In this regard, the Special Representative needs
the firm support of the United Nations if he is to be
successful in addressing the priorities for 2003 that his
predecessor, Mr. Steiner, set out and that the Council
welcomed. Kosovo is at a delicate stage and the
Security Council, with the customary support of
Secretary-General Kofi Annan and his Special
Representative, must tailor its strategy and the
modalities of its implementation by ensuring that its
activities in the province are focused on the long term.
We must therefore ensure that we know what the
people of Kosovo truly want and find appropriate
solutions that will enable us, without acting hastily, to
resolve the problem of the final status of Kosovo.

My delegation would like to reaffirm its
commitment to the principle of "standards before
status" and to the virtues of direct dialogue among all
the parties concerned. In this regard, we agree with Mr.
Holkeri that such dialogue should be focused on
specific issues, and we look forward to the proposals
for modalities for that dialogue. My delegation also
reaffirms its commitment to a multi-ethnic and
multicultural Kosovo nourished by the human values of
tolerance and harmony and watered by the source of
democratic values and respect for human rights.

My delegation appeals to all the elements of
Kosovo society and all other political actors in the
subregion to pool their efforts with those of UNMIK so
as to prevent the further stirring up of negative
emotions and to work to restore peace, security and
prosperity for all.

In conclusion, I would like to say how much my
country appreciates the impressive job being done on
the ground by Mr. Holkeri and his entire team. I
reaffirm the support of Cameroon for their efforts to
implement resolution 1244 (1999).

