Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): I
would like to begin by addressing these words to the
family of the late Captain Mbaye Diagne.

For 20 years, they have grieved the loss of man
who once served the United Nations - indeed
humankind - with the greatest distinction as a military
observer in the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Rwanda. That he was never to return alive to his
beloved family or to the country he served so well must
have brought immense pain, and that no official from
the United Nations Headquarters here in New York ever
called on his family can only be described as shameful.
While I can only speak for my own delegation, I am
absolutely sure that everyone here will join me when
I say that we are sorry, profoundly sorry, for the way
they have been treated by us here at the United Nations.
We now recognize, What they have always known.
Mbaye was the finest example of what we humans,
our human family, can produce, the very best of what
we are and what we have, and of whom his family and
the people of Senegal must always be very proud. In
this context, I am very pleased to see our colleague
the Permanent Representative of Senegal, Ambassador
Abdou Salam Diallo, with us here this morning.

By adopting resolution 2154 (2014), the Security
Council not only honours the memory of Captain
Mbaye Diagne, but in creating a medal in his name for
exceptional courage, we will for the first time in United
Nations history recognize publicly those who perform
amazing feats in the face of extreme danger on behalf
of the United Nations and humankind. Most especially,
we hope that the medal will inspire those United
Nations and associated personnel who toil in dangerous
situations to continue serving the United Nations
bravely. And for those few who demonstrate the most
breathtaking acts of human courage, this new and rare
medal in the name of Captain Mbaye Diagne, together
with the universal recognition that will come with it,
will represent humankind's ultimate acknowledgment
of their selfless devotion to the well-being of others.

Finally, Mr. President, I would like to thank you
and all the members of the Security Council for the
enthusiastic commitment and cooperation all of you
have shown in drafting this resolution, in sponsoring
it, and in seeing it adopted this morning by consensus.

