The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council remains deeply
concerned by the situation in Guinea, which
might pose a risk to regional peace and security
following the killings that occurred in Conakry
on 28 September, when members of the army
opened fire on civilians attending a rally. It
strongly condemns the violence that reportedly
caused more than 150 deaths and hundreds of
wounded and other blatant violations of human
rights, including numerous rapes and sexual
crimes against women, as well as the arbitrary
arrest of peaceful demonstrators and opposition
party leaders.

"The Security Council reiterates the need
for the national authorities to fight against
impunity, bring the perpetrators to justice, uphold
the rule of law, including the respect for basic
human rights, and release all the individuals who
are being denied due process under the law.

"The Security Council welcomes the public
statements by the International Contact Group,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the African Union, in particular
the communique of the African Union Peace and
Security Council meeting dated 15 October 2009
and the communique of the ECOWAS Summit
held on 17 October 2009. It welcomes the
mediation undertaken by President Blaise
Compaore of Burkina Faso, including his efforts
to create a more conducive and secure
environment in Guinea, and calls upon the
international community to support his action.

"The Security Council welcomes the
ECOWAS Summit's statement supporting the
Secretary-General's decision to establish an
international commission of inquiry to investigate
the events of 28 September, in order to ascertain
the facts that took place, to identify the
perpetrators with a view to ensuring that those
responsible for violations are held accountable
and to make recommendations to him. The
Security Council takes note that the authorities of
Guinea have officially committed to support the
work of the international commission of inquiry
in secure conditions.

"The Security Council welcomes further the
ECOWAS Summit's statement stressing the
importance of the establishment of a new
transitional authority that would ensure credible,
free and fair elections, of ensuring that the
Chairman and members of the National Council
for Democracy and Development (CNDD), the
Prime Minister and those who hold high office in
the new transitional authority will not be
candidates in the forthcoming presidential
elections and of setting up benchmarks in the
transition timetable. The Security Council calls
for the elections to be organized as scheduled in
2010.

"The Security Council further recalls in this
context its resolution 1888 (2009), in which it
urged the Secretary-General, Member States and
the heads of regional organizations to take
measures to increase the representation of women
in mediation processes and decision-making
processes with regard to conflict resolution and
peacebuilding.

"The Security Council takes note of the
decisions by the African Union Peace and
Security Council on 17 September and
15 October regarding the imposition of targeted
sanctions against the President of the CNDD and
other individuals. It also takes note of the
decision of ECOWAS to impose an arms embargo
on Guinea. It takes note further that the African
Union Peace and Security Council will meet at
the level of Heads of State on 29 October.

"The Security Council expresses its
intention to follow the situation closely. It
requests the Secretary-General to update it as
appropriate on the situation on the ground, the
potential implications for the subregion, the
09-57976
international investigation of the killings of
28 September 2009 and the measures taken by
ECOWAS and by the African Union."

This statement will be issued as a document
of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2009/27.
09-57976

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.
