Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to address the
Council.

(spoke in English)

This meeting is particularly timely, given the
renewal of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) mandate today. The year ahead
will be a crucial test for Afghan leaders. The future
of a sustainable and functional Afghan democracy can
rest only upon credible and constitutional elections.
We welcomed the Independent Election Commission's
announcement last fall that the next presidential
elections will take place on 5 April 2014, and Canada
notes that President Karzai's tenure is coming to a close
at the end of his second mandate.

Canada encourages the Independent Electoral
Commission (IEC) and the Afghan Government to
press forward with the strengthening of the electoral
process. We note with concern that the likelihood of
irregularities and fraud remains high and must be
mitigated well in advance of elections. It is essential,
in our view, that the democratic opposition be able to
exercise its full rights, as prescribed by the Constitution
and as affirmed by Afghans themselves. To that end,
we encourage the Government to ensure that the
process is transparent and inclusive. We welcome the
upcoming debate within the Afghan Parliament to
finalize the electoral and IEC structure laws, and we
remain committed to working with the Government
of Afghanistan's executive and legislative branches to
ensure that the voices of all Afghan citizens, including
women, will be heard and honoured.

However, elections alone do not make a vibrant,
inclusive and democratic society; the Government of
Afghanistan must also deliver on its rule of law and
human rights commitments. UNAMA's most recent
report on the elimination of violence against women
noted that there remained a disturbing under-reporting
of incidents of violence against women, and a lack of
serious investigation into credible allegations. More
needs to be done to implement the important provisions
of that law. More must be done to uphold the integrity
of the relationship between Afghan women and their
laws. The Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission is essential for the defence of these rights,
among others, and the Government of Afghanistan must
move forward with the appointment of commissioners.
We caution and stress that those appointments should
be merit-based, transparent and inclusive, lest the
Government be seen to actively subvert the Afghan
people and their emerging democracy.

(spoke in French)

On the occasion ofthe Security Council meeting on
Afghanistan held in September 2012 (see S/PV.6840),
Canada emphasized the importance of improving
Government transparency and accountability to ensure
that the funds pledged by the international community
at the Tokyo Conference are used effectively and
appropriately. Since then, Canada has worked with
the Government of Afghanistan, UNAMA and other
members of the Accountability Framework technical
and steering committees to ensure that Afghanistan
and the international community respect their mutual
agreements undertaken in Tokyo. The Accountability
Framework is essential to empowering the Afghan
people, promoting lasting trust among the Afghan
people, and upholding the trust of donor countries
throughout the transition period.

Canada also views positively the efforts ofthe Heart
of Asia countries to move forward a regional process
comprising specific and cooperative measures to
overcome the current challenges with regard to security
and the economy. The constructive participation of
Afghanistan's neighbours in the country's long-term
stability and development is absolutely essential to
realizing that region's significant potential during the
transformation decade.

(spoke in English)

Canada welcomes the progress made in recent
months in the peace and reconciliation process. We
reiterate our insistence that women's rights not be
forsaken for the sake of stability, as well as our support
for an Afghan-led and -owned process. More can and
should be done to ensure that the opponents of peace
do not derail the reconciliation process through acts of
terrorism.

(Spoke in French)

All countries of the region should implement
substantial and agreed commitments in order to improve
security in Afghanistan. In particular, they should
firmly deal with the threat posed by the extremist
insurgent groups operating on both sides of the border
that undermine the stability of South-East Asia. The
people of Pakistan and of other countries of the region
who wish to see peace with their Afghan neighbour in
the context of shared prosperity in Central and South
Asia should see those wishes respected.

(spoke in English)

Canada fully supports firm action against terrorists
who seek to undermine peace through indiscriminate
attacks on Afghan civilians. For that reason, we
welcome the United Nations listing of the Haqqani
Network as an entity that constitutes a threat to the
stability and security of Afghanistan. We will ensure
that, in Canada, the full legal weight of that listing
is brought to bear on members and supporters of the
Haqqani Network. We encourage all United Nations
Members to do the same in their national jurisdictions.

Security will remain a key challenge for
Afghanistan during the transition phase. Canada
finds the obfuscations of truth or statements lacking
hard facts during the security transition to be deeply
troubling. It is never appropriate to politically posture
over the fallen or under the tragic circumstances of
innocent lives lost. As the transfer of lead security
responsibility to the Afghan forces is under way, it is
equally essential that the Afghan people be aware of
where accountability rests. We look forward to the final
stage of the transition, where Afghans will assume
full security responsibility for the entire country by
the end of 2014. Canada has worked closely with the
Government of Afghanistan and our international
partners to train and prepare the Afghan National
Security Forces to take over security responsibility.
We remain committed to ensuring that the people of
Afghanistan can access the security and democracy
that they have been promised by their leaders.

