Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
begin by joining others in welcoming the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, back to the Chamber today, and by thanking
her for her comprehensive briefing. We sincerely
appreciate the valuable work and tireless efforts of the
Court and its officials in all bodies. The work of the
Prosecutor continues to make a significant contribution
to holding the perpetrators of serious crimes of
international concern to account and to providing
justice for their victims. My Government would
particularly like to acknowledge her efforts in applying
an integrated gender perspective throughout her Office
and investigations, as well as in her report.

We continue to be deeply concerned about
the security and humanitarian situation in Libya.
Sadly, since we last met with the Prosecutor in May
(S/PV.7934), the situation of civilians, who are paying
the highest price for the ongoing conflict, has remained
fragile and precarious. A breakdown in the rule of
law has led to widespread human rights violations and
abuses and violations of international humanitarian law
by all parties to the conflict. In those circumstances,
the Office of the Prosecutor plays an important and
essential role. Sweden welcomes the efforts ofthe Office
to investigate the ongoing cases and to closely monitor
the situation throughout Libya. We also welcome its
efforts to bring new applications for arrest warrants
against those alleged to be responsible for violations or
abuses, should the evidence and relevant information
support such action. That is vital and crucial work in
the light of the continuing volatility and insecurity in
the country. Reports of violations and abuses must be
investigated, and those responsible must be brought to
justice. There should be no impunity.

In order to assist the Office of the Prosecutor in
fulfilling its mandate, the support and cooperation of
the Libyan Prosecutor-General's office, the Libyan
authorities, States parties, Member States and all
other relevant entities is crucial. In addition, if it is to
successfully carry out its functions, including those
asked of it by the Council, the Office needs our full
political and financial support. It is essential that we
follow through on our decision to refer Libya to the
International Criminal Court, since the situation in the
country continues to constitute a threat to international
peace and security.

Sweden recalls the decision by the Security Council
to refer the Libya situation to the Court in 2011, and
reiterates its full support to the Office of the Prosecutor
to investigate the actions of all parties to the conflict
in Libya. That includes more recent crimes, such as
the case against Mahmoud Al-Werfalli. We support
the Court's call to the Libyan authorities to cooperate
with it and to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Werfalli
immediately. Regarding the case of Mr. Al-Tuhamy, we
note with concern the continued lack of information on
his whereabouts and reiterate our hope for his speedy
arrest and transfer to the Court. Libya and all Member
States are under an obligation to cooperate with the
ICC in that regard.

We heard from the High Commissioner for Refugees
last week about the grave exploitation and abuse faced by
refugees and migrants along the Central Mediterranean
route to Europe, including in Libya (see S/PV.8083). We
are alarmed by reports of arbitrary detentions, torture
and sexual and gender-based Violence in migrant
detention centres, as well as in regular detention
centres. Greater international access is urgently needed
and should be granted. Re-establishing a permanent
United Nations presence in Libya will be important for
responding to those issues, and we welcome Special
Representative Salame's efforts in that regard. We share
the view of the Office of the Prosecutor that certain
crimes against refugees and migrants fall within the
jurisdiction of the Court, and we support the initiative
to explore the possibility ofinvestigating crimes related
to human trafficking and smuggling networks.

Ensuring the rule of law, ending impunity and
providing accountability are essential to post-conflict
reconciliation and sustaining peace. The work of the
Prosecutor and the ICC plays an important role in
Libya in that regard. They have the full support of
my Government as they undertake this important but
difficult task.

