Mrs. Gueguen (France) (Spoke in French): At the
outset, I extend my sincere thanks to Ms. Ursula Mueller
for her briefing. I welcome the participation of the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait at this
meeting. And I fully echo the congratulations expressed
by Ambassador Heusgen to Kuwait on its outstanding
contribution to the work of the Security Council.

I will not repeat the figures cited by the
Under-Secretary-General, as they speak for
themselves - cross-border humanitarian assistance
is essential and irreplaceable. The renewal of the
United Nations cross-border humanitarian assistance
mechanism is imperative. Humanitarian agencies,
the Secretariat, starting with the Secretary-General
himself, and the countries of the region are all insistent
on the need to preserve that mechanism. Allow me to
give a brief reminder as to why.

First, cross-border humanitarian assistance is
crucial to bringing aid to the more than 4 million people
in need, as the regime of Bashar Al-Assad continues
to hinder humanitarian access and use humanitarian
assistance for political purposes, at a time when the
situation remains unstable throughout the country,
including in those areas regained by the regime. There
is therefore no alternative.

Secondly, the Syrian population is preparing to
face the rigours of a new winter of war. As in previous
years, it is essential to have access to the population
throughout the Syrian territory by the most direct roads
and the fastest means. The survival of millions of men,
women and children depend on it. With regard to border
crossings, the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing is of vital
importance, as it is the route oftransport for 40 per cent
of medicines destined for humanitarian operations in
the north-east.

Certain among us insist that cross-border
humanitarian assistance is no longer necessary,
following the regime's recovery of several territories,
particularly in the south-west. We know, however,
that humanitarian access to those areas is still largely
hampered by Damascus. In that regard, we call once
again on those actors that hold influence over Damascus
to guarantee safe, comprehensive and unobstructed
humanitarian access throughout the entire Syrian
territory - including those areas in which the regime
has recently regained control - in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions and international
humanitarian law.

France calls on members of the Council to
demonstrate unity and responsibility in preserving the
indispensable cross-border humanitarian assistance
mechanism by renewing resolution 2165 (2014) for a
further 12 months.

As we have been tirelessly repeating, respect for
international humanitarian law by all is essential and
non-negotiable. The protection of civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, is an absolute
priority. We reiterate our condemnation of the attacks
against civilians and civilian infrastructure, especially
medical infrastructure, and most notably those that
have taken place in north-western Syria. The board
of inquiry set up by the Secretary-General on those
attacks, to which we give our full support, should make
it possible to shed full light on those incidents. In view
of the displacement of over 70,000 more people in
November and the setting in of winter, everything must
be done to restore the ceasefire in Idlib.

No-one denies the fact that the fight against
terrorism is a crucial issue, but it cannot be used
to justify violations of international humanitarian
law. Those responsible for such acts must be held
accountable before the courts. Evidence will not be
buried, thanks to the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic. We call for cooperation
with all mechanisms that contribute to the fight against
impunity for the crimes committed in Syria.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that a lasting
end cannot be put to the humanitarian tragedy that
Syrian women and men are enduring without a credible
political process. Beyond the humanitarian response,
only an inclusive political solution can bring the
suffering of the Syrian people to an end. I would like
in this regard to reiterate that until a credible political
solution has been resolutely implemented, France, like
its partners in the European Union, will not participate
in the funding ofreconstruction. Resolution 2254 (2015)
remains our road map, and all its components must be
implemented. We will have the opportunity tomorrow,
during our meeting with the Special Envoy, to return to
this topic and reflect on the insufficient progress made
in the context of the Geneva process despite his efforts.

