Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your presidency of the Security Council and wish
your country's delegation all the best. I also thank
the delegation of the United States for its presidency
of the Council last month. I want as well to thank our
colleagues the Chairs of the three Committees - the
Permanent Representatives of Kazakhstan, Peru and
Bolivia - for their detailed briefings on the activities
of those Committees concerning counter-terrorism
and non-proliferation. We also thank the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
of the Committee concerning Da'esh and Al-Qaida,
the Panel of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the Office of
the Ombudsperson for carrying out their activities in
accordance with their respective mandates.

We commend the role played by the three
Committees, including their cooperation with other
relevant United Nations entities, such as United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL, the
International Civil Aviation Organization and other
relevant United Nations entities, together with regional
organizations, to combat terrorism and the proliferation
of terrorist groups, as they pose a threat to international
peace and security.

The State of Kuwait commends the efforts of
the three Chairs, including their visits to Member
States, joint briefings, comprehensive assessments
and analytical work concerning emerging issues,
trends and developments in supporting Member States
and United Nations entities so that they can take the
necessary measures under international law. All those
activities are helpful to Member States and other
subsidiary bodies.

We reaffirm what the Chair of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee said earlier with regard to the
need to focus on women and children as victims of
terrorist groups. In that regard, we note resolution
2396 (2017), which stressed the need to pay attention to
women and children in those specific situations.

Pertaining to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we
commend the role played by the Committee and its
Panel of Experts in helping countries to implement
the provisions of that important resolution. We have
witnessed the recent use of chemical weapons by
States and non-State actors throughout the world. We
therefore must recognize the urgent need to address
that disaster through the implementation of the relevant
international resolutions, especially resolution 1540
(2004). That would allow the international community
to continue its strenuous efforts in order to prevent
non-State actors, in particular terrorist groups, from
developing, possessing, manufacturing, acquiring,
transferring or using weapons of mass destruction in
all their forms, whether nuclear, chemical or biological.

In conclusion, we would like to underscore that the
State of Kuwait condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations regardless of its motives. Terrorism
is a criminal act that cannot be justified and must not
be associated with any religion, nationality, culture or
ethnicity. In order to combat the criminal scourge of
terrorism, we must combine international efforts and
adopt the necessary measures to ensure respect for
human rights, the rule of law, good governance and
peaceful coexistence among religions, while respecting
their symbols and holy places. In addition, conditions
conducive to terrorism must be addressed along
with rejecting hatred and all forms of extremism and
violence. The State of Kuwait is firmly committed to
working actively to effectively implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions on counter-terrorism and
non-proliferation.

