Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): My delegation is
gratified to have this opportunity to hear, in an open
meeting, a first-hand account of the latest
developments in the peace process in Somalia. We
welcome this exchange of views on what the Security
Council and the whole international community can
and should do to support the efforts of the Somali
people to bring peace, stability and prosperity back to
their land.

Indeed, in terms of modern history, the
experience of Somalia may represent a unique case of
the return to the international community of a collapsed
State. That is why we consider the efforts of the
Government of Djibouti to be extremely important and
commend its commitment to push forward the process
of normalization in Somalia. The very fact that it has
succeeded in going this far in implementing the peace
plan - we thank Ambassador Olhaye of Djibouti for
bringing us up to date and for providing his analysis of
developments - is, indeed, evidence of the viability of
its design and of a realistic approach to its realization.

We must recognize that what has already been
achieved is considerable progress compared to previous
attempts to restore the country. We must therefore not
allow this latest effort to fail after having advanced to
the stage where it is now, for this would have
catastrophic consequences for the unity of Somalia and
its people.

Separatism must not be allowed to set roots in
Africa under any circumstances. In this context, the
non-participation of Somaliland in the Djibouti Peace
Conference, and especially the recent accusations by its
leaders against Djibouti, are increasingly disturbing.
We therefore support the idea that only the mounting
pressure of the international community on the
leadership of Somaliland, as well as on leaders of other
entities and factions who continue to defy the ongoing
peace process, can help break their intransigence and
obstruction.

I would also agree that the present achievement
has given rise to strong hopes for overall success, and
this situation calls for consistent supportive action on
the part of the Security Council and other international
actors. Although the very process of restoring the
national Government and the State of Somalia remains
in the hands of the Somalis - or, as Sir Kieran rightly
put it, is "Somali-owned" - the Security Council and
the international community at large must be ready to
provide practical support to these efforts - including
by being prepared, at a certain stage, to recognize the
provisional administration of the country after its
formation by the future Transitional National
Assembly. Such a step, I believe, will be crucial for a
lasting settlement in Somalia.

Providing financial and technical support to the
Conference and to its organizers is no less important
for the continuation of the peace process. Started
several months ago, it has already consumed a
considerable amount of resources, which are close to
their limit.

It is also important to look ahead and to expect
that further support will be needed by the future Somali
Government, which will encounter a great many
problems inherited from the past. The decade of civil
war and lawlessness has claimed the lives of thousands
of innocent people and caused the destruction of
hundreds of homes and villages and other private and
public property, as well as the displacement of millions
of Somalis. The international community should
therefore also be prepared to provide support to the
process of national reconciliation and to assist the
Somali people in solving the problems of national
reconstruction and development.

Decentralization and self-administration are
important concepts in the peace initiative put forward
by President Guelleh of Djibouti. In this connection, let
me stress the importance of ensuring the country's
stability by establishing a truly federal system of
governance that would balance the power of the central
Government.

In conclusion, let me wish the Government and
the President of Djibouti every success in this noble
endeavour, which is very much on the right track. It
must be supported by the Security Council. We look
forward to the presidential statement to be adopted
shortly.

