Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, for his briefing and to express our full
support for the important role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and all the
United Nations agencies in supporting Afghanistan and
coordinating the international community's assistance,
in accordance with the mandate set by resolution 2274
(2016).

While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the observer of the European Union
later today, I would like to raise several points in my
national capacity.

There were some encouraging signs of progress in
Afghanistan during the reporting period, in particular
in addressing the security, economic and development
challenges faced by the nation. We welcome the
efforts of the authorities in countering corruption
and terrorism, addressing the fiscal gap and poverty
and unemployment, as stipulated in the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework. However,
the ongoing political tensions between Afghan senior
officials over the lack of effective reforms, including in
the electoral sphere, do not reflect well on the National
Unity Government of Afghanistan. They can also
affect the holding of long-awaited parliamentary and
district council elections scheduled for next month. We
call on the Afghan leaders to reunite and to focus on
addressing the promotion of good governance, the rule
of law, anti-corruption efforts and human rights, and on
strengthening coordination between the security forces
and law enforcement agencies to ensure that they can
effectively tackle existing security threats.

Promoting a meaningful, Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned peace process should remain a priority to achieve
a sustainable resolution of the decades-long conflict in
Afghanistan. We regret that during the reporting period
no meetings of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group of
Afghanistan took place, which is tasked with creatomg
a conducive environment for such a process. Likewise,
no reduction of hostilities occurred, as the Taliban
rejected all calls of the Afghan Government to join
the peace and reconciliation process. Moreover, there
are alarming signs about the stalemate in the peace
negotiations of the National Unity Government with
some moderate armed groups and factions. An ongoing
offensive by the terrorists throughout the country and
recurring suicide attacks with improvised explosive
devices in major cities continue to claim a high death
toll, and are having an adverse impact on Afghanistan's
political, economic and security stability.

As we see it, no tangible progress towards
stabilization can occur without the readiness of other
regional players to set aside differences and to exert
influence on the Taliban leaders by depriving them
of shelter and forcing this movement to renounce
aggressionagainstAfghanistanandearnestlyparticipate
in the peace negotiations. Regional cooperation should
also be focused on finding ways to effectively disrupt
the Taliban and other terrorist groups' financing by
suppressing the narcotics trade and strengthening
border security to prevent terrorist fighters travelling
to and from the conflict region.

The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan
continues to warrant our attention in the light of the
ever-growing numbers of civilian casualties, especially
among women and children, and the high displacement
rates of those forced to abandon their homes and to seek
refuge from prevalent human rights abuses, in particular
against women and girls. The Taliban's recruitment
of children is also a cause for great concern. Despite
the announced national policy on civilian casualty
mitigation, almost an equal number of the attacks on the
civilian population are attributed to to anti-Government
groups as to the Afghan national forces.

While taking note of positive developments on the
gender equality agenda, in particular the elaboration of
important legal policies, we would like to underscore
the need of ensuring the full implementation of
the national action plan on women and peace and
security as a critical step in elevating women as full
and equal partners in creating a stable future for the
country. That is also the challenge in the context of the
upcoming elections.

Given all those circumstances, it is essential to
provide Afghanistan with appropriate military and
financial assistance to achieve palpable results in
confronting terrorist, economic and humanitarian
threats and to secure a viable future for Afghanistan.
Following the NATO Summit in Warsaw, which
pledged assistance to the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces through 2020, the international
community should seize the opportunity offered by
the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan in October to
support State-building and socioeconomic development
in Afghanistan, including to urgently scale-up
humanitarian aid to address the needs of more than
1 million internally displaced persons and returnees.

Ukraine acknowledges the primary role of
the United Nations in international efforts to
promote peace and stability in Afghanistan and the
valuable contribution of the relevant international
organizations and institutions actively engaged in
assisting Afghanistan. It is highly important to provide
appropriate coordination for those efforts and to avoid
duplication, including through making the best use of
existing mechanisms for coordination.

Building synergies between regional organizations
and further engagement with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe partner countries,
particularly to tackle shared security threats,
including those emanating from Afghanistan, is of
high significance. A stronger partnership with those
organizations present on the ground in Afghanistan
can help us to better target and evaluate our activities.
To that end, the valuable support of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and its regional programme
for Afghanistan and neighbouring countries is of high
relevance. With that in mind, Afghanistan-related issues
should be further dealt with by a very broad spectrum
of actors, while reorienting the policies in Central Asia
to better reflect issues related to Afghanistan.

By adopting today's presidential statement on
Afghanistan (S/PRST/2016/l4), we are sending a clear
sign to the Afghan people about the Security Council's
full support of Afghanistan in its endeavours to address
security, economic and development challenges.
However, it is important that the Afghan Government
proceed with the actual implementation of national
reforms instead of issuing declarative statements.
That will help to preserve the confidence of the whole
international community and its readiness to assist this
country in its struggle for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, while creating a sound foundation for peace,
security and prosperity both in Afghanistan and the
wider region.

