Mr. Charwath (Austria): Austria aligns itself with
the statements made by the observer of the European
Union and the representative of Canada the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict. We also
align ourselves with the statement to be made by the
representative of Panama on behalf of the Human
Security Network.

We would like to thank France for convening this
open debate and the Secretary-General for briefing the
Security Council. He has our full support in his efforts
to ensure the accuracy of United Nations reporting
on grave Violations committed against children. We
highly appreciate the committed work of the Special
Representative for Children in Armed Conflict and
her Office, UNICEF as well as the civil-society
organizations specializing in this topic. While we have
seen some positive developments, protecting children
in situations of armed conflict has to stay a constant
and evolving endeavour. I would like to highlight
three points.

First, with regard to non-State actors, some 29
action plans with parties to a conflict have been signed
to end grave violations. We have to further promote
the work with both State and non-State actors so as
to follow up on their implementation and to conclude
new action plans. Austria recognizes the diverse
challenges to engagement when it comes to responding
to and preventing violations committed by non-State
armed groups and stands ready to support the Special
Representative in facilitating the dialogue.

We are deeply concerned about the targeted
recruitment and use of children by non-State armed
groups, including Violent extremist groups. Under its
Chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe in 2017, Austria has identified
young people and the prevention of violent extremism
and radicalization that lead to terrorism as one of its key
priorities. A series of subregional workshops were held
on young people and preventing violent extremism for
the Black Sea region, the Western Balkans and Central
Asia, where young men and women were able to share
their experiences and provide policy recommendations.

Secondly, with regard to detained children,
children allegedly associated with non-State armed
groups are too often perceived as a security threat
and perpetrators, rather than as victims of grave
violations. Therefore, putting in place alternatives to
detention and prosecution is a top priority. At the same
time, monitoring and reporting on the detention of
children, based on their association with armed forces
or groups, needs to continue. In that regard, we would
like to recall the United Nations Model Strategies and
Practical Measures on the Elimination of Violence
against Children in the Field of Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice, which were adopted as General
Assembly resolution 69/194.

Austria also actively supports the global study on
children deprived of liberty and its goals of raising
awareness for children in detention around the world
and of bridging the data gap on the number of children
detained. Children in armed conflict who are detained
for their association with armed forces or groups
are one area of the study, and we encourage other
States Members to lend their support to producing a
meaningful study outcome.

Thirdly and lastly, with regard to tools and capacity-
building, we also encourage other States to sign and
comply with the Paris Commitments to protect children
from unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces or
armed groups and the Principles and Guidelines on
Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups, and endorse the Safe Schools Declaration and
the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict. Political
commitments have to be accompanied by initiatives
to support practical work on the ground. Therefore,
we welcome measures to improve the training of
peacekeeping and humanitarian personnel to deal
comprehensively with situations involving children.

Austria has been supporting the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations in developing training
materials on child protection for military peacekeepers
and in hosting train-the-trainer courses for troop-
contributing countries. Austria currently hosts a two-
week train-the-trainer course aimed at operationalizing
newly developed training materials on the protection
of civilians and child protection. We will continue
to offer our expertise and national infrastructure for
that purpose.

Last but not least, we would like to emphasize the
importance of deploying child protection advisers to
United Nations missions. Child protection advisers
play a crucial role not only as the focal point of contact
within the mission, but also in reaching out to all
stakeholders responsible for children's rights, as well
as often monitoring the implementation of action plans.

