Ms. Holguin (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
am grateful to the Ambassador of the Russian
Federation for his comprehensive presentation the
Counter-Terrorism Committee's (CTC) activities. We
would like to reiterate that Colombia recognizes the
progress achieved by CTC. We welcome its
increasingly strong promotion of global
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) on the basis
of the principles of cooperation, transparency and
equal treatment. We also welcome progress in terms of
the structure of the Committee, the work of its
Executive Director and his team, and the help given to
countries wishing to implement 1373 (2001).

In this connection, Colombia would like to
inform the international community that on
14 September it acceded to the International
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings,
and has ratified the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. We believe
that resolution 1566 (2004) adopted by the Council on
8 October renews its will to combat terrorism in all its
forms. It is an important step forward in the world's
struggle against terrorism by creating a working group
to examine the possibility of imposing measures on
persons or groups associated with terrorist activities
other than those designated by the Al Qaeda/Taliban
sanctions Committee.

That reiterates Colombia's position to the effect
that there is only one type of terrorism, and it must by
fought with equal determination everywhere. The
international community's commitment to combat
terrorism must be unambiguous. We reaffirm that there
is only one type of terrorism. All of its victims are
innocent and equal. We cannot have first and second-
class types of terrorism when its effects are the same
on society. Terrorism is not unfamiliar to Colombians.
We suffered its deplorable effects for decades. It
creates terror, undermines confidence, violates people's
rights to life and security, which are recognized in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

Cooperation among countries to combat and
eliminate the terrorist threat must be strengthened with
mechanisms that make it possible to implement joint
programmes and policies to strengthen the rule of law
and protect society from this scourge.

Cooperation is indispensable to efforts to uncover
the sources of terrorism and its physical and
intellectual authors. It is necessary to prevent terrorism
from finding refuge in third countries, and financial
controls are important to prevent the financing of
terrorist acts. Terrorism, illegal drugs, arms trafficking
and transnational organized crime are all interlinked.
They all create insecurity and violence. The whole
world is affected by terrorism, and that is why we feel
it is a common problem with no distinctions or
categories. The nature of an act of terrorism is
determined not only by the place in which it is
committed and its global or national scope, but also by
the origin of its sponsors and the money that funds it. It
has been proven that the international financial
networks used by terrorism are similar to those that
deal in illicit drugs and illicit weapons. Our frontal
attack on terrorism must include campaigns against
related crimes on the basis of the principle of shared
responsibility. We reiterate our support for the work of
the Security Council and the CTC in the struggle
against this universal scourge. Only cooperation within
the international community with the legal action and
police activity demanded by the resolution will succeed
against terrorism.

