Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Argentina's initiative in holding this open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We welcome Ambassador Ruiz Cerutti as she presides
over today's meeting, and we would like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights Pillay and Under-
Secretary-General Valerie Amos for their briefings. We
also listened attentively to the statement by Mr. Spoerri,
the Director from the International Committee of the
Red Cross.

Civilians are the primary victims of wars and
armed conflicts. In the recent past the international
community has made enormous efforts to protect
civilians from the scourge of such wars and conflicts,
and the Council has adopted numerous resolutions
and issued many presidential statements establishing
mechanisms and frameworks aimed at effectively
protecting civilians in conflicts, particularly women
and children. China supports the Council's efforts to
conduct in-depth and extensive discussions on the topic
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict in order
to respond comprehensively to the major challenges
to that protection. We would like to underscore the
following four points.

First, national Governments should bear the
primary responsibility for protecting their own
civilians. All parties to an armed conflict should abide
by international humanitarian law and other relevant
international laws, as well as by the resolutions of the
Security Council, and should fulfil their obligations to
protect civilians. While the international community
can render constructive assistance, it cannot replace the
responsibility of national Governments and the parties
to conflicts. In prosecuting and punishing actions that
violate human rights and contravene international
humanitarian law, and in upholding justice, it is
essential that the major focus be on making full use of
domestic judicial systems as the primary channel for
such efforts.

Secondly, in discharging the responsibility to
protect civilians, it is essential that the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations be strictly
complied with, particularly those concerning respect
for national sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity.
Operations relating to the protection of civilian should
be established by the Council and focus on working
towards early ceasefires and solving disputes by
peaceful means, such as dialogue and negotiations;
they should not be conducted for any political motives
or purposes. With regard to the protection of civilians,
the Council should give equal attention to all situations
on its agenda and adopt an equitable, fair and consistent
position.

Thirdly, in order to carry out humanitarian relief
operations to protect civilians, it is essential that the
principles of humanitarian neutrality, fairness and
independence be observed, while showing respect for
the sovereignty of host countries. Only by winning
their support and mitigating resistance on the part
of the parties to the conflict can relief operations be
effectively established. At the same time, the parties
to the conflict should go out of their way to ensure
that civilians have timely and effective access to
humanitarian relief by improving the humanitarian
situation in conflict-affected areas.

Fourthly, the key to strengthening the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is preventing and settling
those armed conflicts. The Council should actively
conduct preventive diplomacy by urging the parties to
conflicts to resolve their differences through dialogue,
negotiations and other peaceful means in order to
achieve a political settlement and minimize human
casualties. Deploying peacekeeping operations cannot
be a fundamental solution to the problem of protecting
civilians. The Council's focus should be on helping
host countries to strengthen their security and justice
sectors and improve their ability to protect civilians.

