Mr. Kouchner (spoke in French): I will not be
able to answer all the very relevant and important
questions due to the hour, but I do intend to come back
again with more progress accomplished and with even
greater determination to fight against what all members
have referred to: violence and impunity, and for the
protection of minorities. Thank you for everything that
has been said concerning the UNMIK teams and the
teams of all those other groups involved in this task,
which at one time was considered impossible and
which some critics now seem to believe is possible.

We do in fact make progress. We have made
progress from an economic standpoint. We have made
a lot of progress from a political standpoint. However,
there has not been enough progress made from a human
standpoint. The change in human behaviour is not
exactly, directly or 100 per cent due the Special
Representative or even the Security Council or the
whole United Nations. We really must emphasize the
importance of time and persistence. Do not abandon us
on the grounds that after all, there has not been a major
crisis. It is because there has not been a major crisis
that it is essential to continue to support us.

One final word on what Richard Holbrooke said.
If the representatives of the Serb National Council of
Kosovo are there, it is not because we are partial. It is
because they present and continue to present claims
that are legitimate. I am pleased that they participated
in this meeting and I appeal to them to continue to
work with us, as have all of you. Their presence here,
and that of Monsignor Artemije in particular, is for me
very clear and decisive evidence of their will to
continue to participate in the shared endeavour. If they
were not to participate in it, they would certainly be on
the side of those who do not want peace any longer,
who constantly try to undermine the task undertaken by
the international community in Kosovo. I do not
believe a word of that.

That is why I thank you for having welcomed
them. If you agree and if circumstances permit, I would
propose, to show a positive and optimistic side of our
Mission in Kosovo, that we come with all the
representatives of the interim administrative council, of
the interim structure in the near future.

On behalf of those working in your name, I would
venture to say happy anniversary, but let there not be
too many of them.

