Mr. Nibishaka (Rwanda): Let me join others
in thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing
this important open debate. I also thank all the
briefers for their comprehensive presentations this
morning. I am convinced that recommendations from
discussions of this nature can significantly contribute
to the improvement and streamlining of practices in
peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction.

As all members know, my country went through
a difficult process over the past 20 years from a
post-conflict situation to become one of the main
contributors to United Nations peace operations. Our
experience alone is an indication that indeed post-
conflict peacebuilding is an important process dealing
with the aftermath of conflicts and conflict prevention,
not to mention upholding the responsibility to protect.
More often, however - peacebuilding, being both a
political and a technical process 4 the United Nations
has continued to struggle in matching the critical gap
between applying existing top-down technical strategies
and the political realities on the ground. In many cases
post-conflict peacebuilding has been carried out as
a purely operational process, using blueprints that
stipulate what decisions must be established and what
systems must be introduced, with technical aspects
tending to take priority. The deteriorating situation
in some countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) leads to questions as to whether
local political mechanisms, capacities and country
dynamics have been taken into account, and whether
mechanisms have been put in place to safeguard their
continued existence and avoid a relapse into conflict.

The situation in Burundi speaks for itself. Despite
being on the PBC agenda for nearly 10 years, political
and administrative weaknesses persisted and in 2015
the situation worsened and the country descended
into political turmoil. While we embraced the concept
of the responsibility to protect 10 years ago, in our
understanding of State responsibility and the role of the
international community in helping States to fulfil it,
the fact that Burundi has now descended into an ever-
greater spiral of violence has not helped make the case.
With similar cases in the Central African Republic in
2015 and 2014, and the 12 April 2012 coup d'etat in
Guinea-Bissau, it appears that the PBC has not lived
up to its projected role and it is far from reaching its
full potential. Those cases also demonstrated that the
international community in general, and the United
Nations in particular, needed to adopt targeted post-
conflict measures that address the root causes of
political conflict while at the same time respecting the
specificity ofeach situation, including the local political
dynamics, cultural, religious and ethnic configurations
and other elements that might play a critical role in
post-conflict settings.

It has been consistently stressed by my delegation
here, and in line with the report (see S/2015/490)
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
Peacebuilding Architecture, the work of the PBC
should focus on the means and the potential available
to the international community to support the locally
driven and locally defined priorities, with a clear
implementation plan and benchmarks to build inclusive
local capacities. Inclusive national ownership and
leadership are crucial prerequisites for sustainable post-
conflict peacebuilding, as is highlighted in the report of
the Advisory Group of Experts. Any peace process not
endorsed by those who have to live with it is likely to fail.
In that regard, we concur with the recommendations of
the three reviews to directly involve women in setting
peacebuilding priorities, identifying beneficiaries and
monitoring implementation. In addition to the potential
for women to contribute to successful peacebuilding,
their participation should also be encouraged on the
basis of fairness andjustice.

We call for continued advocacy on behalf of the
countries on the agenda and help underscore political
and social economic progress to attract assistance and/
or investment and to national priorities. Despite these
challenges, in the country-specific configurations we
are encouraged by efforts deployed by configuration
Chairs, particularly increasing the visits to Burundi and
the region to interact with various stakeholders, as well
as the briefings to the Council and the configuration.
We believe that the PBC, in supporting countries
on its agenda, has a critical role to play in fostering
regional engagement and commitment. In that respect,
the PBC advisory function should also aim at forging
interregional coherence through links with countries of
the region and regional economic communities, as well
as the African Union Peace and Security Council. I
particularly thank those Chairs of the country-specific
configurations who have integrated the regional
dimension into their approach. These practices could
provide an opportunity to increase awareness of the
situation at hand and, where necessary, contribute to
the accuracy of the information at the disposal of the
United Nations that can allow appropriate action to be
taken.

