Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): First of all, I would like
to thank Chile, as President of the Security Council,
for having convened this important debate and
preparing an excellent, thought-provoking concept note
(S/2015/6, annex).

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union. I will make some
additional remarks in my national capacity.

In his recent remarks to the General Assembly, the
Secretary-General called 2014 a "difficult year", a year
that "presented serious challenges to diplomacy and,
indeed, our common humanity, as conflicts raged and
extremism rose". It has unquestionably been another
bad year for international peace and security, and we
can only hope that 2015 will be less disheartening.
However, that might prove to be only wishful thinking,
since there is little ground for optimism. According
to some studies, at the beginning of 2015 there are
around 65 countries involved in some form of armed
conflict. The number of militias, paramilitary and
guerrilla groups throughout the world exceeds 600.
The prospects that these numbers will decrease in the
course of the year are slim, to say the least.

It is self-evident that one of the major challenges
for the international community is restoring peace
and preventing future conflicts. This cannot be done
through the military peacemaking and peacekeeping
means only; we also need to address all the causes
leading to violent conflicts, direct and indirect alike.
Poverty, inequality and the marginalization and
exclusion of groups of people from economic, social
and political life on the basis of gender, ethnicity, age,
sexual orientation or religion can lead to a violent
conflict. Therefore, one of our guiding principles in
preventing or solving conflicts must be political, social
and economic inclusion. That is why we believe that
today's debate focusing on the nexus between inclusive
development and peace and security is very timely.

Good governance, democracy and the rule law are
key to peace and development. We firmly believe that
development, security and human rights go hand in hand
and must be addressed in a holistic manner. Croatia has
therefore strongly supported a transformative shift in
development that would leave no one behind, as was
proposed in the Secretary-General's report on the post-
2015 sustainable development agenda (A/69/700).

We consider the inclusion of human rights, social
equality and women's empowerment as key building
blocks of sustained prosperity for everyone. Tackling
gender inequalities and removing obstacles that
prevent women and girls from exercising their rights
and empowering themselves must be at the heart
of our efforts to create sustainable, prosperous and
resilient societies. To contribute to that goal, during the
ministerial weeks of the sixty-eighth and sixty-ninth
sessions of the General Assembly, Croatia organized
two high-level events devoted to the political and
economic empowerment of women in post-conflict
situations.

By addressing the needs of various groups in
different communities, we can avert future conflicts that
may arise. In that sense, sustainable development goals,
the most important part of the United Nations agenda in
2015, are more than a blueprint for development and the
provision ofa decent life for many millions; they are also
an investment in peace and a barrier against radicalism
of all sorts. A holistic approach is essential, and the
only way forward. But that is easier said than done. The
field is a multilayered and excessively complex one,
composed of social, religious, national, ethnic, gender
and many other issues. Even if a single stone remains
unturned, it could become a spark that could ignite
the flames of war. Democratic elections, for example,
if not conducted properly or based on questionable or
incomplete voting lists and plagued with irregularities,
could cause much more harm than good.

Our policies for early detection, prevention and
post-conflict development need to address all pivotal
issues simultaneously, including inequalities, poverty,
corruption, youth unemployment and weak institutions.
That means that prevention and post-conflict recovery
require collaborative efforts by a range of actors and that
there is a need for a parallel focus on political, security
and all development issues. National ownership and
responsibility and the building of national capacities
based on specific national needs must be at the heart of
any peacebuilding effort. In that context, we believe that
additional efforts should be made to strengthen relations
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as with the Economic and Social
Council, with a view to promoting an integrated
approach to peace and development and achieving
synergy between peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

The year 2015 will be a pivotal one for the United
Nations. A new sustainable development agenda will
be adopted in September. The review processes on the
peacebuilding architecture, peacekeeping operations
and the progress made in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) are well under way. All those
processes should be bold and ambitious in their
recommendations and should establish strong linkages
between peace, security, development and human
rights. The means of implementation are as important
as our determination to carry it forward. Maintaining
peace and security through inclusive and sustainable
development is not just a catchphrase from the United
Nations vocabulary, but the only possible way.

