Mrs. Waffa-Ogoo (Gambia): My delegation
would like to commend the Nigerian presidency of the
Security Council for organizing this thematic debate
under the item "Maintenance of international peace and
security: Optimizing the use of preventive diplomacy
tools: Prospects and challenges in Africa". This debate
is not only on a critical and very visible part of the
mandate of the United Nations, and the Council in
particular, but it is also one that resonates with those of
us in Africa. The Charter of the United Nations,
10-45510
especially in its Chapters VI and VIII, envisages
situations in which parties to disputes that are likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security could resort to the range of preventive
diplomacy tools identified under Article 33 or to
regional agencies or arrangements.

My delegation wishes to acknowledge the
commendable work carried out by the Council in
supporting the pacific settlement of disputes in Africa,
but we would like to see a more active involvement of
the Council in making use of the tools under
Chapter VI. The Council's systematic engagement in
the early stages of a dispute would go a long way
towards reinforcing the good offices missions of the
Secretary-General and such regional and subregional
organizations as the African Union (AU) and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).

We recognize that the increasing interaction and
consultation taking place between the institutions of
the Security Council and the African Union, such as
the AU Peace and Security Council and the AU
Commission, have created one of the best platforms for
preventive diplomacy in Africa. Increasingly, we are
also witnessing the active engagement of the United
Nations Office for West Africa with ECOWAS and
other United Nations entities by deploying preventive
diplomacy tools in volatile situations. The early
engagement of all of these institutions in potential
conflict situations in West Africa has yielded dividends
by reinforcing political stability across the region.

The synergies that these interactions and
consultations create between Member States, the
United Nations and African regional arrangements
must therefore be reinforced by all stakeholders. Our
institutions must enhance their mediation or preventive
diplomacy capabilities by generating a cadre of
practitioners and support teams using knowledge-based
approaches or early warning and early awareness
mechanisms for settling disputes before they erupt into
deadly conflicts.

I should like to highlight a few challenges or
concerns that would need the consistent engagement of
the Council and the international community. Election
processes in many parts of Africa are periods of
heightened tension and dispute, with some resulting in
tragic loss of human life and property, as well as the
onset of ethnic conflicts and political instability.
10-45510

Across West Africa, we have seen numerous success
stories, as in recent developments in Guinea and the
Niger, indicating that early intervention, mediation and
preventive diplomacy work. The lesson here is that
when the United Nations and regional and subregional
stakeholders act in concert in supporting Member
States, disputes among local actors and civil society get
settled and contained. The Council can reinforce such
engagement by endorsing the work of the various
United Nations and regional institutions dealing with
the situation. Peaceful and credible elections engender
security and stability.

West Africa has had a lot of civil conflicts that
have been settled through the active engagement of the
Council, but we still have lingering issues that continue
to threaten the relative security and stability of the
region. The end of conflicts in West Africa has
highlighted the need for security sector reform. The
increasing use of the subregion as a transit hub for
cocaine trafficking is also threatening to derail the
stability of the region. The international community
needs to urgently support ECOWAS efforts in tackling
these twin menaces.

The increasing engagement of the Secretary-
General, the Security Council, the United Nations
system and a network of special envoys and
representatives with the AU Peace and Security
Council, the AU Commission's Panel of the Wise and
subregional bodies such as ECOWAS, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Southern African Development Community, to name
but a few, must lead to a coherent strategy that makes
effective use of Africa's regional and subregional
arrangements, their established mechanisms and tools
and dedicated personnel or experts on preventive
diplomacy. Greater attention could be paid to the role
of preventive diplomacy in the United Nations-African
Union Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme. My
delegation believes that such an approach has the
potential of saving the larger international community
from embarking on costly interventions.

It is clear that there are many centres and actors
in the area of preventive diplomacy, and in any one
potential conflict situation there are bound to be many
actors who run the risk of falling over each other in
their quest for solutions. The United Nations could,
within its Mediation Support Unit, establish a capacity
or facility to coordinate the activities of all actors with
a view to achieving the best possible outcome in
conflict resolution. To my mind, an inspiring example
can be found in the United Nations leadership in
coordinating humanitarian action in disaster situations.
The capacities generated for conflict prevention remain
relevant even when conflicts or disputes are settled.

Preventive diplomacy works. It prevents disputes
from becoming deadly and saves costs associated with
full-blown peacekeeping missions. What we need from
here is a willingness to make good use of the array of
tools available under Chapters VI and VIII of the
Charter - a strategy for action that would embrace all
the relevant institutions and actors on the continent. We
must also enhance our support to the existing early
warning mechanisms and build the requisite capacities
and skills at the local, national and regional levels. A
comprehensive strategy of preventive diplomacy
should benefit from lessons learned, concrete examples
and the numerous success stories that are being
replicated across the continent.

The delegation of the Gambia is looking forward
to the continued engagement of all concerned in taking
this debate forward. My delegation is also convinced
that the time for a consistent and coherent United
Nations strategy for preventive diplomacy is long
overdue.

