The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/1995/1, containing the position paper of the Secretary-
General on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the
United Nations, entitled "Supplement to An Agenda for
Peace". Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-
General's position paper entitled 'Supplement to An
Agenda for Peace' (S/1995/1) as an important
contribution to the debate on the development of the
United Nations activities related to international peace
and security in all its aspects at the beginning of the
year in which the Organization celebrates its Fiftieth
Anniversary. The Council notes that the paper contains
a wide range of conclusions and recommendations
with regard to instruments for resolving conflict. The
Council is of the view that in the light of recent
developments and experience gained, efforts should be
made to further enhance the Organization's ability to
perform the tasks laid down for it under the Charter.
The Council reiterates that, in performing the above-
mentioned tasks, the purposes and principles of the
Charter should always be strictly observed.

"The Security Council welcomes and shares the
priority given by the Secretary-General to action to
prevent conflict. It encourages all Member States to
make the fullest possible use of instruments of
preventive action, including the Secretary-General's
good offices, the dispatch of special envoys of the
Secretary-General and the deployment, with the
consent as appropriate of the host country or countries,

of small field missions for preventive diplomacy and
peacemaking. The Council believes that adequate
resources must be made available within the United
Nations system for these actions. It notes the
problem identified by the Secretary-General in
finding senior persons to act as his special
representative or special envoy and encourages
Member States which have not yet done so to
provide the Secretary-General with the names of
persons who might be considered by him for such
posts, together with other resources both human and
material which might be useful to such missions. It
encourages the Secretary-General to make full use of
resources thus put at his disposal.

"The Security Council endorses the view
expressed by the Secretary-General concerning the
crucial importance of economic and social
development as a secure basis for lasting peace.
Social and economic development can be as valuable
in preventing conflicts as in healing the wounds after
conflicts have occurred. The Council urges States to
support the efforts of the United Nations system
with regard to preventive and post-conflict peace-
building activities and, in this context, to provide
necessary assistance for the economic and social
development of countries, especially those which
have suffered or are suffering from conflicts.

"The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-
General's analysis regarding peace-keeping
operations. It recalls the statement made by its
President on 3 May 1994 (S/PRST/ 1994/22) which,
inter alia, listed factors to be taken into account in
establishing peace-keeping operations. It notes that
in resolving conflicts, primary emphasis should
continue to be placed on the use of peaceful means
rather than force. Without prejudice to its ability to
respond to situations on a case-by-case basis, and
rapidly and flexibly as the circumstances require, it
reiterates the principles of consent of the parties,
impartiality and the non-use of force except in self-
defence. It underlines the need to conduct peace-
keeping operations with a clearly defined mandate,
command structure, time-frame and secure financing,
in support of efforts to achieve a peaceful solution
to a conflict: it stresses the importance of the
consistent application of these principles to the
establishment and conduct of all peace-keeping
operations. It stresses the importance it attaches to
the provision of the fullest possible information to
the Council to assist it in making decisions regarding

 

the mandate, duration and termination of current
operations. It also emphasizes the importance of
providing troop contributors with the fullest possible
information.

"The Security Council shares the Secretary-
General's concern regarding the availability of troops
and equipment for peace-keeping operations. It recalls
earlier statements by the President of the Council on
the subject and reiterates the importance of improving
the capacity of the United Nations for rapid
deployment and reinforcement of operations. To that
end, it encourages the Secretary-General to continue
his study of options aimed at improving the capacity
for such rapid deployment and reinforcement. The
Council believes that the first priority in improving the
capacity for rapid deployment should be the further
enhancement of the existing stand-by arrangements,
covering the full spectrum of resources, including
arrangements for lift and headquarters capabilities,
required to mount and execute peace-keeping
operations. It strongly encourages the Secretary-
General to take further steps in this regard, including
the establishment of a comprehensive database to
cover civilian as well as military resources. In this
context, it considers that particular attention should be
given to the greatest possible interoperability between
elements identified in such arrangements. The Council
reiterates its call to Member States not already doing
so to participate in the stand-by arrangements. While
affirming the principle that contributing Governments
should ensure that their troops arrive with all the
equipment needed to be fully operational, the Council
also encourages the Secretary-General and Member
States to continue to consider means, whether in the
context of stand-by arrangements or more broadly, to
address the requirements of contingents which may
need additional equipment or training.

"The Security Council strongly supports the
Secretary-General's conclusion that peace-keeping
operations need an effective information capacity, and
his intention to address this requirement in future
peace-keeping operations from the planning stage.

"The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-
General's ideas regarding post-conflict peace-building.
It agrees that an appropriately strong overall United
Nations contribution needs to be sustained after the
successful conclusion of a peace-keeping operation,
and encourages the Secretary-General to study ways
and means of ensuring effective coordination between
the United Nations and other agencies involved in
post-conflict peace-building, and to take active steps
to ensure that such coordination takes place in the
immediate aftermath of a peace-keeping operation.
The measures described by the Secretary-General
may also be required, with the consent of the State
or States concerned, after successful preventive
action and in other cases where an actual peace-
keeping deployment does not take place.

"The Security Council shares the Secretary-
General's assessment of the paramount importance of
preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. Such proliferation is a threat to
international peace and security. Appropriate
measures will be taken in this respect in particular
where international treaties provide for recourse to
the Council when their provisions are violated. The
Council underlines the need for all States to fulfil
their obligations in respect of arms control and
disarmament, in particular in regard to weapons of
mass destruction.

"The Security Council takes note of the
assessment of the Secretary-General of the
importance of 'micro-disarmament', as described in
his paper, in the solution of conflicts with which the
United Nations is currently dealing and of his view
that small arms are probably responsible for most of
the deaths in these conflicts. It shares the concern of
the Secretary-General at the negative consequences
for international peace and security which often arise
from the illicit traffic in conventional weapons,
including small arms, and takes note of his View that
the search for effective solutions to this problem
should begin now. In this context the Council
stresses the vital importance of the strict
implementation of existing arms embargo regimes.
It welcomes and supports efforts with regard to
international measures to curb the spread of anti-
personnel land-mines and to deal with the land-
mines already laid, and in this regard welcomes
General Assembly resolutions 49/75 D of
15 December 1994 and 49/215 of 23 December
1994. It reaffirms its deep concern over the
tremendous humanitarian problems caused by the
presence of mines and other unexploded devices to
the populations of mine-infested countries and
emphasizes the need for an increase in mine-clearing
efforts by the countries concerned and with the
assistance of the international community.

 

"The Security Council stresses the importance it
attaches to the effective implementation of all
measures taken by it to maintain or restore
international peace and security including economic
sanctions. It agrees that the object of economic
sanctions is not to punish but to modify the behaviour
of the country or party which represents a threat to
international peace and security. The steps demanded
of that country or party should be clearly defined in
Council resolutions, and the sanctions regime in
question should be subject to periodic review and it
should be lifted when the objectives of the appropriate
provisions of the relevant Security Council resolutions
are achieved. The Council remains concerned that,
within this framework, appropriate measures are taken
to ensure that humanitarian supplies reach affected
populations and appropriate consideration is given to
submissions received from neighbouring or other
States affected by special economic problems as a
result of the imposition of sanctions. The Council
urges the Secretary-General, when considering the
allocation of resources available to him within the
Secretariat, to take appropriate steps to reinforce those
sections of the Secretariat dealing directly with
sanctions and their various aspects so as to ensure that
all these matters are addressed in as effective,
consistent and timely a manner as possible. It
welcomes the Secretary-General's efforts to study
ways and means of addressing the various aspects
related to sanctions in his report.

"The Security Council reaffirms the importance
it attaches to the role that regional organizations and
arrangements can play in helping to maintain
international peace and security. It underlines the need
for effective coordination between their efforts and
those of the United Nations in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter. It recognizes that the
responsibilities and capacities of different regional
organizations and arrangements vary, as well as the
readiness and competence of regional organizations
and arrangements, as reflected in their charters and
other relevant documents, to participate in efforts to
maintain international peace and security. It welcomes
the Secretary-General's willingness to assist regional
organizations and arrangements as appropriate in
developing a capacity for preventive action,
peacemaking and, where appropriate, peace-keeping.
It draws particular attention in this regard to the
needs of Africa. It encourages the Secretary-General
and Member States to continue to consider ways and
means of improving practical cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and
regional organizations and arrangements in these
areas. The Council encourages the Secretary-General
to continue the practice of meetings on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations.

"The Security Council recognizes the crucial
importance of the availability of the necessary
financial resources both for preventive action and
operations undertaken to sustain international peace
and security. It therefore urges Member States to
honour their financial obligations to the United
Nations. At the same time, the Council emphasizes
the continuing necessity for careful control of peace-
keeping costs and for the most efficient possible use
of peace-keeping funds and other financial resources.

"The Security Council will keep the Secretary-
General's paper under consideration. The Council
invites all interested Member States to present
further reflections on United Nations peace-keeping
operations, and in particular on ways and means to
improve the capacity of the United Nations for rapid
deployment. It invites the Secretary-General to keep
it closely informed of the action he takes in follow-
up to the paper and to the present statement. It
hopes that the General Assembly, as well as other
organizations and entities, will give consideration of
the paper a high degree of priority and will take
decisions on those matters which fall within their
direct responsibility."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/9.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at I] am.
