Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
meeting to address the issue of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional bodies and arrangements.
We also thank Mr. Ivica Dacie, Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), for his briefing.
In commemorating 40 years of the Helsinki
Final Act, it is appropriate to reflect on the OSCE's
contribution in ensuring international peace and
security. For Chile, collective action is essential in
tackling both traditional and emerging threats to peace
and security, and it should be strengthened through
cooperation among regional bodies and arrangements.
That is the sense in which my country understands
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

Yesterday the Council reflected on history and
reaffirmed the commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations (see S/PV.7389). My delegation emphasized the full force
of those irrevocable principles in guiding relations
among States. Those values and norms also guide the
OSCE in its work to resolve situations currently posing
a serious threat to regional stability and global security,
including protracted conflicts. We underscore that the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of States must be
respected.

In reflecting on the work of the OSCE, Chile
emphasizes the promotion of inclusive development for
the rehabilitation of fractured societies - an idea that
is also related to conflict prevention and peacebuilding
and corresponds to a development model advocating
political stability, democratic governance and
social cohesion. In that context, we reiterate that
mainstreaming of the gender perspective is critical.

The OCSE has contributed to conflict resolution
and stability in Europe and is working to build trust and
confidence in the framework of a positive agenda for
the future. We believe that the organization has assisted
its member States in times of difficulty, including
situations that affected regional stability, security and

global peace. In that context, we underscore the support
of the OSCE to democracy, the rule of law and human
rights through its mechanisms and operations on the
ground, on behalf of issues on the Council's agenda as
well as issues that are not.

Minister Dacie's briefing made clear that
the main challenge of the organization will be in
maintaining the legacy of dialogue and compromise,
the peaceful settlement of disputes, the promotion of
confidence-building measures and the implementation
of the concepts of solidarity, responsibility and
cooperation, which have characterized the organization.
The OSCE remains an essential forum for dialogue and
a stabilizing mechanism 4 even more so in view of the
challenges facing the region today.

In conclusion, Chile shares the principles, values
and goals that the OSCE follows and promotes, because
we consider it essential that regional mechanisms and
bodies strengthen effective universal action by ensuring
conditions conducive to durable peace and security and
understanding among communities and peoples.

