Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I would like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive and very useful
briefing. We very much appreciate seeing Ambassador
Muburi-Muita here in New York. I wish to congratulate
him for all the work that he has already done in the
past eight months. On a more personal note, I am
always very happy to see him here in the Security
Council.

Let me also thank the presidency for promoting
this first briefing on the United Nations Office to the
African Union. We very much hope that it will become
a regular feature in our activities in the Security
Council.

We all welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Office as an important contribution to
reinforcing the strategic relations and partnership
between the two organizations and providing more
coherence, efficiency and visibility to the United
Nations presence in Addis Ababa.

We have come a long way in terms of forging
institutional ties and developing original mechanisms
of dialogue and cooperation. We should now look
ahead and do our best to build upon these
achievements to ensure that those mechanisms are used
to their full potential.

Concerning the role of the United Nations Office
in matters of peace and security, there is certainly great
potential for efforts towards finding common ground
and continuity in the dialogue between the two
organizations, and namely between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council. The regular dialogue between the two
organs - and we recently had an example of this in
Addis Ababa and another example here last week when
we had a discussion with the African Union Ad Hoc
High-Level Committee on Libya - can obviously
benefit from the work of the United Nations Office in
Addis Ababa, in terms of both substance and working
methods.

As the Council recalls, there are several common
issues on which the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council underlined their
cooperation recently in Addis Ababa. I will only
mention a few, namely, the prevention and resolution
of conflicts, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, human
rights, democracy and the rule of law in Africa. I
would also underline that they expressed a common

concern about the situation of women and children in
conflict situations and post-conflict contexts. I would
also add the common concern on the need to
effectively address the problem of sexual violence in
armed conflicts, to investigate crimes and to ensure
that the perpetrators are brought to justice. These are
security issues that are common to the agendas of both
organizations.

This means that we must work on exploiting and
reinforcing channels of dialogue on these major
security issues. Much has been achieved, but we need
better articulation between the African Union and other
actors involved in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts in Africa, which has not always been present
in handling recent crises.

We therefore look forward to receiving the
recommendations from the report of the Secretary-
General on the Secretariat's strategic vision for United
Nations-African Union cooperation in the peace and
security areas, taking into account the lessons learned
from the hybrid missions in the Sudan and Somalia and
from the first years of implementation of the Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme.

Portugal is a strong supporter of international
efforts aimed at strengthening the African Peace and
Security Architecture in its various dimensions. The
African Union and African subregional organizations'
own roles in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
on the continent have proved to be an important
promoter of stability, and one that should be
encouraged.

Through our active participation in the European
Union-Africa partnership, we have advocated, and will
continue to advocate, European financial and technical
assistance to African initiatives in the peace and
security domain.

We would also like to underline the importance of
regional arrangements for Chapter VIII peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, we encourage a further
strengthening and cooperation with the African Union
in planning and conducting peacekeeping operations in
Africa and any other initiatives aimed at improving the
interoperability between the United Nations and the
African Union.

Finally, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the African Union Mission in
Somalia constitute two concrete models of
peacekeeping cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union from which we believe there are
a number of lessons we can learn, but where there is
also much room for improvement, as has already been
mentioned here today.

Let me conclude by thanking again Ambassador
Muburi-Muita for his work and by assuring him of
Portugal's full support.

