Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): Let me begin by
expressing the Indonesian delegation's appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive and insightful
report concerning the United Nations Mission in Haiti
(UNMIH). Our delegation is cognizant of the fact that the
Mission has effectively assisted the Government of Haiti in
ushering in a new era by maintaining a stable and secure
environment, by permitting democratic elections and by
contributing to the establishment of democratic institutions
in Haiti. These accomplishments add to the list of success
stories of the United Nations peace-keeping operations
around the world. Hence, we would like to pay tribute to
the men and women of UNMIH for their highly
commendable dedication and work in contributing to Haiti' s
recent success.

Our delegation duly notes the termination of UNMIH' s
mandate at the end of June 1996, pursuant to resolution
1048 (1996). We fully recognize that at the present time
there is no immediate threat to the new Haitian
Government. However, we would like to underline that
the continuation of Haiti's progress is contingent on the
presence of a United Nations mission. This has been
corroborated by the request of President Rene Preval to
authorize a new multinational force to maintain public
order and strengthen the Haitian National Police (HNP).

It is to the credit of UNMIH and the Government of
Haiti that a new police force has been created and that a
commitment to the rule of law has been established. The
very presence of this force serves as a buffer, protecting
the people of Haiti against the risk of militia operations.
UNMIH's military component plays a fundamental role in
assisting the Haitian authorities in their security tasks and
in creating an efficient logistics system. It also protects
key political figures who have enabled the establishment
of a newly democratic Haiti. Moreover, UNMIH has
supported the training of the HNP and the promotion of
institutional development.

However, the task at hand is not yet complete. There
is a lag in the professionalization of the Haitian National
Police. More time and training are needed to raise the
level of efficiency of its officers so that they may become
guarantors against the return of a Haiti ruled by the
militia to the detriment of the Haitian people as a whole.
In this regard, my delegation is of the view that any
response to developments in Haiti should include a
proposal detailing the quality and size of the Haitian
National Police and a time-frame in which it is to be fully
operational.

The underlying currents in Haiti remain a source of
concern. According to the report of the Secretary-General,
there is a serious risk of civil unrest due to an increased
demand for improved living conditions and the poor
economic situation that still prevails. The growing fear is
very real that the militia and members affiliated with
Haiti's past Government may wish to capitalize on the
potentially volatile social situation. Indonesia is of the
view that, in order to build peace, we must address the
sources of social and political tension, such as problems
of employment, housing, education, health care,
infrastructure and food supply. Efforts must be applied in
all these areas if a country is not only to prosper but also
to maintain itself as a viable nation. Furthermore, Haiti's
economic performance and the forthcoming elections for
local assemblies and the Senate will need a stable and
peaceful environment to proceed smoothly and fairly.

Considering the fact that Haiti is now at a critical
juncture in its history, the international community,

 

including members of the Security Council, must ensure
that this chance is not lost. The Indonesian delegation
considers the request of President Rene Preval to be
reasonable, given the vacuum potentially created by
UNMIH's departure, opening the door to insecurity that
may destroy Haiti's nascent democratic institutions. In this
context, my delegation would like to welcome the
initiatives of the Organization of American States and, in
particular, the contribution of the International Civilian
Mission to Haiti, to promote the consolidation of peace and
democracy in Haiti. My delegation strongly believes that
regional support is crucial to the future of Haiti. Moreover,
in the long run, we hope that a regional solution will play
a major and significant role in replacing the United Nations
presence.

We strongly feel that the Secretary-General's vision,
reflected in his An Agenda for Peace, of transition from a
peace-keeping operation to a peace-building operation fits
into the Haitian context. Peace-building needs to be carried
out to its fulfilment. It is clear that there is indeed a link
between peace and development in Haiti. Although the
people of Haiti themselves bear the ultimate responsibility
for national reconciliation and the reconstruction of their
country, the support of the international community is
indispensable for long-term peace and stability in Haiti.

In View of Haiti's need for economic development, my
delegation endorses the involvement of and projects
launched by numerous United Nations agencies and
international and financial institutions in order to construct
a new and sound economic base. Responsible and
resourceful economic policies focused on growth, control of
inflation, job creation and privatization will establish the
macroeconomic framework in which projects can thrive. In
turn, economic progress will recreate the atmosphere for
investment, the social stability and the Government
commitment needed for Haiti's national well-being.

In the light of the fragile situation which prevails in
Haiti, the Indonesian delegation supports the
Secretary-General' s recommendations for the establishment
of a new Mission, called the United Nations Support
Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH), as reflected in the draft
resolution. Considering the financial crisis which the United
Nations is presently facing, my delegation is of the View
that UNSMIH's mandate should include a gradual reduction
of both its military and civilian components; our delegation
feels that once the situation finally stabilizes, only a small,
symbolic United Nations presence will be necessary. This
demonstrates that there is a correlation between the
reduction in strength of the United Nations Mission and the
improvement of the situation in Haiti. We believe that
UNSMIH's limited mandate, with its military component,
could provide the necessary back-up for the Haitian
National Police and will prove adequate to meet the
Haitian Government's request.

We are of the view that the international
community's commitment is crucial in ensuring Haiti's
stability and the rebuilding of the country. My delegation
will therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution before
us today.

