Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, I would like first of all to express our
condolences to the families of the victims and wish a
speedy recovery to those injured in the latest attacks
in Afghanistan, which we strongly condemn. We once
again call on the parties to abide by international law
and international humanitarian law with regard to the
protection of civilians.

I would like to thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto
for his informative briefing and for his admirable
commitment to lasting peace in Afghanistan. We
have listened to his remarks, which, for the most part,
we endorse. We also thank Ambassador Djani for
the excellent work he has done in the exercise of his
functions as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), as well
as Mr. Yury Fedotov for the relevant information he
has provided.

The successful holding of Afghanistan's
presidential elections, scheduled for 28 September, will
be an important milestone for the Afghan people and a
great opportunity for all Afghans to decide the future of
their country. We therefore encourage the Government
of Afghanistan to fortify security measures through
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces so
that the Afghan people can exercise their right to vote
in a secure environment and to ensure the holding of
transparent, inclusive and credible elections through
the Independent Election Commission. Along those
lines, we echo Mr. Yamamoto's call for national leaders
and candidates to participate responsibly, and urge
the Taliban and other armed groups to desist from
threatening or attacking election personnel, candidates
or voters.

My delegation believes that, in parallel with the
electoral process, it is particularly important that talks
on an Afghan peace process continue. In that spirit, we
support all of the efforts under way and future efforts to
promote the intra-Afghan dialogue for peace in Qatar
and the strengthening of regional cooperation efforts
through the convening of multilateral forums to build
regional consensus on peace.

Equatorial Guinea believes that such a peace process
must be inclusive and Afghan-led and -implemented,
with a view to achieving a peaceful resolution of the
conflict and a comprehensive political solution; this
means that it must incorporate all social and political
forces in the country, including the opposition as
well as women in particular, in a meaningful way.
While we acknowledge that there has been significant
progress in that regard, we encourage the Government
of Afghanistan to continue including women in the
electoral and peace processes, with women playing a
leading role during the negotiations.

With regard to the humanitarian and security
situation in Afghanistan, we share the grave concern
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General's report (S/2019/703) once again
reflects a high and devastating number of victims, the
result of deliberate attacks through the indiscriminate
use of improvised suicide and non-suicide explosive
devices, as well as ongoing attacks on humanitarian
workers. All of that, compounded by drought, sudden
natural disasters, food insecurity and poverty, is
displacing massive numbers of people, exacerbating the
major challenges facing Afghanistan.

Those challenges require the continuing attention
of the international community and the provision
of significant support to the Afghan Government to
improve the country's security environment. In that
context, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea will support
any language aimed at addressing those challenges
during the negotiations for the renewal of the mandate
of United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).

Last but not least, our country remains concerned
about the growing presence of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant in Afghanistan, which poses a serious
threat to the security of Afghanistan and the countries
of the region. In that connection, we encourage Member
States to support the work of the 1988 Committee and
thus comply fully with their sanctions obligations.

In conclusion, we reiterate our support and well-
deserved praise for UNAMA's key role in promoting
peace and stability in Afghanistan.
