Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary- General Lowcock for their briefings. In the past two years, the situation in Yemen has seen twists and turns. The international community and the parties in Yemen have made great efforts to find a political solution to the Yemeni issue. With the adoption of the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement, some progress has been achieved. Meanwhile, we have also noted that the relevant agreements have not been effectively implemented. Recently, conflicts in many regions of the country have escalated. A severe lack of mutual trust among the parties and a political process in deadlock are combined with a worsening humanitarian crisis. China finds these facts deeply worrying. We hope that the parties in Yemen will have a greater sense of urgency and show political will to jointly promote a breakthrough in the peace process in the country. First, a ceasefire must be achieved as soon as possible. In the general debate of the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly, Secretary-General Guterres reiterated his appeal for a global ceasefire, calling for such a ceasefire by the end of the year. China supports the Secretary-General's appeal and hopes that the Security Council and the international community will play an active role to increase mediation efforts in conflict situations such as the one in Yemen and provide strong support to the work of the Secretary- General and his Special Envoy. Both the Yemeni Government and the coalition have expressed support for the Secretary-General's ceasefire appeal, which deserves our recognition. We hope that all parties in Yemen will put the interests of the people and future of the country first, respond to the people's desire for peace and stability and immediately stop using force and return to the track of dialogue and negotiation. China is concerned over the missile and drone attacks against Saudi Arabia and the escalation encompassed in such areas as Al-Hudaydah. The United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement should implement its mandate to monitor the ceasefire in accordance with the request set forth in resolution 2534 (2020). Secondly, political commitments must be honoured. The Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement have shown the tremendous efforts made by all the parties and therefore cannot be left as empty words. The parties to the conflict cannot always go back and forth between the battlefield and the negotiating table in a vicious cycle of fighting and talking. The key is to implement the agreements reached. This is conducive to building mutual trust among the parties. It also serves as the basis for new progress. Properly solving the problem in the south has a bearing on the overall situation in Yemen. China highly commends Saudi Arabia's contribution to advancing the implementation of the Riyadh agreement and supports Saudi Arabia in continuing its important work. Through the mediation of the Special Envoy and the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Yemeni Government and the Houthis recently reached an agreement on the prisoner exchange. Today we see major progress in the exchange of prisoners. China greatly welcomes that, and we hope that additional confidence-building measures will be taken. Thirdly, with regard to strengthening the regional security dialogue, a political solution to the Yemeni issue requires a conducive regional security environment. China advocates that regional issues be resolved through dialogue and consultation among the countries in the Gulf region by building a platform for dialogue among the countries of the region in order to forge a new consensus around maintaining regional peace and stability. Other countries have also put forward similar ideas. We see agreement on the general direction. We should therefore work together to realize such ideas and promote the regional peace process. China encourages the relevant countries in the region to make use of their own advantages so as to positively influence the parties in Yemen and contribute to the political settlement of the Yemeni issue. At the same time, Yemen's sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity should be fully respected and safeguarded. Fourthly, with regard to striving to alleviate the humanitarian crisis, currently more than 20 million people in Yemen face the threat of food insecurity. At least 1 million women and 2 million children are severely malnourished. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Food Programme have repeatedly issued famine warnings. More than 2,000 cases of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) have been confirmed in Yemen, while the actual number of those infected is much higher. China urges all parties concerned to abide by international humanitarian law, put people and their lives first, protect civilians, in particular the vulnerable groups, and provide safe and unhindered humanitarian access, including allowing the United Nations to conduct a safety assessment of, and repairs to, the FSO SAFER oil tanker as soon as possible. The international community, particularly donor countries, should provide sufficient funding to the Yemen humanitarian response plan by honouring their pledges as soon as possible. Every effort should be made to prevent a famine in Yemen, protect farmland and agricultural production facilities, keep commercial ports operating and effectively deal with the plague of locusts and floods. We must support the World Health Organization in playing a leading role in fighting the pandemic and saving lives. China has always stood by the Yemeni people. We have provided several batches of food aid to Yemen, covering most of its provinces. Since the outbreak of COVID-19, we have donated several batches of supplies for the pandemic response to the Government and the people of Yemen and have proactively shared our experience in fighting the pandemic. In future, we will continue to provide rice, medical equipment and other humanitarian assistance to the Government and the people of Yemen and work with the Gulf countries and the international community to contribute to easing the humanitarian crisis on the ground.
