Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): The
adoption by the Security Council of this resolution is a
decisive step towards settling the crisis in Kosovo. For
more than a year the Security Council has been seized of
the matter. On several occasions over the course of more
than a year it has taken a position on the humanitarian
situation in Kosovo and the region and, above all, on the
principles that should underpin a political solution. In
resolution 1160 (1998), adopted on 31 March 1998, the
Security Council imposed an embargo on the sale and
supply of arms to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
including Kosovo. But it also underlined that the way to
defeat violence and terrorism in Kosovo was for the
Belgrade authorities to engage in a genuine political
process with the Albanian Kosovar community. In
resolution 1199 (1998) of 23 September 1998, the

 

Security Council spelt out what was required of the two
parties. A third decision, resolution 1203 (1998) of 24
October 1998, made it possible to deploy the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe Verification
Mission in Kosovo.

Unfortunately, the Belgrade regime refused to comply
with the obligations set out in those resolutions. It opposed
and rejected outright the efforts of the negotiators at the
Rambouillet conference and all other forms of diplomatic
intervention, even though, after lengthy negotiations, the
political settlement envisaged at Rambouillet laid out a
future for Kosovo. The continued and worsening repression
of the civilian population compelled the members of the
Atlantic Alliance to resort to military means in order to put
an end to a senseless and unacceptable policy of destruction
and deportation. However, in parallel with that, the
members of the Atlantic Alliance continued their efforts
with the Russian Federation, with the assistance of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, to identify the
bases of a political settlement.

Fortunately, the negotiations conducted so tenaciously
by President Ahtisaari of Finland, on behalf of the
European Union, by the Russian envoy Mr. Chernomyrdin
and by the American envoy Mr. Talbott, yielded results and
have made it possible to envisage a peaceful solution. It
will still demand a great deal of effort and a great deal of
determination. But the resolution just adopted provides us
with the legal, political and practical means to restore
peace.

Everyone is now aware that this resolution bolsters the
authority of the Security Council. It is the Security Council
that is deciding on the deployment of civil and security
presences in Kosovo under the auspices of the United
Nations. It is the Security Council that is authorizing the
Member States and the international organizations
concerned to establish the international security presence in
Kosovo. It is the Security Council that is authorizing the
Secretary-General to establish an international civil
presence. It is the Security Council that is determining the
precise responsibilities entrusted to the international security
presence and to the civil presence. The Security Council is
requesting the Secretary-General to appoint a special
representative to control the implementation of the civil
presence and to ensure close coordination with the
international security presence. The Security Council will
remain in control of the implementation of the peace plan
for Kosovo because it is requesting the Secretary-General
to report to it regularly on the implementation of the
resolution and to include reports from the leadership of the
civil and security presences. Those of us who wish to
recall the primacy of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, as
established by the Charter, have been satisfied. Everyone
deserves gratitude for the steps taken to achieve this
result.

The chapter that is now closing has been a painful
one. This resolution blazes the way towards peace. It
enshrines the reaffirmed authority of the Security Council
but also the effective and decisive action taken by
regional organizations. It underscores the role of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, but it demands
a great deal of Member States.

Our vote on this resolution is thus also a
commitment to continue to be vigilant and to mobilize
our resources and our energies so as to contribute to
ensuring that peace, law and justice prevail.

