Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your country's
presidency of the Security Council and on your efforts
so far to successfully manage the Council's busy
programme of work this month. I also thank you for
convening this open meeting. I wish to thank
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing this morning.

When the Quartet proposed a timetable for the
activation of direct negotiations between the
Palestinian and Israeli parties in its statement last
September (see SG/2l78), with a view to reaching an
agreement that included key issues before the end of
2012, we supported that proposal and hoped for its
success in achieving the goal desired by everyone,
although the past positions of the Israeli side were not
encouraging. On previous occasions we emphasized
that the work of the Quartet should not be limited to
setting dates and timetables, but should ensure the
appropriate conditions for their implementation.

However, as expected, the Government of Israel
did not remove the main obstacle to the success of the
negotiations, which is illegal settlement activity.
Although it recently held meetings with the Palestinian
side in Amman, those meetings are not enough to break
the vicious circle experienced by the Palestinian cause
as long as the Israeli Government has no real intention
to make peace. That Government continues to ignore
all international calls urging it to halt and dismantle its
settlements in the territories occupied since 1967.
Those settlements are illegal and constitute a real
threat to the peace negotiations and the two-State
solution and are a blatant violation of international law.
A few days ago, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs Valerie Amos briefed the Council
on the grave humanitarian impact of the presence of
illegal settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

When one thinks about the fact that Israel has
already exceeded all limits, the Government of Prime
Minister Netanyahu surprises us with unprecedented
transgressions. A few days ago, by proposing the
construction of new housing units in the West Bank,
the Israeli Government attempted to legitimize not
homes currently inhabited by settlers in the settlement
of Migron, but settlements that even Israel itself
considers illegal. In that regard, it is necessary that the
States that sponsored the Quartet's proposal and that
believe in a negotiated solution act to bring the
required political pressure to bear for the success of
this endeavour.

In that context, some have suggested that the
Palestinian side has not been acting in a manner
conducive to the implementation of those steps. The
Palestinian attempt for recognition of the State of
Palestine as an independent State does not undermine
the two-State solution at all. That is why we will not
shy away from calling on the Council to support it. In
so doing, we call on the Council to shoulder its
responsibility towards the Israeli actions that
undermine the two-State solution by imposing a fait
accompli situation that makes it impossible to build a
viable Palestinian State in the territories occupied by
Israel in 1967, including East Jerusalem.

It goes without saying that the solution to the
crisis in the Middle East depends upon Israel's
withdrawal from all occupied Palestinian land, the
remaining Lebanese territory and the Syrian Golan, as
well as on abiding by the resolutions of the United
Nations.

What is of concern to us in particular is the
escalation of the illegal measures taken by the Israeli
authorities aimed at the Judaization of occupied
Jerusalem. In that regard, we would like to stress our
firm opposition to such measures by Israel and its
attempts to change the Arab identity of the city, its
demographic composition, its legal status and its
religious character. We stress also that these attempts
are null and void and have no legal effect.

We urge the international community to express
its rejection of the attempts by Israel to damage Islamic
and Christian holy sites, demolish homes and expel the
Arab population, including cancelling their identity
cards. Such attempts violate the obligations of Israel,
the occupying Power, as well as international law, are
contrary to the relevant United Nations resolutions and
undermine the foundations of a peaceful solution to the
Palestinian issue and the Arab-Israeli conflict.

The Syrian issue is no less urgent, in terms of the
high and unfortunate number of victims of violence in
Syria, as stated in the briefing of the Assistant
Secretary-General, or in terms of the nature of the
situation in the country, with its complex composition
and regional dimensions, and in terms of the risk of
seeing the country slide towards a greater level of
violence.

We, like other countries, are concerned about the
continuing serious crisis in a brotherly Arab country.
We are keen to stop the bloodshed that has befallen the
Syrian people. We have demanded an end to violence,
murder, violations of fundamental freedoms and
bloodshed. We also urge the Syrian Government to
discharge its responsibility. At the same time, we stress
the need to protect the cohesion and unity of the Syrian
people and Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity.

The Arab League has spared no effort in playing
a positive role in order to resolve the Syrian crisis in a
regional framework through the Arab League initiative,
devoid of any violence or military intervention. That
initiative included the deployment of a mission of
observers to Syria to monitor its implementation. On
Sunday, after the Arab ministerial committee in charge
of the Syrian crisis reviewed a report of the Arab
observers in Syria and made its recommendations to
the meeting of the Arab Foreign Ministers, the
ministerial committee developed an Arab League
action plan for an Arab solution to the Syrian crisis,
similar to the solution proposed for the crisis in Yemen.
The Arab League asked the President of the
ministerial committee and the Secretary-General to
inform the Security Council and to ask for its support
for the plan. While we commend the request made by
the Secretary-General to the Council to shoulder its
responsibilities, we specifically believe that the Arab
League's request to the Council to adopt its plan, in
accordance with the resolutions of the Arab League,
was in line with the demands of the Secretary-General
and the international community. We stress the
importance of supporting the efforts of the Arab
League as part of energizing regional solutions in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

