Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the Assistant
Secretary-General and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, who provided us
with a clear picture of the latest developments in the
situation in the besieged areas in Syria.

It has been roughly a week since the world has come
to know the horrifying truth surrounding the siege of
Madaya, locatedjust 25 kilometres from the capital city
of Damascus. Everybody was shocked by the graphic
images of death and starvation coming out of the town,
something that is virtually impossible to imagine
nowadays. The level of savagery that the people of
Madaya have been subjected to can only be compared
to the Nazi atrocities during the Second World War. We
extend our deepest sympathies to the innocent Syrian
people who are suffering indiscriminately as a result of
the terrible ongoing conflict in their country.

We welcome the delivery of the second batch of
humanitarian aid to Madaya and call on all sides of
the Syrian conflict, including the Syrian Government,
to show consistency in providing the United Nations
with unhindered access to the town and other besieged
areas, as required under international law and pursuant
to resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014).
We support the statement of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, who said yesterday
that those responsible for this atrocity must be
prosecuted. We want to remind everyone in Syria that
anyone deliberately using starvation as a weapon is
committing a war crime and will be held accountable
sooner or later.

I would like to ask a specific question. At a
meeting a few days ago, we were informed that nearly
400 residents of the town required immediate medical
care and evacuation. What happened to them? If they
were not evacuated, we would like to know precisely
who prevented the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs from taking care of them. We
believe that it is an obligation of the Security Council,
without delay, to come up with a document establishing
stronger responsibility and accountability for those who
target civilians in Syria. As a country that experienced
an artificial famine in the early 1930s, Ukraine calls on
the Council to make its voice heard when it says that
using starvation as a method of warfare by either side
cannot and will not be tolerated.

Finally, some of us in the Security Council may have
different opinions on the political situation in Syria, but
we should stand united when it comes to addressing the
humanitarian crisis in the country, which has already
suffered so much in the course of the past five years.

