Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank the Chinese
presidency for convening today's emergency meeting
on the latest developments in the Azov Sea.

Kazakhstan, as a member of the Council, is open to
dialogue and is ready to debate international security
issues in the context of transparent discussions in
order to prevent international conflicts. Taking this
into account, as well as the need to consider the matter
within the framework of the Security Council, our
delegation was ready to vote in favour of both requests,
that of Ukraine and that of Russia.

Kazakhstan considers both peoples - those of
Ukraine and those of Russia - as the inhabitants of
brotherly nations to our country that have shared a
common history. In this regard, we urge both parties
to refrain from any steps that could lead to a further
escalation of tensions in bilateral relations.

It is of special importance to our State that Ukraine
remain sovereign, stable and independent. Kazakhstan
is ready to assist both nations - the Russian Federation
and Ukraine - to overcome this crisis in their relations.

Kazakhstan adheres to a balanced approach
of resolving the Ukrainian crisis through peaceful
negotiations and a mediation process based on the
key principles and norms of international law and
the United Nations Charter. My country continues to
take part in multilateral consultations in seeking a
settlement of this issue. We are determined to work
closely with all members ofthe Council without political
expediency and in an open, objective, responsible and
constructive way.

It should be noted that in the past our country
contributed to the launching of the Normandy format
and to the eventual conclusion of the Minsk agreements.
Kazakhstan has also repeatedly expressed its readiness
to render all-round assistance in the process, supporting
a peaceful settlement in the south-eastern part of
Ukraine and fostering robust relations between Ukraine
and Russia.

In this vein, our delegation is concerned that the
negotiation process to resolve the Ukrainian conflict has
been suspended during the past months, as evidenced
by the lack of higher-level contacts in the Normandy
format. This suspension has the potential to spark new
and negative developments in the region.

In that respect, it is with regret that we learned of
the incident between the Russian and Ukrainian navy
vessels in the Kerch Strait that took place yesterday,
25 November. Kazakhstan urges both sides to act with
the utmost restraint so as to de-escalate the situation
between the two States. We consider this to be the
only viable existing mechanism to resolve the issue in
a peaceful way through refraining from any kind of
negative action.

An incident such as this could drastically raise the
chances of an unintended spark setting the region on
fire. Both Governments must urgently step in and try
to negotiate a deal to de-escalate the situation, with
possible assistance from the international community.

We believe that sustainable peace and the
full-fledged normalization of relations between
both countries can also be achieved through the
establishment of confidence-building measures in the
security and economic areas. We should not allow any
further escalation of tensions, as they could lead to
active warfare in this new area.

