Mr. Soler Torrijos (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, allow me to express my thanks for this
morning's briefing and to welcome the appointment of
Mr. Staffan de Mistura as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq. We wish him every success
in the delicate task entrusted to him. We have faith in
his ability to act out of the box when it is timely and
prudent. We are optimistic about the increasingly broad
commitment of the international community, in
particular the commitment of the neighbouring
countries in the region, to reconstruction and stability
in Iraq. A few months ago we witnessed the
strengthening of the International Compact for Iraq
with additional elements, and we now have the
outcomes of the recent ministerial meetings, in Kuwait
and Istanbul. These are acknowledgements that
building peace in Iraq requires increased efforts
towards dialogue and social development.

From Panama's point of view, the slow progress
of the political process in Iraq has become an obstacle
to the strengthening of the country's most important
political and social institutions. However, we have
faith that the Iraqi leaders will be able to overcome
their political disagreements in order to reach a
consensus on the nature and structure of their State.

Last October's report on the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) (S/2007/608)
described the serious humanitarian situation in the
country resulting from sectarian violence. The number
of internally displaced persons has increased by 16 per
cent in recent months and it is increasingly urgent to
achieve proper and stable conditions so that the
millions of displaced Iraqis can return to their homes.

We are somewhat concerned by the organization
of civilians into so-called Awakening Councils. These
irregular armed groups should be supervised with
particular attention, even when they are credited with
having partially reduced violence in some parts of Iraq.
Their legal and operational parameters must be clear as
well as the responsibilities under which they operate.
Panama favours the efforts of the Government of Iraq
to integrate these units into the regular security forces.

It is a good time for the Security Council to think
about the role it should play in resolving the political
and humanitarian crisis in Iraq. Our delegation is
optimistic about reports indicating that violence has
been somewhat reduced. The expanded mandate of
UNAMI adopted in resolution 1770 (2007) was an
important step in achieving more active and focused
United Nations participation in this endeavour.

Panama reiterates its best wishes to the new
Special Representative and urges him to continue his
efforts to promote an inclusive political dialogue that
will lead to lasting reconciliation for the Iraqi people.

