Mr. Baali (Algeria): Three weeks ago, when the
Security Council failed to adopt a resolution that would
have condemned the assassination of Sheikh Ahmed
Yassin, and all terrorist acts against civilians, and
would have called for the cessation of all acts of
violence, including acts of terrorism, I warned the
Council that its failure to act was going to send the
wrong message to Israel, which would abusively take it
as a license to kill. In fact, immediately after the draft
resolution was vetoed, the representative of Israel, in
addition to insulting the Council in this very Chamber,
made it clear that Israel would continue to take out
Palestinian leaders.

Now, even if we had been able, on 25 March, to
adopt that resolution, I am convinced that Israel -
which has consistently placed itself above international
law and held our Council in contempt, as abundantly
demonstrated a few minutes ago by the same
representative - would still have proceeded with its
policy of extrajudicial killings, as it has done with
colonization, annexation, occupation and repression.

Again, Israel has struck and, again, it has killed.
Its latest victim was Mr. Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi, the
leader of Hamas, struck by a missile along with two
companions. In spite of the almost unanimous
condemnation, Israel remains defiant, and its Prime
Minister, after praising the army for Rantisi's
assassination, vowed yesterday to strike terror
organizations and their leaders.

Again, the Security Council finds itself
confronted with yet another Israeli provocation and yet
another challenge to its authority and credibility. How
is it going to cope with this intractable situation, which
further undermines the peace process? Is it going, this
time, to assume its responsibilities, condemn in a clear
and unequivocal fashion this killing and call for the
respect of international law? Is it going to come, at last,
to the conclusion that the civilian population in the
Palestinian territory is in great danger and needs to be
protected by an international force to be urgently
dispatched?

What I know for sure is that the Security Council,
which is seen by many as the custodian of international
law and the body everyone looks to in times of danger
and need, has to make the right decision this time. That
is, it must call upon Israel to cease its policy of
targeted assassinations and to abide by international
law. This time, the Security Council cannot escape its
responsibilities. It must act, and act swiftly.

In the Palestinian territory, in Arab nations and in
the Muslim world, emotions are high and distress and
frustration are deep. If no action is taken and Israel
again gets away with these horrendous crimes, the
situation might very rapidly deteriorate and, ultimately,
veer out of control.

In other terms, Israel cannot keep violating
international law in total impunity. Israel must be
restrained before it is too late, it must be stopped
before the peace process is put to death.

It is not too late for this Council to reassert its
authority, to put an end to this policy of escalation,
provocation and defiance, and to reaffirm once and for
all that a genuine, just and lasting peace can only be
achieved through the implementation of the road map. I
hope that the Security Council will, this time, live up to
its responsibilities and to the expectations of those
who, in spite of everything, have kept faith in it.

In this regard, a draft resolution will be
introduced shortly, and I hope it will have a better fate
than last month's ill-fated draft resolution.

