Mr. Lancry (Israel): At the outset, Mr. President,
I wish to congratulate you on your election to the
presidency of the Security Council and to congratulate
your predecessor, the distinguished Permanent
Representative of China, on his most able leadership of
the Council.

My country, Israel, is a country that seeks peace.
This may sound commonplace, but in this tormented
period when hatred and mistrust are deepening between
Israelis and Palestinians, even such a cliche becomes
essential in order to rebuild the lost language of peace
and to recover the spirit of the acceptance of the other.
Our desire to live in peace and coexistence with our
Palestinian partners and our neighbours in the region is
imperishable. Our hand remains extended in peace, as
it has for 53 years of Israeli statehood. We do,
however, believe in a vital, urgent and necessary need,
namely, to end the current Israeli-Palestinian setback.

In this spirit, the State of Israel has accepted the
Mitchell report, in all its sequential aspects, as a road
map leading back to the negotiating table, and we
remain committed to it. Even before the Tenet ceasefire
took effect, Israel implemented its own unilateral
ceasefire. Unfortunately, these actions were met with
no reciprocal gestures from the Palestinian side.
Consequently, 36 Israelis have been killed and 292
have been injured in over 1,300 separate attacks since
the Tenet plan took effect in mid-June.

Thus, today's meeting takes place not only
against the backdrop that the Palestinians have
depicted, but also against the backdrop of ongoing
Palestinian terrorism, which in the last two weeks has
escalated to an average of more than 20 attacks per day,
with scores of Israelis killed or injured. It appears that
despite the recent atrocity in Jerusalem, which echoes a
similar atrocity in Tel Aviv in early June - not to
mention the daily gunfire attacks everywhere - the
Palestinians have no scruples about convening a
meeting of the Security Council to discuss Israeli
actions.

This unprecedented escalation of Palestinian
terror is not in itself a new phenomenon in Israel. We
have been facing a calculated and orchestrated
campaign of Palestinian terror for more than 10
months; bombings and shootings in civilian areas have
become a fact of life for many Israelis. What has
changed - and to catastrophic effect - is the
frequency, intensity and horror of the attacks.

Ten days ago, a Palestinian suicide bomber
walked into a crowded Jerusalem restaurant during the
lunch hour and detonated a powerful explosive charge,
sending glass, chairs, tables and even human beings
flying through the air and out into the street. Reports
from the scene described a nightmare of chaos, wanton
destruction and intense human suffering. When the dust
had settled, 15 people lay dead and more than 130 were
injured. Among them were seven children, five
members of one family - a mother and father and
three of their children, ages 14, 4 and 2 - a tourist
from Brazil, and a pregnant American schoolteacher.

Before Israel could fully grieve for that senseless
loss, another bomb ripped apart a coffee house near the
northern coastal city of Haifa. There too, a Palestinian
suicide bomber entered a small, crowded cafe and
detonated powerful explosives. Twenty-one Israelis
were injured in the blast, and it was only by a miracle
that no one was killed.

Both those attacks bear a frightening resemblance
to the Palestinian suicide bombing outside a Tel Aviv
nightclub on 1 June 2001. In what has now become a
familiar pattern, a Palestinian terrorist situated himself
among scores of civilians waiting to enter, and
detonated an explosive that ended 21 young lives.

What would any Government do in the face of
ongoing daily acts of terrorism that spilled blood on the
streets and denied its citizens a sense of security?

Prior to the Jerusalem bombing, Israel provided
the Palestinian Authority with a list of terrorists
engaged in planning impending attacks on Israel. The
Palestinian Authority ignored the information on that
list and, in flagrant violation of signed agreements,
took no action whatsoever. On that list figured
Abdullah Barghouti, who was the mastermind of the
Jerusalem bombing. Had the Palestinian Authority
fulfilled its obligation to renounce terrorism, had the
Palestinian Authority been serious about implementing
its part of a ceasefire and arrested Abdullah Barghouti,
15 lives would have been spared and an immeasurable
rise in mistrust and suspicion between our two peoples
could have been avoided.

Obviously, terrorism has become the Palestinian
Authority's preferred way to deal with the peace
process. The Palestinian leadership, in fact, has much
to lose by using terrorism for the achievement of
political ends.

That is a message that Israel should not be alone
in expressing. Terrorism is a global issue. The entire
free world has a vital interest in making clear that
terrorism is totally unacceptable and that no gains will
ever accrue to those who wilfully attack civilians.
Chairman Arafat must receive a clear and unequivocal
message from the Security Council and from the
international community: terrorism is unacceptable.

In the light of the security situation, Israel was
forced to take action in defence of its citizens. These
were not actions that we wished to take; they were
actions that were forced upon us, and at the same time
they were indispensable.

Israel is obligated, under every norm of
international law and custom, to take concerted action
in defence of its citizens. In that regard, we should be
treated like any other nation that faces armed
aggression, let alone continuous violence directed
specifically at innocent civilians, seeking to cut them
down as they go about the most ordinary aspects of
their lives.

The use of human beings as bombs is an alarming
phenomenon that presents no obvious response.
Individuals who are willing to sacrifice their lives in
such a gruesome manner will not be deterred by
ordinary means. Our response must therefore be
adapted and geared towards cutting off terror at its
source because, once it is unleashed, it is virtually
impossible to stop.

In the face of international scrutiny of Israel with
regard to its alleged violation of international norms, I
wish to draw the Council's attention to the fact that
Palestinian suicide bombings, which engender death
and devastation, cannot be regarded as perfectly
judicial. They do not exemplify a moderate use of force
and do not comply with international law and human
rights. They constitute a unique challenge that requires
adapted responses.

In the fight against Palestinian terror, no one is
more obligated than Chairman Arafat. It was his
commitment, expressed in his letter to the late Prime
Minister Yitzhak Rabin, which qualified him as a
partner for peace. What is more, no one is better
positioned to contain terrorism at its source than
Chairman Arafat. Instead of doing so, as he has
repeatedly promised, Chairman Arafat has himself
become a party to terrorism. He has released terrorists
from jail; he has used the official Palestinian media to
incite them to violence; he has refused to re-arrest them
even when he knew they were about to commit murder;
and he has invited the Hamas and Islamic Jihad terror
organizations to join him in a unity coalition. As long
as the Palestinians maintain that policy, Israel will
continue to take the steps it deems necessary to keep
the Palestinian machinery of killing off its streets.

We have waited long enough - nearly a year in
fact -and we have given the Palestinian leadership
every opportunity to fulfil its obligations and to contain
terrorism. After the Mitchell Committee submitted its
recommendations calling, first and foremost, for an end
to the violence, we waited. After a Palestinian suicide
bomber took down 21 young people at a Tel Aviv
nightclub, we waited. After Chairman Arafat agreed to
the terms of the Tenet ceasefire, we waited. Each time,
we waited, and we ended up waiting only for the next
attack. We cannot be expected to wait any more.

Israel's action in Jenin was intended to achieve
what Chairman Arafat has thus far failed to achieve,
namely the prevention of violence. Our response was a
limited one, taken in a city that has become a hub of
suicide bombers. No casualties were incurred as a
result of that preventive action that undoubtedly saved
the lives ofinnocent civilians.

Israel's actions are in accord not only with
agreements signed between the parties, but also with
established principles of international law, most
pertinently the right to self-defence.

After the devastating carnage that littered the
streets of Jerusalem and Tel Aviv, it can no longer be
denied that Israel is genuinely under attack.

Similarly, Israel's seizure of Orient House and the
Abu Dis compound is not a takeover, it is not
occupation, it is not an act of revenge, but an act of
self-defence. What we have done is take temporary
control of buildings that were being used by official
Palestinian forces to assist terrorists in carrying out
their murderous attacks. Israeli forces recovered
intelligence reports and illegal weapons from Orient
House that constitute irrefutable proof that the site was
being used for political and military purposes.

Israel has agreed to the presence in Jerusalem of
Palestinian institutions serving the communal needs of
the city's Palestinian population. A letter to that effect
was sent by Foreign Minister Shimon Peres to
Norwegian Foreign Minister Hoist. However, this letter
clearly refers only to economic, social, educational and
cultural institutions. Orient House was, in fact, being
used for much more, as indicated by the intelligence
materials and illegal arms found by Israeli forces that
entered the site. Thus, Palestinian actions there are not
protected under the terms specified in Shimon Peres's
letter.

The legality of our actions in Abu Dis conforms
to the same principle. Palestinian forces headquartered
in the District Governor's compound in Abu Dis-
including the security forces, Force 17, the Palestinian
police, the intelligence services and others - have
been engaged in organizing and instigating terrorist
activities. In so doing, they have failed to comply with
their obligations under Israeli-Palestinian agreements,
including, inter alia, Chairman Arafat's cardinal
undertaking to renounce the use of terrorism and
violence and to resolve all outstanding issues through
negotiations.

In taking control of these buildings, which have
been used to coordinate terrorist activity, Israel has
acted in full compliance with its responsibilities under
signed agreements. Under those agreements, the areas
in question are designated as Areas B and C, areas in
which Israel is responsible for maintaining security and
for fighting terror. The Israeli-Palestinian Interim
Agreement stipulates that not only is Israel permitted
to take security measures in those areas but, in fact, it
is required to do so. This is our moral obligation, and
our response is driven by this obligation.

Similar principles apply to Orient House, as well.
Under signed agreements, Jerusalem is specifically
excluded from Palestinian jurisdiction. Under the
Interim Agreement, Palestinian Authority offices may
be located only in areas under Palestinian territorial
jurisdiction in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
Notwithstanding, Palestinian offices have been located
in Orient House, in violation of agreed arrangements.

In both cases, in that of Orient House, as well as
in that of the District Governor's compound in Abu
Dis, the Palestinian leadership, and particularly
Chairman Arafat, must take into account that
converting terrorism into a political tool will entail a
political loss.

Israel regards the draft resolution before the
Council as a biased and one-sided document that seeks
to place the onus of the present crisis squarely on one
party. In fact, it requires virtually nothing of the
Palestinian side. It does not call for a commitment to
resolutely fight terror, nor does it call for the re-arrest
of terrorists currently planning future attacks on Israel.

Even with regard to violence itself, the draft
resolution, in operative paragraph 1, uses a sort of
coded language that refers exclusively to Israel and
thereby frees the Palestinians from their own
obligations to end the violence. There is no "call on the
two sides", but rather, a sophisticated semantic texture
that explicitly designates Israel as the unique source of
violence and implicitly absolves the Palestinian side of
its killing of 156 Israelis and the injuring of hundreds
more. With regard to negotiations, let me reiterate that
we are willing to undertake them once the terror ends,
on the basis of existing signed agreements.

Even more, the draft resolution's supposed
fidelity to the recommendations of the Mitchell report
is entirely disingenuous. Nowhere does the spirit of the
Mitchell Committee permeate this document with
regard to the obligations of the Palestinian side. The
Palestinians, who have repeatedly called for the
implementation of the Mitchell recommendations,
seem to have forgotten precisely what they are. Allow
me to remind them.

The Mitchell report calls, first and foremost, for
an unconditional cessation of violence, followed by a
cooling-off period, then a series of confidence-building
measures and ultimately a return to negotiations. The
report further states

"the Palestinian Authority should make clear
through concrete action to Palestinians and
Israelis alike that terrorism is reprehensible and
unacceptable"

and by taking all measures "to prevent terrorist
operations and to punish perpetrators".

I would like to ask, where in the draft resolution
is there any similar reference to the Palestinian
obligations regarding terrorism? I would also like to
ask why operative paragraph 1 does not call on the
Palestinian side to put an end to the unspeakable
practice of suicide bombings.

Moreover, even though the Mitchell report calls
for an incremental series of steps, the draft resolution
totally ignores the sequential procedure. Since the
Mitchell report refers to a direct, face-to-face approach,
there appears to be no justification for further
complicating matters by subjecting implementation to
international supervision and scrutiny or by imposing
any kind of monitoring mechanism that has not been
negotiated and agreed to by both sides. Such a selective
reading of the Mitchell report does not advance the
cause of peace.

In calling for international protection, as
stipulated in the preamble of the draft resolution, the
Palestinian leadership is once again exposing its
duplicity in seeking exemption from the consequences
of their own aggressive and violent behaviour. How
can the Palestinians claim the need for protection while
they kill Israelis by the dozens on an ongoing basis?

Israel therefore remains opposed to an
international presence in this context, as that would
contravene both the spirit and the letter of direct
bilateral face-to-face negotiations. More importantly,
such a presence would be totally ineffective in
preventing terrorist attacks like the recent suicide
bombings in Jerusalem and Tel Aviv. An international
presence cannot dismantle the bomb factories of
Hamas and Islamic Jihad; it cannot intercept suicide
bombers on their way to carry out attacks; it cannot
stop snipers and mortar fire from targeting Israeli
civilians.

In short, an international presence cannot return
peace and quiet to our region; that requires the
concerted effort of Chairman Arafat, who cannot be
permitted to escape his commitment and his duty.
Rather than hiding behind an internationally supplied
shield, which in any case must be agreed by both sides,
the Palestinians must fulfil their obligations to
renounce terror and violence.

If more evidence of the limitations of an
international presence is needed, the behaviour of
UNIFIL vis-a-vis Hezbollah is highly instructive.
When a confrontation over control of two vehicles,
using the abduction of three Israeli soldiers on 8
October 2000, arose between UNIFIL - a well-trained
and well-armed force representing international
legitimacy - and a small group of Hezbollah
terrorists, UNIFIL surrendered to the demands of
Hezbollah. According to the recent United Nations
report of the fact-finding team led by Joseph Connor,
senior officials in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations expressed grave concern over this fact.
What are we therefore to assume would be the reaction
of a team of observers in the territories - or any other
international mechanism - to a potential confrontation
or to the daily harassment by Hamas, Islamic Jihad and
the Tanzim?

All calls for an international presence have been
predicated on the mutual acquiescence of both sides.
For its part, Israel does not accept such a presence. It
would be ineffectual and would set a dangerous
precedent by relieving the responsible party of its
international and bilateral obligations. The only way to
break the cycle of violence is to prevail upon Chairman
Arafat to comply with acceptable norms of behaviour
and rid the territory under his jurisdiction of this vile
scourge.

It is for these reasons that we find the current
draft resolution totally unacceptable, and we
thoroughly reject it.

Under the destructive and painful influence of the
violence that has rocked the region for 11 months, we
seem to have lost our ability to speak in the language
of peace. Israelis still recall the courageous moral and
political stance of the late President Anwar Sadat of
Egypt, who, with his proclamation of "No more war",
broke open an emotional and political avenue that
permitted the historic breakthrough that constituted
Israel's treaty of peace with Egypt.

We have read Chairman Arafat's commitment to
renounce terror and violence, and for a time we saw in
him the image of a new peacemaker. But his current
terror alliance, the education in hatred and exclusion
that permeates Palestinian society, and the campaign of
incitement and demonization of Israel and the Jewish
people that fills Palestinian television and newspapers
are not only harming the Palestinian people and their
will to exist in peace, but are undermining the faith of
the people of Israel in our ability to render war and
confrontation a relic of the past.

We must return ourselves to the lost language of
peace. The recommendations of the Mitchell
Committee must be fully implemented without delay,
including, first and foremost, an immediate and total
cessation of violence. There is nothing that must be
discussed or negotiated. It is a simple and
straightforward necessity that requires concerted
action, not meaningless and empty proclamations.

I invite our Palestinian partners to join us in
implementing - not declaring, but implementing~
the true and genuine ceasefire. Let us lay down our
arms and return once more to the process of building a
future based on respect, coexistence, cooperation and
peace.

