Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Special
Representative Eide for his briefing.

Today, after more than seven years of war,
Afghanistan finds itself at a new crossroads. The
developments in that country have attracted the world's
attention. On the one hand, the security situation
continues its downward slide, causing heavy civilian
casualties and exacerbating the humanitarian crisis. On
the other hand, the international community, including
the United Nations, has increased its attention and
input with regard to Afghanistan.

At the Paris Conference last June, the
international community reaffirmed its support for the
national reconstruction of Afghanistan and for the core
coordinating role of the United Nations in assisting the
country. Despite the current and future difficulties
facing Afghanistan, we have no reason to lose
confidence. This year's election will be a major event
in the political life of the country. Afghanistan's
Independent Electoral Commission recently
reconfirmed the date of 20 August for the presidential
election. We believe that the Afghan people will be
able to use their wisdom to appropriately address
election-related issues and, through the election,
increase social cohesion and improve the effectiveness
of the Government's functioning.

It is particularly important to ensure a secure
environment for the election. We hope that the increase
in the numbers of troops from the countries concerned
will help to ease the security situation in Afghanistan.
We also hope that, with the assistance of the
international community, the Government, the Afghan
security forces and the Afghanistan National Police
will continue to build their capacities so that they can
soon take up the heavy responsibility of maintaining
national security and social stability.

Experience has shown that military means alone
cannot reverse the situation in Afghanistan. In the long
run, it is essential to encourage various ethnic groups
and factions to achieve reconciliation through dialogue.
At the same time, in carrying out military action, the
parties concerned should take care to reduce civilian
casualties.

With a view to responding effectively to security
concerns, Special Representative Eide and the Afghan
Government have proposed to take an integrated
approach and undertake different targeted measures in
different areas of Afghanistan. In the northern and
western parts of the country, where the situation is
relatively stable, the focus will be on developing the
economy, whereas in the south and east the focus will
be on strengthening security.

In our view, promoting economic development in
the southern and eastern parts of Afghanistan is just as
important as stabilizing the security situation,
especially since those are the areas in which poppy
cultivation is most concentrated. It is only by
vigorously developing alternative-crop cultivation and
promoting economic growth that poppy cultivation can
be further reduced, thus diminishing the root causes of
social instability in the country. We call on the
international community to further increase its support
for Afghanistan's agricultural production.

At the initiative of a number of countries, an
international conference on the question of Afghanistan
will be held in The Hague on 31 March to discuss the
direction of the country's future development. We wish
the conference success and hope that the parties
concerned will reach agreement on such issues as
stabilizing the security situation and promoting
economic development and will point out a clear
direction for the next phase of work in assisting
Afghanistan. We have also noted that the countries
members of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
will be holding a meeting in Moscow, and we wish that
meeting success also.

We support the continued leading role of the
United Nations in coordinating the international
community's assistance to Afghanistan, and we support
the extension of UNAMA's current mandate for
another year. We are willing to continue to provide
help to Afghanistan to the best of our abilities.

