Mr. Kamau (Kenya): I thank you, Madame
President, for giving me this opportunity to address the
Council on this very important topic. We also thank the
Secretary-General, the Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Rwanda,
and the representative of the World Bank for their
statements earlier.

We would also like to associate ourselves with
the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The most pressing challenge to peace and
development in Africa is the attainment of accelerated
economic development based on the bedrock of human
development, equity and security. The specific
underlying causes of the strife, conflict or civil
intimidation that are the primary obstacles to peace and
security on our continent are many, varied and well
documented.

African leaders and, indeed, the people of Africa
have devoted considerable effort to countering failed
governance and the absence of peace, security and
development. Thankfully, those efforts have not gone
unrewarded. Inn recent years the continent has
witnessed, despite some persistent and glaring failures,
an impressive revival and reconstruction of countries
amid the abandonment of violence and the acquisition
of new freedoms and liberation.

But even as we sit here today, the failures and
glaring exceptions and the real and imminent threat of
reversals in some countries must surely be cause for
concern and pause for introspection, and there is no
better place to undertake this introspection than here in
the United Nations Security Council.

While there can be little debate that development
and security are intertwined and interdependent, the
very fact that we are discussing the issue suggests that
there is some discomfort as to the manner in which the
interface is collectively understood and collectively
managed - here in the United Nations, but equally
importantly in continental institutions and even
national bodies.

In our reality in Kenya, security is indeed the
precursor for peace and development. But it does not
necessarily follow that any price must be paid for
security, because in and of itself, security does not
guarantee peace or development. Thus, a balance has to
be struck by those who may wish to exercise collective
management over matters of security.

Most of our countries are either in economic
transition or are fledgling democracies or young
nation-States. For the most part, all these countries are
still in the natural process of solidifying homogeneity,
establishing their national identity and/or extending
constitutional and civil liberties to their populations.

These characteristics of our countries make for a
complex, highly sensitive and potentially explosive
national political and social environment. This fact,
however, we feel is sometimes lost on this Council and
other global bodies that are dominated by countries
that are politically and economically stable and
historically privileged. This is particularly so when the
apparent rush to enforce security overruns the need for
considered and deep appreciation of the situational and
historical conditions that characterize fractured
societies, fledgling democracies or transitional
economies.

At times, sadly, the converse is also true: the
threat of insecurity is downplayed in efforts to play up
a global value such as good governance. These
affirmations on our part must not be construed as
suggesting that we do not believe that democracy, civil
liberties and sustainable security and development go
hand in glove, because they do. But attaining these
core values is a delicate process fraught with reversals
and disappointments. What is important is the clear
understanding that, at times, reversals and
disappointments are inherent to the nature of free
democracies and, moreover, that the rush to suppress or
contain those developments by external means,
international institutions or coercive force may in fact
lead to the abortion of the democratic process and a
lapse into insecurity, or even worse.

For Kenya, our future security and our
development lie in our domestication of our new
Constitution and the concomitant building of the
institutions that are the means of domesticating it. But
we are also painfully aware that without political
harmony and commensurate rapid economic growth
and equitable prosperity, our Constitution will not be
worth the paper it is written on.

Let me conclude by making a small plea: that
those who may wish to assign themselves the noble
task of managing collective global peace and security
do so by focusing on the direction of progress,
prosperity, peace and human development, rather than
on the character or familiarity of the progress. Every
nation will have to find its own path. That is a truism
that holds fast for every nation - a fact that we hope
the Security Council will uphold in carrying out its
most important mandate.

