Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)(spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to express my
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and on
your wise leadership of the Council. I would also like to
express our gratitude to your predecessor, Ambassador
Lavrov, and the members of his delegation for his able
and successful stewardship of the Council during the past
month.

An extremely important matter is before the Council
today - namely, the role and contribution of the Security
Council in achieving a fundamental objective of the
United Nations: the prevention of armed conflicts. Like
any other organ of the United Nations system, the
Security Council is governed and guided by the purposes
and principles of the United Nations, as set out in Articles
1 and 2 of the Charter. One of the main purposes of the
United Nations as a whole, as defined in Article 1,
paragraph 1, of the Charter, is the maintenance of
international peace and security. That paragraph also
provides that to that end, a purpose of the United Nations
is

"to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace,
and for the suppression of acts of aggression or
other breaches of the peace, and to bring about
by peaceful means, and in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law,
adjustment or settlement of international
disputes or situations which might lead to a
breach of the peace".

The principles governing the work of the United
Nations and its organs are set forth in Article 2 of the
Charter, which provides for, inter alia, the sovereign
equality of all its Members, settlement of disputes by
peaceful means, Members' refraining from the threat or

 

use of force in their international relations and non-
interference in the internal affairs of States.

The Charter entrusts the maintenance of international
peace and security to both the General Assembly and the
Security Council. Under Article 11, paragraph 1, the
General Assembly may consider the general principles of
cooperation in the maintenance of international peace and
security, and it may make recommendations with regard to
such principles to its Members, to the Security Council or
to both.

Under Article 24 of the Charter, Members of the
United Nations have entrusted the Security Council with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and Member States agree that the
Council, in carrying out its duties under this responsibility,
act on their behalf. In discharging these duties, the Security
Council shall act in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations and the powers vested in
the Security Council. Hence, the mandate for maintenance
of international peace and security is a joint responsibility
of the General Assembly and the Security Council. Thus,
the primary responsibility for maintenance of international
peace and security is not an exclusive function of the
Security Council.

The Security Council fulfils its responsibility on behalf
of all Member States and in their collective interest, and not
on behalf of or in the interest of one or some of the
members of the Council. I feel the need to state and to
clarify the terms of reference of the Security Council as a
primary organ of the United Nations system: compliance
with the mandate delineated by the United Nations Member
States in the Charter and adherence to the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter are the only admissible
legal basis accepted by Member States for the functions of
the Council.

The Security Council's deviation from its mandate or
non-compliance with the principles set forth in the Charter
could, indeed, undermine the credibility of the Council if a
larger United Nations membership felt that the Security
Council was not acting on its behalf, nor in its collective
interest, but rather was acting in the interest of a few
Member States or a single State. In addition, the
preservation - indeed, the enhancement - of the
credibility of the Council depends on total compliance with
international law as well as with international treaties and
conventions.

International understandings established by
consensus or in the form of international instruments of
a universal character are the true expression of the will of
the international community. The Security Council's work
and resolutions cannot be respected or complied with by
Member States unless they reflect the will of the majority
of Member States.

This is embodied in Article 25 of the Charter, which
states that Members of the United Nations agree to accept
and carry out the decisions of the Security Council in
accordance with the present Charter.

The starting point is the reform of the Security
Council itself - in particular, and in a speedy fashion,its
working procedures. Its procedures and methods of work
must ensure that the Council's decisions reflect the will
of the majority of the Member States represented in the
General Assembly. It is perhaps useful here to recall that
many speakers today, as well as the Secretary-General,
emphasized this point.

The majority of States represented in the General
Assembly must participate in the open debates held by the
Council from time to time before the adoption of any
important decisions by the Council, or when the Council
takes up a new subject. These discussions must form the
basis of any resolution to be adopted by the Council; the
basis must not be closed-door discussions among a
limited number of States, which discussions do not
represent the collective will of the international
community, as is the case in addressing many issues,
including the issue before the Council today.

The text of the draft presidential statement was
drafted and discussed before this meeting was convened.
The question that arises is as follows: what is the impact
and significance of the opinions of the Member States of
the United Nations in this forum today - indeed, every
day?

To enhance, or rather to restore, the credibility of the
Council, it must comply with the resolutions that it
adopts. Indeed, the Council must be the first to comply
with its resolutions and the last to breach them.
Otherwise, how can the Council call upon States and
other organs to comply with those resolutions if the
Council itself modifies its resolutions, or reinterprets
them, or changes their interpretation, in response to the
wishes of this or that party?

 

That being said, allow me to proceed to the core
subject to which the Council has dedicated this open debate
on what it could contribute to prevent armed conflicts.
What is the nature of its contribution in the context of its
responsibility to maintain international peace and security
in correspondence to the contributions of other United
Nations organs and regional and international organizations
and subregional organizations? No agreement on answers to
these questions can be reached before identifying the
existing or potential threats to international peace and
security in our contemporary world. Agreement on the
nature of these threats and their early detection is a sine
qua non, along with the political will to speedily take action
to confront them and to prevent the outbreak of armed
conflicts.

It is our view that nuclear threats and risks, even as a
result of human error or a technical malfunction, remain the
greatest threat to international peace and security. Removal
of such threats cannot be achieved without total elimination
of nuclear weapons. To focus only on nuclear non-
proliferation has proved to be impractical. As long as there
are States that have nuclear capabilities and that insist on
possession of nuclear weapons, the world will not be free
of nuclear weapons, since other States will seek to acquire
a similar nuclear capability.

The Security Council could play a crucial role in
achieving the total elimination of nuclear weapons,
especially since the nuclear-weapon States are permanent
members of the Security Council. If they are genuinely
serious about carrying out their pledge to eliminate nuclear
weapons, they can act, and do so through the Security
Council.

The Council can firmly confront acts of aggression
and occupation of territory by other States, but it cannot
gain the confidence of the larger membership when it
remains idle in the face of such gross violations.

Where is the credibility of the Council, when it has
done nothing in the face of Israeli acts of aggression
against Arab States for over 50 years and has taken no
measures to deter such aggression? The Council was
satisfied to pass resolutions that were totally disregarded. In
the meantime under various fabricated pretexts and with
astronomical speed, it hastened to impose sanctions against
Arab States. Why did the Security Council not act against
the military aggression of the United States against Libya
in 1986? That aggression was absolutely unwarranted and
targeted civilians, who were massacred by the scores. That
aggression was condemned by the majority of the Members
of the United Nations. In that case, did the Security
Council act in accordance with the will of the majority of
the United Nations Member States or the international
community? What did the Security Council do, and what
is it currently doing, in the face of the almost daily
military aggression against Lebanon and the occupation of
Lebanese territory, despite the fact that the Security
Council had adopted a resolution in that regard?

Indeed, Israel struck United Nations posts and
massacred civilians that had sought refuge in United
Nations facilities in Qana, Lebanon. Did the Security
Council not adopt a resolution calling for Israel's
withdrawal from Southern Lebanon? There is a contrast
here that stands in stark relief. Are Security Council
resolutions binding in certain cases and non-binding in
others? What did the Security Council do in order to put
an end to the daily bombardment of Iraq, which
bombardment is not in implementation of a Security
Council resolution? This is what we expect the Security
Council to do to prevent the outbreak of armed
aggression: to deter aggressors and to hold them
accountable by punishing them, and to complete its role
afterwards by building and maintaining peace and by
deploying peacekeeping forces and clearing the way for
other international organs to perform their functions in
order to promote and build durable peace.

The Security Council should not deal with subjects
that it has started to take up, such as the illicit arms trade,
human rights and drugs, because there are other
competent organs in the United Nations system that can
adequately deal with, and should address, such subjects.

Even the deployment of peacekeeping missions has
been subjected by the Council to considerations and
criteria that vary from one region to another in
accordance with the whims and interests of some States,
and not in the interests of international collective peace
and security. Suffice it to cite here the way in which the
Council addresses many ongoing conflicts, especially in
Africa, which are virtually ignored except for meetings
regarding Africa or statements or resolutions that favour
support or appeal for support for Africa. But, in actual
fact, the Security Council failed to adopt long overdue
resolutions. The representative of Namibia has referred to
many relevant and indeed important questions in this
regard that the Security Council must seriously consider.

How long does it take the Security Council to take
a decision to deploy observers in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in Sierra Leone, using various pretexts?

 

Some demanded written guarantees. Others demanded
adequate financial and security resources and guarantees.

The Council is treating the case of Somalia as if it
were on another planet. It seems nowadays that the Security
Council is driven by certain Western mass media
campaigns and the interest that lies behind that media. The
Council does not really act on the basis of international
security, or in the interests of the majority of the Members
of the United Nations. This situation must change if the
Council indeed wants to play a constructive role in the
prevention of armed conflicts. We expect the Council to
respond to genuine potential threats anywhere in the world,
in the real interest of world peace and security.

In closing, I wish to say that we have heard time and
again references at today's meeting to the question of
humanitarian intervention. Let me repeat that for a situation
to be called "humanitarian" it must be dealt with seriously
and dispassionately by those who have addressed this point
today. But this is not the case. It is not difficult to cite the
problems in a given country in order to justify and provide
cover for an intervention that has implicit and
predetermined purposes that affect the interests of those
who would intervene, and not the humanitarian situation of
those affected.

For instance, Libya lost exactly half its population in
order to gain independence. We are therefore not prepared
to accept any resolution that would contravene paragraph 7
of Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations, conveying
the right to intervene in the domestic affairs of any State,
even under the lofty pretext of humanitarian considerations.
Where were humanitarian considerations when we were
under colonial rule? This is one instance of bad intentions
we can cite. Kosovo is not the only example in this regard
and East Timor will not be the last.

