Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Qazi, for
his briefing. We would also like to thank Ambassador
Wolcott Sanders of the United States delegation for her
briefing.
We have carefully read the report of the
Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, which is very
comprehensive and contains some impressive ideas.
The Iraq war ended more than three years ago.
Since then the Iraqi people have travelled an
extraordinary road. They have overcome many
difficulties and basically achieved various benchmarks
set out in resolution 1546 (2004). We would like to
convey to them heartfelt congratulations for those
accomplishments.

However, despite the important progress made in
the political process in Iraq, an examination of the
current situation there shows that security, economic
reconstruction and the protection of human rights
remain sources of great concern. The question of Iraq
has once again given rise to universal concern.
Secretary-General Annan points out that the prospect
of all-out civil war and even of regional conflict has
become much more real.

The United States Iraq Study Group recently
published a report that put forward some new ideas and
ways of thinking aimed at resolving the Iraq question.
All sides can take this opportunity to reconsider the
issue in a comprehensive manner with a view to
finding a proper solution and helping Iraq to set out on
the road to peace, stability and development at an early
date.

China believes that, in order to properly resolve
the Iraq question, a number of aspects need to be taken
into account.

First, Iraq should continue to promote the
national reconciliation process and enhance the
inclusiveness of the political process. The realities of
the past few months have shown that the sectarian
conflict has become a major factor affecting security
and stability in Iraq. China welcomes the national
reconciliation plan put forward by Prime Minister
Al-Maliki. We hope it will effectively encourage all
parties to take the overall interests of the country to
heart, showing mutual respect, understanding,
tolerance and trust for each other, and jointly create a
good future.

Secondly, the Iraqi Government should shoulder
more responsibilities for maintaining security and law
and order in the country so as to restore the popular
confidence in the Government. The Multinational
Force should also signal that it will not stay in Iraq
forever, so as to improve its image in Iraq. Meanwhile,
the Iraqi Government and the Multinational Force
should realize that it is impossible to resolve the
security question solely by military means. It is

necessary to deal with the political, economic and
security aspects of the problem if it is to be resolved
effectively. A national reconciliation process that is
broad and inclusive will greatly help all sides to
resolve their differences through democratic and
peaceful means.

Thirdly, the Iraqi Government should quickly
make progress in economic reconstruction and allow
the Iraqi people to enjoy real benefits. The
International Compact launched jointly by the Iraqi
Government and the United Nations provides an
important platform for mobilizing international support
and crystallizing international consensus. China fully
supports the International Compact and hopes that it
will be able to play its due role at an early date.

Fourthly, the international community -
especially the countries in the region - should come
together to help Iraq to achieve stability as soon as
possible. The Iraq question cannot be resolved without
the support and help of neighbouring countries.
Security in Iraq directly impacts the security of all the
neighbouring countries. We welcome the periodic
regional meetings of the Foreign Ministers and the
Ministers of the Interior of Iraq and neighbouring
countries. We hope that all sides will continuously
increase mutual trust through dialogue.

When the time is right, we could also consider
convening an international conference, under the
auspices of the United Nations, to promote dialogue
and understanding.

China has always stood for the maintenance of
Iraq's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity and the proper resolution of the problem
through political means. We hope that, with the support
and help of the international community, the Iraqi
people will, through their tireless efforts, achieve the
objective of an Iraq governed by the Iraqi people and
restore Iraq to its past glory.

