Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I have already had an opportunity to tell
you how grateful my country is to see you presiding
over the Council, and I am following your instructions.

To paraphrase Winston Churchill, when London
was subjected to carpet bombing, it was a time for cries
and tears but not for statements and speeches. The war
is raging in Iraq, cradle of urban civilization, where the
memory of humanity is captured in the first clay
tablets, inscribed with the first alphabet.

War is raging in one of the most sensitive parts of
the world - a region where the peace of the world is
now at stake. Everybody knows that the highest of all
priorities, the one that we should have looked at first,
was to give justice to the Palestinians, who have waited
more than 50 years for the decisions of the United
Nations to be implemented, in order to restore their
dignity and to give them the enjoyment of national
sovereignty within their own State, with Al-Quds,
Jerusalem, as its capital.

The war that is raging today is now being
broadcast live and in real time and is being experienced
by the entire population, wherever they may be. These
populations are witnessing innocent civilians fall
victim, women and children, elderly people. Entire
families, like those families of Council members or my
own, are watching their relatives held prisoner,
intimidated, wounded or killed. War today is no longer
something you find in experts' reports. It is not
literature. It is not a matter of disarmament experts. It
is not a matter of referring to one legal provision or
another. War is the bitter reality that makes us all doubt
whether we have made advances in our ethics, values
and humanity.

The Kingdom of Morocco has often addressed the
Council, before the hostilities broke out, to call for a
peaceful solution to the Iraqi crisis, which would
preserve the credibility of the Council and the values
on which the Charter is based.

Force, indeed, should be the last resort, after all
other means for a peaceful settlement have failed. As
everyone knows, the philosophy that underpins our
Organization requires that all States renounce the
unilateral use of force and turn to collective security.
Today, we wish to reiterate our faith, more than ever, in
the values of peace and tolerance that have guided the
founding fathers of our Organization. We believe that
collective security is the best means of protecting us
against the return of the demons of expansionism and
domination.

All international and regional groups have spoken
on the Iraqi crisis and its consequences, as well as on
the hostilities under way. The Kingdom of Morocco, as
an Arab and Muslim country and member of the Non-
Aligned Movement, has taken part in these discussions
and the stances that resulted from them. The council of
the League of Arab States met in Cairo 23 March, the
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States
clearly spoke on this issue this afternoon.

We are here again today before the Security
Council, after the international community has failed in
all the efforts it has made for several months to
promote a peaceful outcome of the Iraqi crisis, in
particular by allowing disarmament inspectors to carry
out their tasks to completion.

The entire world has its eyes focused on us, as if
it were trying to detect some hope through the curtain
of smoke and flames that are released from explosives
and bombs. Almost 60 years have elapsed since such a
hope was proclaimed widely and loudly in San
Francisco. The peoples of the United Nations declared
their resolve "to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war", which twice in the space of a
lifetime - this was in 1945 - "brought untold sorrow
to mankind".

This is what the peoples of the United Nations
expect of us today: to save them from the scourge of
war and the suffering it causes. It is up to us all,
whoever we may be, every Member of this
Organization, the powerful and the others, to get down
to this task with a sense of urgency. We cannot resign
ourselves to the fatality of death, which blindly strikes
innocents, to the fatality of destruction of a land where
the earliest traces of our shared memory reside, a land
where God called on people to allow the spirit to
prevail over instinct and passion.

The discussions of the Council today and
tomorrow are crucial, because the future of our
Organization depends on them and especially of the
vision of the world that they embody. What is that
vision? It is that people, despite the diversity of their
cultures, beliefs and sensibilities, can always find
common ground to save themselves from the scourge
of war.

Such common ground, as Secretary-General Kofi
Annan has reminded the Council just a few hours ago,
consists in the respect for the sovereignty, unity and the
territorial integrity of Iraq, as well as in the right of this
country, and all others, to choose its own political
regime, without foreign interference, and to freely
exploit its own resources. Finally, respect for
humanitarian law allows for neither exception nor
reservation. It is an indispensable body of imperative
rules of international law. I know what I am speaking
of here.

Similarly, the solidarity of the international
community, to alleviate suffering and help the hungry,
the sick or disabled, must go beyond all political and
other divisions. It is only in this way that we can
preserve our humanity.

We must see to it that this crisis, this tragedy, can
be an opportunity for a rebirth, a resurgence of the
values of peace and tolerance. But this must be done
quickly, very quickly. For "the night is long that never
finds the day". Shakespeare was a poet, a humanist,
who knew that freedom cannot live side by side with
domination.

