Mr. Cevik (Turkey): Let me begin by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jan
Kubis for his comprehensive briefing on the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2012/907).

We welcome all of the positive signs mentioned in
the report. On the other hand, as responsibilities are
handed over to the Afghan authorities at an accelerated
pace, significant political, economic and security
challenges remain, many of them highlighted in the
Special Representative's insightful briefing. The
increase in the number of civilian casualties and attacks
on schools and health facilities, particularly those
targeting girls' schools, are matters of grave concern.
The potential economic consequences of the transition
are worrisome.

While we are progressing towards the implementation
phase of the commitments put forward in Chicago and
Tokyo last year, we must remain in touch with the
realities on the ground. Tackling those challenges and
building a sustainable, stable Afghanistan is crucial not
only for the future of the Afghan people, but also for
peace and stability in the subcontinent, Asia and the
world.

In these challenging times, a continued display of
will on the part of the international community will
strengthen the hopes of the Afghan people for the future
and help ensure that a smooth transition is under way.
We are glad to see increased efforts on the part of the
Afghan Government and the international community
aimed at ensuring the concrete implementation of the
mutual pledges made in Tokyo, and we are ready to
support those efforts in any way we can.

The conduct of credible and inclusive elections
will be a key indicator for a smooth and viable political
transition process. The announcement of the date
of 5 April 2014 for the presidential and Provincial
Council elections is an important step forward. We
commend the efforts made by the Independent Election
Commission, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) to ensure that free
and fair elections are realized. We also welcome and
encourage the constructive participation of political
parties and civil society in the electoral process.

The successful continuation of peace and
reconciliation efforts under the leadership and
ownership ofAfghanistan will foster peace and stability
in Afghanistan and constitute another important step
towards a political transition. We congratulate the
recent progress made in this area under the successful
guidance of Mr. Rabbani, the head ofthe Peace Council.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2082 (2012).
Turkey will continue to support this process with the
best interests of the Afghan people in mind.

We cannot emphasize enough the importance of
regional cooperation for establishing and sustaining
a secure, prosperous and peaceful Afghanistan. The
constructive engagement of Afghanistan's regional
partners will remain key to addressing common
challenges such as terrorism, barriers to trade and
investment, illicit drugs and refugees.

The trilateral summit process between Afghanistan,
Pakistan and Turkey has made a valuable contribution
towards dialogue and cooperation among the three
countries through seven meetings since 2007. The
summits provide a functional platform for cooperation
that is focused on political dialogue, military and
security issues, peace and reconciliation efforts, and
economic development and partnership.

The seventh trilateral summit, held on 11 and
12 December in Ankara, was convened under the theme
of connectivity, with the view that strengthening local
and regional networks of transportation will facilitate
connectivity for economic development, stability and
self-sustainability. The three countries reiterated their
determination to intensify their cooperation in the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation
efforts and to address the security challenges affecting
the region. A parallel meeting of the Istanbul Forum,
which comprises the apex organizations of the private
sectors of the three countries, was also held on the
sidelines of the summit.

We are also pleased to see that the Istanbul Process
is steadily moving towards the phase of development
and implementation, with several follow-up meetings
held based on the framework accepted at the Kabul
Ministerial Conference held on 14 June this year.
During the most recent senior officials' meeting, held in
Ankara, we agreed to finalize all implementation plans
for confidence-building measures before the senior
officials' meeting to be held in Baku on 6 February. We
would like to thank all Heart ofAsia countries, regional
organizations, the United Nations and supporters for
their strong support for the process.

As Afghanistan's regional and international
partners, we should spare no effort to contribute to
the vision of a secure, peaceful and self-sufficient
Afghanistan. That is our mutual interest. Turkey will
always remain in solidarity with the Afghan people and
continue to contribute to a safe, secure and prosperous
Afghanistan, as we have done for many decades.

In concluding, I would like to voice our strong
support for the crucial role played by the United
Nations in Afghanistan. I would particularly like to
commend the valuable efforts of the United Nations,
and UNAMA in particular, in taking the Istanbul
Process further and to express our heartfelt gratitude to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Kubis
and his hard-working team.

