Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the presence in our midst today of Secretary-
General Kofi Annan. We thank Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Amos Namanga Ngongi, former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for their briefings
on the situation in the country. Our thanks go also to
Mr. Javier Solana, Secretary-General of the Council of
the European Union and High Representative for the
Common Foreign and Security Policy, for having
shared with the Council his thoughts and perceptions
inspired by his recent visit to the Great Lakes region.

There is no doubt that the scale of the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
international community's commitment to promote
peace in that country, have left their mark on the work
of the Security Council, which has been constantly
alert and attentive to developments on the ground and
has taken measures to make a constructive contribution
and to support the parties involved in the quest for
solutions.

Recently the Security Council adopted resolution
1484 (2003) which approved the deployment of the
Interim Emergency Multinational Force in Bunia in
response to the violent events which took place in that
region in May. We are grateful to France for its
commitment, participation and leadership. Without
doubt, the Multinational Force has made it possible to
stabilize the situation. At the same time we wish to
convey our appreciation for the invaluable work done
by the Uruguayan contingent of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), whose presence made it possible
to keep the situation in Bunia under control until the
Multinational Force could be deployed.

In recent weeks, Security Council members have
been working to draw up and define the terms of a draft
resolution to strengthen the mandate of MONUC, in
keeping with the recommendations of the Secretary-
General and with a view to giving the mission a robust
mandate. With this conviction, Council members have
now virtually agreed upon a draft text which is likely to
be adopted within the next few days.

Given the importance of disarmament and
demobilization in the peace process, as well as the
establishment of a police force responsible for
domestic security, the draft resolution also includes
provisions to enable MONUC to support the
Transitional Government in this area.

The coordination of action between the
Multinational Force and MONUC is very important,
bearing in mind that MONUC will take control of the
situation on the ground on 1 September 2003.

We hail Bangladesh's decision to deploy a 3,800-
strong contingent in Bunia to replace the Multinational
Force. At the same time, the Security Council has
succeeded in maintaining ongoing dialogue with all the
parties involved. Its members have visited the region
on a number of occasions, for the purpose of
encouraging the parties to fulfil their commitments,
and directly to convey the determination of the
Security Council to support the peace process. We
welcome the progress made in the political area. We
are pleased to note the peaceful manner in which the
return of political leaders to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is taking place, in particular that of Mr.
Jean-Pierre Bemba of the Mouvement pour la
liberation du Congo. In that regard, we are particularly
pleased to note that the members of the Transitional
Government have taken office, in particular the four
Vice-Presidents, who were sworn in yesterday at
Kinshasa. We wish the authorities of the Transitional
Government every success, and we trust that they will
be able to uphold their commitment to peace and
political dialogue.

There are still many outstanding issues,
particularly the question of human rights. In that
regard, there are many matters to be addressed by the
Transitional Government. The Government will have to
pay special attention to trials to punish the crimes and
violations that have taken place and to prevent
impunity. On the humanitarian level, every effort must
be made to ensure the safe return of refugees and
displaced persons. Lastly, we encourage neighbouring
countries to commit themselves to supporting the peace
process so that we may put an end to this conflict that
has caused so much damage to the Congolese
population and to the region in general.

