Mr. Gold (Israel): Let me begin by congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and on the manner in which this particular
meetings has been conducted so far. I would also like to
pay tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Amorim of
Brazil. Let me also add that I would like to pay a special
tribute to the Ambassador of Egypt, Mr. Nabil Elaraby.
Egypt is the first country with which Israel had diplomatic
relations in the Arab world, and Ambassador Elaraby has
been a gifted and experienced diplomat who represents
eloquently his country's point of View.

The State of Israel has a deep and historical interest in
the growth, integrity and respect of international
humanitarian law in general, and the Geneva Conventions
in particular. As a nation that lost one third of its
population in the Nazi occupation of Europe, in the most
heinous case of genocide in human history, Israel's own
birthright is engraved with a particular responsibility to
prevent this crime from occurring ever again against the
Jewish people and a universalist commitment to combat
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes wherever
they may occur.

In this context, Israel is concerned with what is
transpiring today regarding those international instruments
designed to protect civilians in armed conflict, including the
Geneva Conventions. The world community is facing at
least 20 ongoing armed conflicts around the globe that have
led to acute starvation, ethnic cleansing and the physical
eradication of entire communities.

A basic paradox confronts the international community
in this regard. For while the Geneva Conventions in
particular have received nearly universal support through
the accession of 188 countries, it remains a challenge to
ensure that the provisions are upheld on the ground and
accorded the respect they deserve.

 

The architects of the Geneva Conventions were
aware that this sort of situation might arise. Common
article 1 of the Fourth Geneva Convention states:
"The High Contracting Parties undertake to respect
and to ensure respect for the present Convention in
all circumstances."

The majority interpretation of this article at the close
of the 1949 Geneva Conference was that this language
was intended to require States to ensure that their own
populations, armies and institutions respect the
Convention. This meant that not only clear instructions be
given by States to the relevant departments of their
Governments, but also that these regulations be carried
out.

There are practical steps that every signatory to the
Fourth Geneva Convention can adopt in order to ensure
greater respect and adherence to its provisions. First,
States have a responsibility to educate their peoples
regarding the importance of humanitarian law in general.
This should not be confined to the small community of
legal experts in foreign ministries and universities who
write on this subject. States should disseminate
information about the Fourth Geneva Convention even
before they become involved in armed conflicts. For
example, the Fourth Geneva Convention should be
included in military training. In fact, the provisions of the
Convention should be included in the staff orders of every
soldier, which is the practice of the Israel Defence Forces.

Secondly, States can use their legal processes to
broaden adherence to the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Legal advice and representation should be given to every
civilian coming under military administration as a result
of armed conflict. Moreover, individuals facing
administrative decisions taken by the military should have
the right of appeal or redress. Israel, for its part, has
given the residents of the territories under its military
administration the right to challenge the actions of the
Israel Defense Forces by subjecting them to judicial
scrutiny. In other words, Palestinian Arabs were given the
right of appeal to Israel's Supreme Court while they were
under Israeli military administration. Parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention should consider adopting this
precedent set by the State of Israel.

To ensure respect for the Fourth Geneva Convention,
it is not only necessary to advance education on
humanitarian law and to utilize the legal process. It is
also necessary to ensure the principle of freedom of

 

access. Humanitarian norms, in short, are best protected by
transparency. Israel did its part in this regard by providing
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) with
access to territories under its military administration.

Clearly, when a State party opens its sensitive
operations to outside scrutiny, it can provide ammunition to
those with hostile agendas. Such openness, after all, will
not always guarantee objectivity on the part of those
reporting on humanitarian matters. But States should risk
unfair criticism rather than compromise freedom of access,
which is an essential check on the protection of human
rights. For bitter experience has demonstrated that visible
protection invariably is the only protection for many
civilians in times of war.

The greatest threat to international humanitarian law,
it must be remembered, is politicization. For it is more than
frequently the case that States that spotlight their concern
with alleged human rights violations in one case are in fact
attempting to divert international attention away from
serious breaches of international humanitarian law in some
of the most urgent cases. Thus great international efforts
may be spent on questionable cases, while massive human
rights violations are completely ignored in others. When
human rights are used to advance one single political
agenda while the rights of countless others are ignored,
human rights are denigrated, becoming a political
instrument of narrow interests instead of a universal
standard for the protection of all humanity.

The twin pillars of humanitarian protection are
objectivity and neutrality. The moment the neutrality of
international humanitarian institutions is threatened, the
protection of human rights itself is endangered. Not all
States can maintain freedom of access if they cannot trust
that they are being scrutinized by impartial standards. It
must be absolutely clear to occupying Powers and occupied
populations that the body responsible for overseeing the
implementation of international humanitarian protection is
guided by complete impartiality. That requires giving due
regard to unique situations as well as to the complexities
and security dilemmas that they entail.

States are not tested in times of complete peace and
prosperity. Adherence to international humanitarian norms
is not measured by what officials write in learned journals
or present at international seminars. The real test of States
as to the seriousness they attach to international
humanitarian law comes when they face clear and
immediate threats to their national security and nonetheless
demonstrate a decisive determination to educate their armed

 

forces, to incorporate their legal processes and to retain
transparency in order to protect the rights of civilians in
armed conflict.
