The President (spoke in French): I wish to warmly
welcome our friend, the Secretary-General, Ministers
and other distinguished representatives present in the
Security Council Chamber.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, Egypt, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Morocco,
the Netherlands, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia,
Slovakia, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and
the United Arab Emirates to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Zeid Ra'ad
Al Hussein, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights; His Beatitude Louis Raphael I Sako,
Patriarch of Babylon of the Chaldeans; and Mrs. Vian
Dakhil, member of the Iraqi Parliament.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Al Hussein,
who is joining today's meeting via video-teleconference
from Geneva.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
individuals to participate in this meeting: His
Excellency Mr. Stavros Lambrinidis, European Union
Special Representative for Human Rights, and His
Excellency Mr. Ufuk Gokcen, Permanent Observer for
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation to the United
Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/l76, a letter dated 12 March
2015 from the Charge d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of France to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on
the item under consideration.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

