Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to thank the
Lithuanian presidency for organizing this important
debate.

The framework for the protection of civilians has
increasingly advanced since the human tragedies of the
Rwanda and Srebrenica genocides. The need to protect
and assist civilians affected by armed conflict has been
stressed in numerous Security Council resolutions
since 1999. The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/20l3/689), the recommendations made by the Internal
Review Panel on the United Nations Action in Sri
Lanka, and the agenda entitled "Rights up front" have
been the latest examples that have contrubuted to the
elaboration of a conceptual and normative framework
related to the protection of civilians. It is now time to
look into how to translate that into practice.

However, the civilian death toll continues to
rise, with recent alarming signals coming from
Afghanistan, the Central African Republic and South
Sudan, among many other places. The Secretary-
General's report points out a multitude of challenges
in Syria, ranging from attacks on civilians and civilian
deaths to displacement, a lack and arbitrary denial of
humanitarian access, the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas, the indiscriminate use of heavy
wepons and aerial bombardments, summary and
extrajudicial executions, enforced disapperances and
attacks on schools, hospitals and other public facilities,
among many others.

The role of peacekeeping and other missions in the
protection of civilians in conflict is essential. It is high
time to start developing coherent and effective general
strategies in order to respond to the ever-worsening
situation of civilians in armed conflict. Those strategies
should also respond to the changing international
context and the new realities on the ground.

States have the primary responsibility for
protecting their civilians. Parties to conflict must
uphold humanitarian and human rights principles and
comply with their international humanitarian and
human rights obligations, ensure accountability and
provide the necessary support and services to those who
are suffering or have suffered in situations of conflict.
The United Nations and the international community
must assist them in this burdensome task, supporting
them in terms of capacity-building and the provision
of available resources in times of need, upon request,
and taking the necessary measures when the actors
primarily responsible fail to do so.

Monitoring and reporting are among the most
important contributions that peacekeeping and other
missions can provide, especially in field missions
where accessibility is a problem. United Nations and
other missions can be crucial sources of trustworthy
information, which can lead to awareness-raising as
well as to better planning, protection and response. That
increases the importance of objective, consistent and
responsible reporting. From this perspective, we also
fully support fact-finding missions and commissions of
inquiry, and we believe that we should be able to make
better use of their findings. To that end, States should
provide full access to mandated missions to observe
and report.

Furthermore, the United Nations, its missions and
its agencies could play a valuable coordinating role
among the many actors involved, which could contribute
towards realizing protection-of-civilians mandates. For
United Nations missions and peacekeeping operations to
achieve those goals, it is essential that they be provided
with necessary support, equipment and resources.

Disadvantaged categories of the population, such
as women, children, people with disabilities and older
persons, should be given special attention in the process
of the design of protection-of-civilians mandates and
strategies, as well as in the training programmes of
military, police and civilian personnel. The prevention
of sexual and gender-based violence in conflict, as well
as the provision of services to those suffering from such
violence, should be a particular area of focus.

There is a compelling need, in working on such
strategies, to listen more attentively to regional
countries and organizations, troop-contributing
countries and other relevant actors that are active
in crisis areas. The Secretary-General's report
(S/2013/689) highlights the comprehensive and cross-
cutting nature of efforts relating to the protection of
civilians and the importance of bringing together
different actors towards that end. Mediation and other
conflict-prevention mechanisms should be utilized to
the fullest extent. As such, we welcome the relevant
part of the concept note (S/2014/74, annex) prepared by
the Lithuanian presidency, which emphasizes the need
to consult a broad range of actors in the implementation
of civilian-protection tasks and beyond.

For protection-of-civilians mandates to be fully
realized, the strong support of the international
community is essential. The Syrian crisis, which is
resulting in the loss ofthousands of civilian lives before
our very eyes, is a sad and striking reminder of the
importance of unity and immediate joint action.

In concluding, I would like to stress our appreciation
to the hardworking personnel of the United Nations,
whose courageous and tireless efforts help prevent the
loss of the lives of thousands of civilians around the
globe every day.

