Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Clearly, we share all the feelings so
eloquently expressed to Ms. Norma Chan by colleagues
who spoke earlier. We wish her every success in her
future endeavours.

We thank Mr. Kai Eide for his comprehensive and
candid analysis of the situation in Afghanistan, as well
as for his introduction of the Secretary-General's
periodic report (S/2009/475). We welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Mr. Spanta, and
listened very attentively to his statement.

The main event during the reporting period was
the holding of presidential and local elections in
Afghanistan. The preliminary results have been
published, and we hope for the rapid conclusion of all
necessary procedures related to the partial recount by
the Electoral Complaints Commission. Based on those
results, we expect the rapid formation of a new Afghan
Government, which is especially critical in the light of
the significant tasks facing the country.

The very fact that the elections were held, despite
attempts by extremist forces to impede this expression
of the popular will, confirms the Afghan people's
determination to build a strong, independent and
democratic State.

The main obstacle on the path to the
reconstruction of the country remains the security
situation. The Secretary-General's data on the number
of incidents confirm that efforts by the Afghan
authorities and the international military presence have
not led to genuine improvements in this field. Indeed,
the situation continues to deteriorate rapidly. The
terrorist activity of the Taliban and Al-Qaida is
growing. These activities remain the main destabilizing
factor.

Against this backdrop, we are especially
concerned by the continuing civilian deaths as a result
of International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
operations. Work to prevent civilian casualties is being
undertaken. However, thus far, it has not been effective
enough.

We back the objective of national reconciliation
in Afghanistan. We cannot forget, however, that the
fight against the Taliban and Al-Qaida is not only
domestic in nature, but also has regional and
international dimensions. That is why the process of
national reconciliation should not run counter to
relevant Security Council decisions, including
implementation of the sanctions regime against the
Taliban and Al-Qaida.

We are against the creation of special conditions
for delisting of so-called reconciled members of the
Taliban. Who will guarantee that they will not return to
their past activities? If the Afghan leadership deems it
useful to forge contacts with former combatants, then
such dialogue should take place only with those who
have laid down their arms, who have recognized the
Government and the Constitution of Afghanistan and
who have rejected all links with Al-Qaida.

We are deeply concerned by the situation with
respect to the production and trafficking of narcotics.
Despite a reduction in the area under drug crops
cultivation and a relative decrease in the volume of
production of narcotic substances, it is premature to
talk of success here.

Thousands of people are dying as a result of the
narcotics trade. It is insufficient to apply only
economic measures to fight this, although stimulating
legitimate agricultural activity by the population
should be continued. There is an undoubted need to
bring new non-force methods to bear to eliminate drug
crops and destroy drug trafficking infrastructure. ISAF
possesses the necessary potential for this.

There is a need to move more actively to include
drug traffickers in the Security Council sanctions list.
Drug traffickers nurture terrorist and extremist
structures. The large-scale production of raw materials
for narcotics and narcotics themselves is one of the
main channels of financing for the terrorist movement
and, to a large extent, leads to the development of
negative phenomena such as corruption and
lawlessness.

We believe that the scale of the Afghan drugs
threat requires that work be stepped up at various
levels. We are referring here, inter alia, to the
importance of pooling counter-narcotics efforts of the
NATO-led ISAF in close cooperation with the
Government of the country and with the actions of
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), with
the objective of establishing an anti-narcotics security
belt along Afghanistan's borders. In the field of
countering terrorism, drug trafficking and organized
crime in general, there is a need to more actively
harness the potential of regional institutions that have
demonstrated their effectiveness in this field. I am
referring here, first and foremost, to the CSTO, and to
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO).

We take note of the initiative by a number of
European States of organizing an international
conference in Afghanistan to discuss future assistance
for the country during the post-electoral period. The
main thing here is that this proposal should enjoy the
backing of the Afghans themselves. We have noted
Mr. Spanta's statement on this matter here today. Such
an event should be held after a new Afghan
Government has been formed and has started its work.

In Afghanistan, we all share a common interest,
namely to provide security and to establish a
democratic and independent State. We back ISAF and
the coalition forces. To this end, we have concluded
bilateral agreements on military transit with the
Federal Republic of Germany, France and, most
recently, with Spain. An agreement has been signed on
the transit of non-military NATO shipments. There is
an important agreement on military transit with the
United States of America. We hope for the rapid launch
of the implementation of the Plan of Action of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization Member States and
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, adopted at the
special conference on Afghanistan held in Moscow. We
invite all interested States and international
organizations to promote the implementation of the
Plan ofAction.

The Russian Federation is genuinely interested in
achieving a stable settlement in Afghanistan. We will
work to resolve this issue in close cooperation with our
Afghan and international partners.

