Mr. Van Dunem "Mbinda" (Angola): Let me begin
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the current month.
Let me also congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Bill
Richardson, for the way in which he conducted the
proceedings of this Council during his mandate.

The past 30 days have been a time of high
expectations among the members of the Security Council
and the international community at large, waiting to see
whether the decision and the deadline set by the Security
Council in its resolutions 1127 (1997) and 1130 (1997)
would be fully complied with, or if this Council would
again and for the second time be forced to apply new
sanctions against UNITA.

As the facts on the ground show and the Secretary-
General's report clearly demonstrates, UNITA provided no
sign of cooperation or of good faith and political will. It
has yet to fulfil three crucial obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol, namely, the handover to the Government of all
localities under its control, the demilitarization of its
remaining troops and the cessation of its hostile anti-
Government propaganda.

As of today, no substantial progress has been made
in the demilitarization of its military wing. The figures
advanced by that organization with regard to its current
military strength are false, fabricated and therefore totally
unacceptable. The truth is that UNITA still maintains
about 35,000 heavily armed men, equipped with
sophisticated artillery pieces and other war mate'riel.

I must underline that unless these forces are
completely disbanded, no peace will be achieved in
Angola, because they are the main source of tensions and
insecurity.

As to the process of the normalization of State
administration, despite the progress made, we find
ourselves far from its conclusion. The process is
experiencing delays caused by obstacles systematically
raised by UNITA. It remains unthinkable for UNITA to
hand over Bailundo and Andulo to Government control.
With regard to UNITA's radio station, though steps were
taken towards transforming it into a nonpartisan station,
very little progress was made. UNITA's anti-Government
propaganda continues, now based mainly in UNITA's so-
called representations in some foreign countries.

One can see easily that UNITA's leadership has
completely disregarded the urging of this Council and
blatantly violated its resolutions 1127 (1997) and 1130
(1997). All the international appeals for it to implement
its share of the Lusaka Protocol, which is the only basis
for peace, stability and development in Angola, have
fallen on deaf ears.

 

Instead, UNITA, as in the past, has systematically
resorted to manoeuvres aimed at impressing the members
of the Security Council and the international community,
with a view to avoiding the entry into force of sanctions as
set out in operative paragraph 4 of resolution 1127 (1997).
The international community, and this Council in
particular, cannot and should not let itself be misled by an
organization which so far has given no proof of abandoning
its quest to take power by force. If this Council fails to use
the means at its disposal to impede UNITA from carrying
out its intentions, a new outburst of violence will be
witnessed in Angola, with serious consequences for peace
and stability throughout the entire central and southern
African region.

The imposition of strong international restrictive
measures against UN ITA remains the only alternative sure
to dissuade that organization's leadership from war and urge
it to take the path of peace and democracy.

I would like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to paragraph 7 of resolution 1127 (1997),
which states:

"the provisions of paragraph 4 above shall come into
force ...unless the Security Council decides, on the
basis of a report by the Secretary-General, that
UNITA has taken concrete and irreversible steps to
comply with all the obligations".

Today, when a new deadline for UNITA to fulfil its
obligations has come to an end, what we can conclude is
that UNITA has not taken the necessary steps to comply
with all the obligations set out in resolution 1127 (1997).
Therefore, we cannot expect less than immediate
application of the measures set forth in paragraph 4 of
resolution 1127 (1997), for the good of the people of
Angola and to ensure the Council's moral authority.

The draft resolution to be adopted today goes in that
direction and is an expression of the Council's
determination to bring peace to Angola. We look forward
to the UNITA leadership's understanding this strong
message from the international community and speeding up
the conclusion of the peace process.

