Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): Once again, the Security
Council meets today in order to discuss the situation in
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina - a situation,
in our opinion, caused by the continued and systematic
aggression against the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of a Member State of this Organization, namely, the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We, however, like the rest of the international
community, find ourselves at a point where we have to
express our profound alarm and shock for the
continuation of war in that part of Europe.

In the last three to four years since the fighting
erupted in that area, many resolutions have been adopted
by this Council, as well as by many other international
forums, calling on the parties involved to refrain from the
use of force and to move steadily towards peaceful
options in an attempt to demonstrate their political will
and determination to resolve their differences peacefully.
However, these calls and demands have not been heard,

 

mainly due to the unreadiness of the Bosnian Serbs to
adhere to the peace process.

We regret this outcome and today call yet again on
those concerned to accept the Contact Group Peace Plan as
a starting point. We believe that if the party concerned had
accepted the plan it is very unlikely it would be in the
situation in which it finds itself today.

Since the beginning of the conflict in the former
Yugoslavia, the international community has exerted
strenuous efforts to bring the parties one step closer to
peace. But, due to the position of one side - the Bosnian
Serbs - all those efforts did not yield the expected results.
On the contrary, in the last few months we have witnessed
an unprecedented twist of events as never before. The
United Nations peace-keepers came under direct and
deliberate attack by parties, to the point where they were
used as human shields. Civilians in the safe areas are
shelled and "ethnically cleansed" before the very eyes of
the international community, which has an obligation to
protect the lives of those civilians who are under the daily
threat of Serbian atrocities, a recent example of which was
the last attack on the safe areas of Srebrenica and Zepa,
which have now fallen into the hands of the Bosnian Serbs.

Thousands of men have been taken by the Bosnian
Serbs, and unfortunately we are told officially by the
Secretariat that no access to the detainees has been given to
the United Nations or the International Committee of the
Red Cross. Their whereabouts are not known. This is not
acceptable to the international community.

Oman, like the rest of the international community,
accepts neither this new escalation of fighting by attacking
United Nations peace-keepers nor the status quo prevailing
in those safe areas which recently became subject to the
policy of "ethnic cleansing". In this regard, we add our
voice to those who have called on all those responsible to
fully adhere to the repeated calls of the Security Council,
as set out in the statements of its President on 20 and 25
July 1995, which demanded that the Bosnian Serb forces
withdraw from the safe areas of Srebrenica and Zepa and
respect the status of the safe areas and ensure respect for
human standards in accordance with international
humanitarian law.

My delegation strongly supports the call for the
unconditional release of all those who are detained.

Alarming and horrifying reports were revealed in the
Council today by those who have witnessed and
experienced the Bosnian Serbs' massacres at Srebrenica
and Zepa. Oman believes that there is an obligation - a
moral obligation, a political obligation - on all members
of the international community to work together united
with one voice that would say "No" to "ethnic cleansing",
"No" to rape of Muslim women and "No" to the
continued violations of the safe areas. We believe the
time has come for this stand: enough massacres, enough
killings, enough torture have taken place.

We pay tribute, a special tribute, to the Secretary-
General, to his Special Representative to all United
Nations personnel, United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations for their efforts to find a
peaceful solution in that area and to alleviate the
sufferings of the people of that region.

Finally, in the spirit of consensus, because the draft
resolution focuses on the humanitarian plight, my
delegation will vote in favour of the text before us.

