Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution
because, naturally, we support the extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL). We support UNMIL's work in Liberia,
which is particularly necessary as the elections
approach. We think a mid- and long-term presence of
the United Nations in Liberia is necessary to complete
the peacebuilding work that has been successfully
conducted in that country.

We call on Liberia to redouble its efforts during
the transition process to achieve an effective transfer of
UNMIL tasks to the national authorities, particularly in
the sphere of security. Moreover, the Security Council
must responsibly manage the peacekeeping missions
that it mandates. The missions must be adapted to the
needs of the countries in which they operate. UNMIL,
in a country that has been at peace for nearly eight
years, is no exception to that principle of good
management.

Also at stake is the capacity of the Security
Council to respond to new theatres of conflict that are
emerging elsewhere on the continent, such as in the
Sudan, which require more Blue Helmets, more
logistical support and more financing. It is important to
regularly review all of our missions and to be able to
adapt them, both at the top and the bottom, so as to
make best use of our not unlimited resources. For that
reason, we fully support the Secretary-General's
recommendation, contained in paragraph 73 of his
twenty-third progress report on UNMIL (S/20ll/497),
for a thorough review of UNMIL, its mandate, its
configuration and its military and police strength by
31 May 2012 at the latest, based on the Secretariat's
proposals that are expected on 30 April 2012 at the
latest. This point could have figured in the new
UNMIL mandate.

When the elections are over and the President is
inaugurated, we call on the Secretariat to immediately
send a team to Liberia to conduct, as the Secretary-
General himself suggested, a review of UNMIL's
format. The Security Council will then have to take
action on this issue in the weeks following the receipt
of the proposals, between now and the end of May
2012. We hope that the major progress achieved by
Liberia will permit the withdrawal of UNMIL's
military component.
11-50062

