Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to express my
appreciation to Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing, which clearly shows the extent of the
deteriorating situation and the danger posed to the
occupied Palestinian territories and to security and
stability in the region.

Despite the fact that more than six months have
elapsed since the Israeli forces perpetrated their
massacre in the Gaza Strip and the Security Council
adopted resolution 1860 (2009), we still cannot see any
sign that the occupying authorities intend to change
their inhuman behaviour towards the civilians in the
Gaza Strip. For the third consecutive year, we see their
lack of will to end the siege and the blockade, to open
the border crossings closed under a policy of collective
punishment that runs counter to all international and
humanitarian law, and to desist from committing grave
violations in the occupied Palestinian territories, some
of which easily qualify as war crimes under
international law and international humanitarian law.

Nor do we see any sign of international will to
break the world's silence and pressure the occupation
authorities to put an end to the suffering of civilians in
the Gaza Strip. That silence has encouraged the
occupation forces to commit yet more crimes and to
intensify their practices, behaving like a State that is
above the law.

At this juncture, we would like to commend the
role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the efforts
made by its personnel in the face of threats and danger.
We strongly condemn all aggression against its
personnel and the false accusations levelled against
them by the occupation forces.

Conditions in the West Bank are no better than
those in the Gaza Strip, which shows that, despite
Israel's allegations and pretexts with regard to the Gaza
Strip, Israeli officials have not ceased to declare their
intention to continue expanding their settlement
activities and to apply policies that seek to rapidly
Judaize Jerusalem by confiscating identity cards and
land. Meanwhile, the settlers continue their crimes
against Palestinian civilians in the occupied West
Bank, which more often than not are committed with
the help and support of the occupation forces, which
protect them while ignoring the complaints of
Palestinian civilians.

Those measures have been intensified by the
continued construction of the racist separation wall
despite the advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice and by blockades of ring roads and the
bypass roads that cut across the West Bank. The land
that has been taken from the West Bank as a result of
the settlements, the ring roads and the separation wall
totals 2,703 square kilometres, which constitutes 46 per
cent of the whole area of the West Bank. Yet, we still
talk about the establishment of a Palestinian State at a
time when 46 per cent of the West Bank has been taken
by the Israelis and their settlers.

I would like to mention the situation of
Palestinian detainees and prisoners, especially women.
Here, I refer to the report adopted by the United
Nations Development Fund for Women, which refers to
the grave and distressing situation of female
Palestinian prisoners in Israeli detention centres. The
report says that most of them are exposed to
psychological and mental pressure and torture,
including insults, beatings, threats and sexual
harassment. The report also states that 13 per cent of
these female prisoners are under the age of 18.

Any serious effort to achieve peace in the Middle
East must start by putting an end to the international
silence with regard to Israel. This means that the
international community should not fear Israel but
should dare to call on it to freeze all settlement

activities and to halt and remove all settlements. The
Council has been silent, which has encouraged Israel to
continue those policies. It has rejected any mention of
a racist State, instead talking about a Jewish Israeli
State, and it has failed to condemn the enactment of
new laws against the Arab people. That threatens a new
Nakba, lays the groundwork for the transfer and
displacement of 1.5 million Palestinians from land
occupied in 1948 and denies the right of Palestinian
refugees to return under international law and
international resolutions.

