Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling this important debate today. I also wishto thank Mr. Edi Rama, Prime Minister of the Republic of Albania, for taking the time to come here, as I think it is very important for the Security Council to hear from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We congratulate him on assuming the role of Chairperson-in-Office and wish to assure him of the United Kingdom's support. The OSCE is a key pillar of the rules-based international system, just like the United Nations itself. It is a crucial institution for European and Euro-Atlantic security. As Prime Minister Rama highlighted, it is important that, in discharging that responsibility, the OSCE be able to make a real difference on the ground. As other speakers have noted, the people of Ukraine feel that need particularly acutely. We welcome Mr. Rama's recent visit to Ukraine, where he had an opportunity to witness at first-hand the reality for people living near the line of contact. We believe that he is correct to prioritize the OSCE's response to the conflict in eastern Ukraine. The United Kingdom supports the push for full, safe and unimpeded access for the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, as well as adequate resources to ensure that it is able to fulfil its mandate. As other speakers have mentioned, we, too, are deeply concerned by the deterioration of human rights in Crimea since the illegal annexation, including arrests, ill-treatment, torture and intimidation against political opponents and minorities and the denial of basic human rights and religious freedoms to those who do not accept the forced imposition of Russian legislation and citizenship on the peninsula. Therefore, the United Kingdom urgently calls on Russia to immediately release the 89 or more political prisoners currently detained in Russia and in Crimea. We welcome President Zelenskyy's commitment to finding a diplomatic solution to the conflict in eastern Ukraine. Ukraine's recent delivery of confidence-building measures led to the December Normandy Format summit in Paris and a further prisoner exchange. We look to Russia to abide by the Minsk agreements commitments it signed up to and to use its influence to ensure the separatists do the same. We also call on Russia to play its part to enable further disengagement and full access by the International Committee of the Red Cross to non-Government-controlled areas. Russia needs to fully respect Ukraine's independence and territorial integrity, withdraw its forces from all of Ukraine and end its illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol. Crimea and Donbas are part of Ukraine - what Russia has done and continues to do there breaches its obligations under international law and presents a serious challenge to the international rules-based order. We welcome the OSCE _ chairmanship's prioritization of conflict resolution, including the work of the Special Monitoring Mission and the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine, as well as the resolution ofthe other protracted conflicts in the OSCE area. Like others, we attach great importance to the work of OSCE field presences across the region. The United Kingdom has the honour to support Prime Minister Rama's chairmanship by chairing Security Committee of the OSCE. We are very grateful for his determination to tackle organized crime and underline the importance of ensuring that action is taken in compliance with international human rights standards. The OSCE's cooperation with the United Nations on countering terrorism and violent extremism is particularly strong. We welcome the OSCE's partnership with the Security Council's counter-terrorism bodies and look forward to the OSCE joint forthcoming conference with the Office of Counter-Terrorism in Switzerland on foreign terrorist fighters. The unique value of the OSCE lies in the consensus approach to principles and verifiable commitments allowing for mutual benefits and the prevention of miscalculation or escalation. In particular, the United Kingdom would like to see the preservation and enhanced delivery of existing confidence- and security- building mechanisms in 2020, including the Open Skies Treaty and the Vienna Document. We commend the focus of Prime Minister Rama on the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and the promotion of the role of women in peace and security. Preventing sexual violence in conflict also remains a top priority for my Government. We are very proud to give Prime Minister Rama our full support for his chairmanship of the OSCE.
