The President: I thank Mr. Fernandez Amunategui
for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guatemala.

Allow me to deviate from past practice by taking
the floor at the beginning of our debate instead of
at the end. I am doing this because I consider it an
honour for Guatemala, as well as a personal honour for
myself, to preside over this first substantive meeting
of the Security Council during the month of October.
This is for us a historic event; this is the first time that
Guatemala has assumed the presidency of the Security
Council since the founding of the United Nations.
I did not want to wait until the end of the debate to
make mention of that fact. We are all the more pleased
given the topic of today's debate: the renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), above all because of Guatemala's
commitment to Haiti.

As the Council is aware, the countries of our region
feel a sense of ownership regarding MINUSTAH.
Twelve Latin American countries contribute troops
and police; and the Force Commander has always
hailed from our region, as has, most of the time, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We
are pleased that a Guatemalan, Edmond Mulet, has
in the past occupied this important post. We are also
pleased that our troops have been present in Haiti since
the establishment of the first Mission in 1993, and
continuously since the establishment of MINUSTAH.

A few weeks ago, I had the privilege of making
a brief visit to our contingent of 137 personnel in
Port-au-Prince; I also took that opportunity to visit
MINUSTAH headquarters. This debate therefore has a
strong personal resonance for me, for my country, for
my region, and, of course, for the United Nations.

In that regard, I would like to make just three brief
points.

First, we believe that the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/678) paints a promising picture. It
combines the required caution with the hope necessary
to continue moving forward. We congratulate Haiti on
the swearing in of a new Government, the publication of
the correction version of the constitutional amendments
and the establishment of the Superior Council of
the Judiciary. All of those achievements represent
important milestones in Haiti's efforts to strengthen its
democratic and rule-of-law institutions.

We are also pleased that the establishment of the
Permanent Electoral Council is back on track after
some setbacks, and we trust that the electoral process
in Haiti will resume after delays of almost one year.

Secondly, Guatemala will remain committed to
Haiti and to United Nations peacekeeping operations
for as long as necessary. We support the MINUSTAH
reconfiguration and consolidation process. We look
forward to more details on this new consolidation plan.
Carrying it out will require intensive coordination
among a wide range of national and international
stakeholders, and it will be subject to various
development and implementation timelines.

With regard to security, we note that the level of
operational effectiveness of the Haitian National Police
will constitute the main benchmark in setting the pace
for the drawdown of the Mission's uniformed personnel.

We fully support the development of a transition
compact that will make it possible to measure the
progress made in the stabilization process, going
beyond the work of MINUSTAH into the realms of
development and institution-building. In that respect,
we welcome the recent launch of the aid coordination
mechanism presented by the Haitian authorities last
week in New York at the beginning of the general
debate.

Thirdly, I would like in particular to commend the
work done by Mr. Mariano Fernandez Amunategui
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of MINUSTAH during a period marked by
difficulties and challenges. He has carried his work
forward in an outstanding manner, as evidenced
this morning by his presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General. Guatemala will continue to support
his work.

In conclusion, I should like to stress that Guatemala
fully supports the international community's efforts
to assist Haiti in the reconstruction and strengthening
of its institutions through a permanent and strategic
partnership aimed at creating a better future for Haiti.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

