Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): Honduras views with extreme concern the
continuing deterioration of the security and humanitarian
situation in Burundi, exacerbated by the coup d 'etat of last
25 July, and by the threat that the persistence of this
situation represents to the peace and security of the Great
Lakes region.

The delegation of Honduras considers that the ethnic
violence, the suffering of the population of Burundi and the
exodus of refugees will persist, affecting the stability of the
region at large, until constitutional order is restored and the
necessary political dialogue begins between the parties to
allow for a broad settlement of the situation.

My delegation therefore makes an urgent appeal to the
Burundian parties to make every necessary effort to
 

generate mutual trust and to create the conditions for
peace and national reconciliation. We urge them to find
without delay the appropriate political mechanisms to
make it possible to find a satisfactory solution to the
crisis, with the understanding that only a broad and
permanent political settlement providing for how the
Government will be shared between the Hutu majority
and the Tutsi minority can constitute the key element for
establishing peace and harmony between Burundians,
putting Burundi back on the path towards democracy and
making possible international cooperation for
reconstruction, development and the stability of the
country. It is only through dialogue that the democratic
and institutional consensus will be achieved to help bring
peace, security and tranquillity to the population of
Burundi.

We understand that in the present circumstances the
promotion of a broad-based political dialogue in Burundi
is a difficult task. For this reason, the support that this
Council can give to the resumption of dialogue and
negotiations under the auspices of the Mwanza peace
process is important, as is the support that it can give to
the efforts made by former President Nyerere to facilitate
a lasting political solution to the crisis. We also consider
essential the support that this Council can give to the
regional efforts made and initiatives taken to help find a
peaceful solution to the situation in Burundi, in particular
the decisions taken at the second Arusha summit.

My delegation is aware that the present situation in
Burundi represents a threat to the peace and security of
the Great Lakes region. There is still the possibility of an
escalation of the violence in Burundi which could attain
a regional scope. For this reason we recognize the
importance of the different regional and international
initiatives, in particular those of the Organization of
African Unity and the efforts of former President Nyerere
to find a peaceful solution to the crisis in Burundi.

In connection with the humanitarian situation, we
believe that until an end is put to the ethnic violence, to
the climate of impunity and to the violations of human
rights, genocide will remain a possibility in Burundi. For
this reason we are of the opinion that, at the same time as
efforts are being made toward the establishment of
dialogue among the Burundian parties, contingency
planning must continue for a rapid humanitarian response
in the event the violence should become widespread or
the situation in the country worsen.

 
My delegation understands that it is up to the
Burundians themselves to shape their own destiny and to
overcome the obstacles to the attainment of peace and
national reconciliation. The most important thing right now
is the prompt return to constitutional order and the
settlement of disputes by peaceful means. We reiterate our
appeal to organize a dialogue without delay, a dialogue that
by bringing together all the political forces of Burundi can
allow for a democratic and institutional consensus, which
is the only realistic way to find a permanent solution to the
crrsrs.

