We thank Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and Under- Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their comprehensive review of the situation in Yemen. We welcome the decision of the Arab coalition to unilaterally stop all military operations for the next two weeks with a prospect of extension. In that regard, we supported the relevant Security Council press statement adopted in line with the call of the Secretary-General and Special Envoy Griffiths on all parties involved in the Yemeni conflict to put an end to the confrontation, which has recently exceeded five years, and to take all necessary steps to combat the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Regrettably, reports indicate that hostilities continue. We strongly believe that all sides should cease hostilities and embark upon the path of political settlement. We support Mr. Griffiths's efforts to establish contacts between representatives of the Government of Yemen, Ansar Allah and the Arab coalition under United Nations auspices in order to ensure de-escalation, a sustainable ceasefire, confidence-building measures and the launch of a comprehensive and inclusive political process in Yemen. Dialogue is absolutely essential. We do not expect instant results, but we would very much hope that this time, with this dialogue, there is a chance of entering a new stage of conflict resolution in Yemen. For our part, we will continue to provide support to United Nations efforts. Humanitarian assistance remains a priority, as well as response to the threat posed by an outbreak of COVID-19. But let us also not forget that Yemen and some 20 million Yemenis have already gone through other severe epidemics, including cholera and diphtheria, and, what is no less sad, hunger. It is important to ensure unimpeded access for humanitarian and health-care workers to all areas of the country. We are hopeful that Mr. Griffiths's efforts will bear fruit this time. We will continue to engage and to be cooperative.
