Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mark Lowcock for his
briefing and to commend him on his tireless efforts and
those of his team in their response to the urgent and
severe humanitarian situation in Syria.

To address that urgency and severity, a month
ago almost to the day the Security Council adopted
resolution 2401 (2018). We thus collectively and
unanimously demanded that all the parties to the
conflict cease hostilities throughout the country to
allow for sustained and unimpeded humanitarian
access to civilians in need and for medical evacuations.

A month later, what is the situation? Not only has
resolution 2401 (2018) not been implemented, but the
humanitarian situation in Syria has worsened. The
civilian population is living in despair, trapped between
bargaining and fighting, particularly in eastern Ghouta.

Over the past few weeks, not only has the fighting
has not subsided; it has doubled in intensity, with a
land offensive launched by the regime, supported by its
allies Russia and Iran. The carefully planned offensive
was unremitting, using the double strategy of terror and
parallel negotiations that was used in Aleppo to obtain
the surrender of combatants and the displacement
of civilians. For a month there has not been a single
day when eastern Ghouta, which has been besieged
and starved for years, has not suffered indiscriminate
shelling by the regime and its supporters. They have
systematically bombed schools and hospitals and killed
more than 1,700 civilians, including more than 300
children. Those deaths are the result of a deliberate
strategy of the Syrian regime to forcibly bend an entire
population, annihilate any form of opposition and
remain in power.

Nothing should justify breaches of international
humanitarian law. Not one humanitarian convoy
has been authorized to enter eastern Ghouta since
15 March, and almost no humanitarian assistance has
been delivered in recent weeks. Meanwhile, there are
immense needs among those still in eastern Ghouta, the
majority of whom are women and children.

For several days we have been witnessing forced
evacuations of populations from eastern Ghouta, which
could constitute crimes against humanity and war
crimes. We have demanded humanitarian access to
eastern Ghouta in order to provide assistance to people
in their own homes, where they wish to stay as long
as the ceasefire allows. That was the reason for the
adoption of resolution 2401 (2018). Instead, we have
witnessed just the opposite - an escalation of violence
to force a massive displacement of civilians. Bombing
has forced civilians, approximately 80,000 people, to
flee. The displacement of people from eastern Ghouta
is an integral part of the military strategy of the Syrian
regime to force the opposition to capitulate. Once again,
civilians are the primary victims.

As I said, those forced displacements could
constitute crimes against humanity and war crimes.
Evidence of such crimes will be collected, preserved
and used. We were clear on that point during the Arria-
formula Council meeting with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights a few days ago. Some
55,000 civilians are now in eight collective camps
managed by the Syrian regime around eastern Ghouta,
without water or electricity and in disastrous sanitary
conditions. Their lot has not improved; their hell has
simply moved a few kilometres away. We are extremely
concerned about the fate of those civilians who now
live in overcrowded conditions, with no assurances of
protection or security, with no guarantee that they will
return home.

How do we protect civilians in the situation I have
just described? It is absolutely urgent to protect those
who can still be protected. Although the 30-day cessation
of hostilities demanded by resolution 2401 (2018) has
still not been implemented, that demand remains, more
urgent and relevant than ever. The resolution is still the
framework for our collective action. In that regard, and
in line with the briefing just given by Mark Lowcock, I
would like to underscore three vital demands.

First, it is indispensable and urgent that humanitarian
convoys be allowed to enter eastern Ghouta daily and
with adequate security. Although humanitarian needs
are great, the regime continues to deliberately block aid.
United Nations convoys must be able to enter and make
deliveries. Fighting must cease long enough to allow
for delivery, unloading and distribution of supplies,
including of medical assistance.
The second demand concerns civilians who remain
in Ghouta, who have the right to emergency humanitarian
assistance and to protection. Aid must reach them
where they are. To that end, the United Nations and its
international and local humanitarian partners must be
able to work safely on site to assess the needs of those
populations. It is an obligation under international
humanitarian law, but it is the minimum required
to provide tangible assistance to those concerned.
The protection that is due them under international
humanitarian law must be unconditionally guaranteed.
In that regard I call again on the responsibility of all
actors with influence on the Syrian regime.

The third demand, which has taken on new
importance in recent days, is for assistance to be provided
to the displaced civilians in camps outside Ghouta.
Very concretely, that means that those populations, who
have been forced to leave everything behind in order to
survive, must be assured of their safety, access to basic
necessities and a chance to return home when they so
desire. Care must be taken that they are not threatened
with retaliation, threats or persecution of any kind.

In order to ensure that they are protected, the
United Nations and its partners must be able to escort
civilians who have been evacuated from their point of
departure to their destination in the collective shelters.
The United Nations and its partners must be granted
continuous access to civilians living in those camps.
We hope that the United Nations can strengthen its
support to displaced persons who have fled eastern
Ghouta. That would call for an increase in the number
of international staff on site. We hope that approval will
be granted to that end as soon as possible. It would also
call for security guarantees for humanitarian workers.

The situation in Afrin is also extremely worrisome.
A great many civilians are in a critical situation. More
that 180,000 people have been displaced. A single
convoy was authorized, yesterday, which is insufficient
given the tremendous needs of the population. Ongoing
fighting in Afrin has forced the Syrian Democratic
Forces to halt operations against Da'esh, whose threat,
as we all know, has not dissappeared. Our position
on the issue is the same. The legitimate concerns of
Turkey with regard to the security of its borders cannot
in any way justify a lasting military presence deep
inside Syria.

More than ever, we need the fighting to end.
We call on all parties on the ground to conclude the
negotiations under way and respect a cessation of
hostilities. We support the efforts of the Special Envoy
for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and his commitment
to resuming the Geneva process and to reaching a
lasting political solution in line with resolution 2254
(2015) that starts with the establishment of an inclusive
constitutional committee, under the auspices of Mr. De
Mistura, It is the only way to end the Syrian crisis.

It is absolutely essential to work on both the
humanitarian and political fronts. I appeal on behalf of
France, first, to those who can make a difference on the
ground, starting with Russia. It is never to late to save
lives. Let us be well aware that without urgent, decisive
action, the worst is undoubtedly yet to come in the form
of a worsening and enlargement of the conflict.

The time has come for us to learn seriously
the lessons of the Syrian tragedy. This tragedy is
the illustration of a new global disorder where the
rappelling ropes have disappeared due to a lack of
strong international governance, a lack of a power of last
resort and a lack of convergence among key actors - to
which we add the well-known attitude of Russia.

In other words, if we want to avoid other tragedies
of this type in future, it is essential to structure the
multipolar world in which we now find ourselves
around a robust multilateralism embodied by a
reformed United Nations. It is the only alternative to
the fragmentation of the world and the return to the
zones of influence - and our history teaches us all the
dangers of that - and it is with the settlement of the
Syrian crisis, which is our priority today and which is
the emergency before us, one of the other challenges of
our generation.

