Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, on behalf of Ambassador Amil and the
Pakistan delegation for the opportunity to participate in
this important debate initiated under your presidency.
We align ourselves with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of Morocco on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. Let me also thank our three
briefers for their important briefings this morning.

Peacekeeping is today the biggest enterprise of
the United Nations, rightly termed its flagship activity.
It is restoring peace, bringing solace and offering hope
to millions of people afflicted by conflict and complex
crises around the world. Success in recent years has
raised expectations - and rightly so - as well as the
demand for United Nations peacekeeping. And the
ensuing challenges of making peacekeeping work even
better are equally complex and exceptional. We believe
it is the collective responsibility of Member States to
ensure a more effective and successful employment of
this tool for the maintenance of international peace and
security. It is in this spirit and context that we see the
initiative.

Pakistan brings multiple perspectives to the
debate. First, it is a leading contributor of military and
police personnel to United Nations missions over the
years. Pakistan's current contribution of 11,135 is an
all-time high, constituting over 12 per cent of total
United Nations deployments. We have been the overall
top contributor since the advent of the surge in demand
in 2003. A large part of our participation is in the most
difficult and complex situations in Africa.

Secondly, Pakistan is also host to one of the first
United Nations peacekeeping missions, the United
Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan,
a mission which has played an invaluable role in
confidence-building and maintaining peace and
stability in that region.

Thirdly, our field perspective is complemented by
our continuing and deep engagement in the policy
discussions on peacekeeping. In the Council itself,
Pakistan was the first to put a special focus on the issue
of surge and other growing challenges of complex
missions, in which regard a wide-ranging presidential
statement (S/PRST/2004/16) was adopted in May
2004.

Pakistan believes that the challenges facing
peacekeeping need to be addressed in a comprehensive
manner and with a common strategic vision. The
Brahimi report (S/2000/809) made a pivotal
contribution to that work and remains relevant today,
although not fully implemented.

On the initiative of the Secretary-General,
Member States approved, during the sixty-first session
of the General Assembly, a major peacekeeping reform
proposal aimed at strengthening the overall capacity to
achieve greater efficiency and effectiveness in the
implementation of mission mandates. A review of that
process is now due. Peace Operations 2010 is also
underway in parallel. In our view, any new initiative or
process, whether driven by Member States or by the
Secretariat, should be gauged in the context of its
relevance and coherence with the ongoing processes, as
well as the role and responsibilities of the relevant
United Nations bodies with regard to peacekeeping.

Our collective efforts to address the challenges
and to attain the objectives of peacekeeping cut across
a range of key issues, some of which were mentioned
by other delegations today. I would like to highlight a
few that are essential for success.

The first is the continuing need to adapt
peacekeeping and equip it for the changing
requirements. Secondly, the basic and agreed tenets of
peacekeeping must be respected. Thirdly, the identity
of United Nations peacekeeping vis-a-vis other kinds
of peace operations must be preserved. Fourthly, there
is need for equal attention in addressing inter-State
conflicts and intra-State crises. Fifthly, a truly holistic
approach to conflict prevention must be
operationalized, addressing the root causes of conflicts
and preventing their relapse through a fuller interface
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding and formulation of
the right exit strategies. Sixth, cooperation potential
with regional organizations within the framework of
the Charter should be exploited, making use of the
comparative advantages but without substituting the
primary role of the United Nations. Seventh, clear,
realistic and achievable mandates must be formulated
based on an objective and comprehensive analysis of
realities on the ground and provision of commensurate
resources to enable the missions to fulfil those
mandates. Eighth, and perhaps most crucial, is the
political support and collective commitment of
Member States to United Nations peacekeeping.

In our view, those overarching issues should
guide the process of any strategic oversight. The issues
listed in the presidency's non-paper - preparation,
planning, oversight and evaluation - are right on spot.
Those are the core functions and activities that need to
be given prime attention, not only by the Council but
also in the work of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. To better perform those core
functions, some of the questions identified in the
non-paper are quite relevant.

There are three sets of priorities: first, reinforcing
interaction among all key actors; secondly, enhancing
the flow and exchange of information in all directions
and at all stages; and thirdly, improving the capacity to
generate accurate and objective analysis and
assessments and feeding them into decision-making
processes that are designed to perform the core tasks
better.

From the nature and scope of those activities, it is
obvious that they cannot be only Council-centric. As
the central body writing and reviewing peacekeeping
mandates, the Council should carry out all the
necessary internal thinking and improvement of its
working methods so that it can better carry out its
responsibilities. We welcome all efforts in that
direction. However, since mandates are to be
implemented on the ground by troop-contributing
countries - the majority of which are not members of
the Council - there is an obvious need to bring them
fully into the loop. That requires a genuine and
meaningful partnership, which should extend from the
deployment and operational aspects to a role in
decision-making and policy formulation. We believe
that partnership with troop-contributing countries must
also encompass their proper representation in
operational terms, as well as top managerial positions
both in the field and at United Nations Headquarters.

Member States would agree that effective
strategic oversight also requires full adherence to the
principle of unified command and control under the
United Nations. In the field, that must apply to all
peacekeeping operations. There also appears to be a
need for strategic oversight in the Secretariat, which is
still grappling with the complexities of a new structure.

The strategic objective of the Security Council is
the maintenance of international peace and security.
That is also the objective of peacekeeping. We believe
that some of the difficulties of decision-making -
where and where not to deploy, where to strengthen,
where to cut or draw down - could be overcome by
establishing peace and security as an objective and as
the main benchmark. We agree that that is easier said
than done. However, if individual interests and
expediencies could give way to that common objective,
things could be done better by the Council.

In the same vein, we believe that cost, although it
is a consideration, should not override the interest of
saving lives and preventing conflicts. There must also
be efficient management of resources. However, as
previous speakers have said, resources must not be
stretched to a limit that risks the viability and the
success of missions. The fact that, of the many possible
options, United Nations peacekeeping is the most
economical - a point that Mr. Annabi made this
morning - should make us invest more in that
enterprise through much broader sharing and
contribution on the part of all Member States.

We believe that we can meet the challenges of
peacekeeping and attain our objectives through a
cooperative and collective endeavour. We therefore
thank you, Mr. President, for consulting us. We will
remain engaged with your country and with all other
Member States in order to take our work forward.

