Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Madame President, on Bosnia and
Herzegovina's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, and by extending the
appreciation of my delegation to you and the members
of the Council for convening this open debate on such
an important issue.

My delegation joins others in congratulating the
five new members of the Council - Colombia,
Germany, India, Portugal and South Africa - and in
wishing them a very productive and successful tenure
in the Council. We would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and with the
statement of the Organization of Islamic Conference to
be delivered by the representative of Tajikistan.

In the past few weeks, the news emanating from
the region has been of grave concern. The acceleration
of settlement construction and expansion in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, epitomizes this
harrowing trend. The situation was made even worse
by the latest military incursion conducted by Israel a
few days ago. The international community is very
aware of the ultimate objective of these settlement
policies and measures. They are clearly aimed at
11-21096
altering the demographic composition, physical
character and status of the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Israel is violating
international law and the United Nations Charter.

The illegal Israeli settlements undermine all
efforts to restart peace talks between Palestine and
Israel, jeopardizing the vision of a two-State solution
and complicating the conflict in the region. We
therefore attach primary importance to the role of the
Security Council in responding to the settlement issue
as it did back in 1980, when it adopted resolution 465
(1980). The Council must regain its role in solving this
very important issue, as mandated by the United
Nations Charter.

It is in this context that Indonesia is
co-sponsoring the draft resolution before the Council
on the illegal Israeli settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. We hope that this new resolution will
reverse the inactivity of the Security Council when it
comes to matters relating to the suffering of the
Palestinian people. The Council must and indeed can
exert a positive influence on the Middle East peace
process.

At this stage, however, it is hard to imagine that
peace can be victorious in the Middle East through a
one-time lofty solution. We can always hope for the
kind of effort made at Oslo or Madrid or Annapolis,
but for the time being we must appreciate positive
developments on any scale that keep the peace process
in motion. Indonesia therefore supports the current
surge in diplomacy aimed at relaunching negotiations
and jump-starting a comprehensive peace process,
including the ongoing efforts of the United States. We
also recognize the role of the Quartet in promoting
solutions to the conflict in the Middle East. And, not
least, we have been persistent in recognizing the
contribution of countries in the region and of the
League of Arab States to the Middle East peace
process, including through the Arab Peace Initiative.

It is our View that the peace process and the peace
settlement must be aligned. One cannot envisage a
peace settlement forced under the threat of the barrel of
a gun. That would produce only a short-lived
settlement, if not a hazardous one. Nor can one
imagine a peace process that lacks the legitimacy
conferred by the main parties and the international
community.
3
For far too long the Middle East conflict has
tarnished the efforts of our era to create a peaceful and
liveable region. The need to find a peaceful, just,
lasting and comprehensive settlement to the conflict is
absolutely critical. The Government of Indonesia is
committed to helping to achieve an end to the
protracted and bitter conflict that has been wearing on
the parties of the region for far too long. Our
commitment to and support for the Palestinian cause is
total and unwavering. Our commitment to an
independent, viable and democratic Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security with its neighbours,
is absolute.

Let me conclude by expressing our fervent hope,
which, I believe, is also shared by many here and
outside this Chamber. The Palestinian comprehensive
plan was launched in August 2009 in preparation for
independence within a 24-month period. We hope that
2011 will be the year that history will record as seeing
the victory of reason over fear, the victory of humanity
over cruelty; the year enabling us to liberate the people
of Palestine and to bestow peace and prosperity on
them, the year to see two countries living side by side,
charting a new phase in their bilateral relationship. The
Security Council owes the international community
and those two peoples such a desirable and dignified
outcome.

