Mr. Mendonca e Moura (Portugal): While it is
a principal organ of the United Nations, the Security
Council is, however, restricted in its composition. It
acts on behalf of all of us, the Member States - hence
the need for transparency in the Council Vis-a-vis the
general membership to which it is accountable.

As a member of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, we associate ourselves with
the statement delivered earlier on its behalf by the
representative of Switzerland and wish to touch briefly
on the following four complementary aspects.

First, open debates such as today's can prove very
useful for listening to the general membership's views
on various subjects and situations relevant to peace and
security and, on the other hand, for enabling Member
States to better understand the measures the Council
adopts and helping to strengthen their commitment
to their full implementation. However, we have to
make open debates more efficient. We should be able
to conclude a productive debate in a single morning
session if we all cooperate in helping to focus on the
messages we deem important. So we support the format
that Spain has proposed for use in future open debates
and, like many others, including Council members,
we will abide by the shorter time allotted. Indeed, the
proposed format builds on presidential note S/2012/922,
which is aimed at increasing efficiency, interaction and
transparency in the outcome of open debates.

Secondly, with their specific knowledge of the
situations and areas they cover, the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and the Economic and Social
Council can bring new and complementary perspectives
to the Council. The Council has already recognized the
importance of interaction with them; that is not new.
What we need to do now is to put that into full practice
and for the presidencies of the Security Council
to promote such interaction through their monthly
programmes ofwork, regularly scheduling the Chairs of
the PBC and its configurations, and the President of the
Economic and Social Council, as briefers in meetings
or participants in informal dialogues, as appropriate.
We therefore fully agree with the statement made on
behalf of other Council members by the representative
of Angola highlighting the crucial role of Council
presidencies when preparing their programmes of work.

Thirdly, concerning the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council specifically, we see
merit in organizing periodic meetings to discuss issues
relevant to both their agendas. We are encouraged to
hear that the next presidency of the Security Council,
the United Kingdom, will continue to focus on
these important interrelations between security and
development. Such interaction could also be channeled
through the subsidiary bodies, such as the Sanctions
Committees and Working Groups, particularly those
on peacekeeping and conflict prevention.

Fourthly, the Council's consultation with the PBC
and the Economic and Social Council could become
part of a much broader aspect, conflict prevention.
And to respond to the challenge issued this morning
by the representative of the United Kingdom to put
forward concrete suggestions, we propose that the
Council do some thinking on how to make better use
of the subsidiary bodies, including existing Working
Groups, to capture the signs of emerging challenges
to peace and security that are closely connected to
the larger development agenda - such as climate
change, pandemics, illegal trafficking and organized
crime - and submit timely reports on them to the
Council when they deem action to be necessary. I want
to emphasize that we are not talking about endless
meetings that merely prolong decision-making. We
know that the Council is an action-oriented body,
not a debate forum, but the inclusion of these bodies'
perspectives in Council meetings can, if efficiently
conducted, be extremely important to more coherent
decision-making in the United Nations.

The diversity of the United Nations is its strength.
Today, security is linked to many aspects that we
see dealt with across the United Nations system. The
Security Council should not insulate itself from such
experience, indeed, it can only benefit from it. We hope
that the members of the Council can reflect on that fact
and establish a practice that allows such interaction to
occur regularly, without of course overburdening the
Council's already heavy workload.

