Mr. Egeland: I shall make a few concluding
remarks. First, we are very grateful indeed for the
many expressions of support through this long debate.
This has been a year of disasters and conflicts like no
other. We need your continued support and
encouragement. We need you to help us help the people
in the field do a better job in protecting civilians.

I think this debate has underlined the importance
of mainstreaming protection, providing a clear focus
for future action in addressing some of the critical gaps
in implementation. I am glad to hear that Council
members feel that the Secretary-General's report
contributes to the Council's developing a more
strategic and systematic perspective.

Throughout the debate here today there was
recognition of the needy to increase mechanisms for
peacemaking and conflict prevention as one of the
main tools for the protection of civilians. A number of
countries - I recall China, Algeria, Egypt -
emphasized the need to address the root causes of
conflict and to end conflict. The importance of
addressing the root causes of conflict and devoting
greater efforts to conflict prevention cannot be
understated. I think no one sees this more clearly than
our humanitarian workers in the field. We see the
importance of our work, but we also see its limits. As I
said this morning, effective humanitarian action -
keeping people alive - can never be an alibi for real
efforts to end a conflict and provide security for those
whom we feed and cloth and give emergency medical
assistance.

Today once again we focused mainly on Africa
and the unresolved African conflicts and protection
crises. I also very much recall the situation reported by
the Permanent Representative of the Government of
Iraq. With 30,000 civilians killed, according to him, it
is one of the most acute protection crises in the world
today. It only serves to emphasize the scale and
complexity of the problems facing us. I would like to
extend my deepest condolences to the victims of
conflict and violence in Iraq and in all the countries in
Africa, in Asia, and the Middle East and Latin
America, and elsewhere where we have protection
problems.

I am also pleased to hear that the Government of
Uganda today repeated that a negotiated outcome is
still on the table for northern Uganda, as was expressed
by the Permanent Representative. We condemn the
senseless violence of the Lord's Resistance Army and
its leader, Joseph Kony, but it must also be recognized
that the problems created cannot be addressed solely
by military means. The conflict has lasted for 19 years,
and now all efforts must be used to reduce violence and
save lives.

I repeat that resources devoted to peacemaking,
to the root causes of the conflict and to security efforts
for the most vulnerable are totally inadequate. The
recently documented death rates among displaced
populations in northern Uganda are at crisis levels,
considerably higher now than even those in Darfur,
where effective humanitarian action has reduced
mortality levels. However, Darfur is also a situation,
described by the colleague from the United States,
where developments are getting worse and where the
protection crisis is deepening. The international
community can begin to assist in addressing this only if
there is sustained access by the international
community to all the displaced, an access that of late
has been reduced both in northern Uganda and in
Darfur.

It was mentioned in the debate that we in the
humanitarian organizations must always observe
humanitarian principles. Over the past five years
humanitarian organizations have done considerably
more to ensure the impartiality of humanitarian work
and that we are always reaching those with the greatest
needs in an impartial manner. We are improving the
instruments at our disposal in line with relevant
General Assembly resolutions in order always to
respond impartially and to provide more predictable
assistance wherever it is required.

I think our neutrality has been strengthened by
improved guidance and training with military forces in
areas of civil-military cooperation to ensure a better
understanding of the respective roles and
responsibilities of military and civilian actors, to
prevent a blurring of roles. Improved training for
humanitarian coordinators and greater internal
awareness within humanitarian organizations
themselves have also reinforced humanitarian
principles. We have also worked with Governments in
areas affected by conflict to support them in their
responsibilities and to clearly identify the protection
needs of their populations.

Moreover, as this debate underscored, the
protection needs of civilians are still considerably
greater than our capacity to meet those needs. Because
humanitarian access has increased in many areas, there
is a need for protection activities and services. One
such area - not mentioned today - is the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where we have much better
access than in previous years. We have provided
medical and psychosocial support to women and
children who have been raped; we have reunited
children with their families; and we have helped people
to obtain the documentation they need to gain access to
basic services.

As was recalled by the representative of
Denmark, among others, we are developing a search
protection standby capacity - PROCAP, as it is called.
One-hundred people stand by to go anywhere in the
world to carry out protection work as humanitarians
and human rights workers. The new Central
Emergency Response Fund, which we hope will be
agreed very soon at the level of the General Assembly,
will be a financial mechanism that can be used to allow
early action to save lives and reduce the prospects of
displacement, about which so many speakers raised

concerns today. Other reforms - including the
development of cluster leadership approaches among
all humanitarian actors - will also enable us to

respond more predictably where urgent needs for
protection and humanitarian assistance exist.

The importance of more accurate reporting to the
Security Council was highlighted here today by a
number of representatives of Member States. I, too,
have underlined the importance of providing the
Council with accurate global information. As my
predecessor, Ambassador Oshima, stressed on behalf of
Japan, that is not an easy task, and our progress in
developing comprehensive information systems has
been slower than I would have wished. We have
established the parameters for a reporting framework,
however, in agreement with the relevant United
Nations agencies and departments, and have
established links with many relevant academic research
institutions. The next report of the Secretary-General
will - I am sure, and I promise - show the fruit of
that collaboration.

The representative of the Russian Federation
stressed the importance of ensuring the implementation
of the first two Council resolutions on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict: resolutions 1265 (1999) and
1296 (2000). I agree wholeheartedly that that is
imperative. All of us - Governments, parties to
conflict, regional organizations, the Security Council,
peacekeeping missions and we in the humanitarian
community - need to do much more to implement
those important resolutions so that we can improve our
response to the ongoing protection concerns.

At the same time, as I said in my opening
statement, we now need a new resolution that reflects
relevant developments over the past five years in order
to guide and strengthen our future work in 2006 and
beyond. I urge Council members to redouble their
efforts to adopt not only a resolution, but a strong
resolution, and to keep in the forefront of their minds
the children, women and men suffering daily in
conflict situations, for whom that resolution must make
a concrete difference.

Once again, I thank you, Mr. President, for
presiding over today's debate, which has been most
important and valuable to me, to my team and to all of
us humanitarian actors who are working together to do
our part to protect civilians in need.

