Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow me
to begin by expressing my appreciation to you, Mr.
President, for having convening this meeting, to the
Secretary-General for his thoughtful remarks on 20
January and to Ambassador Greenstock for his able
leadership and his briefing to the Council.

The Islamic Republic of Iran, as a country that
has suffered immensely from acts of terrorism, has a
strong interest in the subject and is determined to leave
no stone unturned in achieving the objectives set out in
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). In this
process, we have thus far submitted our initial and
supplementary reports to the Committee. With a view
to implementing the resolution, my Government has
established a National Coordination Committee to
facilitate the implementation of the resolution. As a
result, while many existing laws make terrorist acts
punishable, two pieces of comprehensive draft
legislation, namely the Anti-Terrorism Act and the
Anti-Money-Laundering Act, are under consideration
in the Cabinet and the Parliament. The latter, in
accordance with Security Council resolutions, aims at
setting out a legal and practical mechanism to
effectively halt financial and other support to terrorist
organizations and groups, while the former addresses
the issue in all its other aspects. Pending their
adoption, and in conformity with existing laws,
practical arrangements have also been made to increase
security in sensitive areas and to enhance the anti-
money-laundering mechanisms of the banking system.

Special measures adopted along Iran's long and
porous eastern border, right after the tragedy of 11
September 2001, with a view to interdicting Al Qaeda
infiltration, continue consistently. Iranian law
enforcement agencies are also engaged in extensive
operations to arrest any suspected terrorists that might
have entered Iranian territory from neighbouring
countries. As a result of such activities, thus far several
hundred foreign nationals suspected of being involved
in terrorist activities have been arrested and then
handed over to the Governments of their countries of
origin.

Terrorism is a persistent menace that requires a
continued global response. The tragic loss of life in
terrorist attacks such as those committed in the past
several months clearly demonstrates that success in
countering the threat remains elusive. It underlines the
need for continued and more extensive cooperation at
the international level, which can be possible and
effective only if the United Nations plays a central and
coordinating role by setting effective international
norms and issuing a clear message about the
unacceptability of acts of violence targeting civilians.

Undoubtedly, more cooperation on combating
terrorism requires more understanding among nations
and less tension and conflict. As the Secretary-General
emphasized in the Council on 20 January 2003,

"we must never lose sight of the fact that any

sacrifice of freedom or the rule of law within

States - or any generation of new tensions

between States in the name of anti-terrorism -

will hand the terrorists a victory that no act of

theirs alone could possibly bring". (S/PV.4688, p. 
3)

I should also caution against some attempts aimed
at seeking to misuse the campaign against terror by
denigrating and suppressing the legitimate rights of
peoples, particularly the people of Palestine, to self-
determination. Undoubtedly, such misuse does not help
advance the fight against terrorism.

Before concluding, I would like to underline the
necessity of addressing more seriously and in an
institutionalized framework the strong links among
terrorism, drug trafficking and transnational organized
crime. The Islamic Republic of Iran has suffered
tremendously in combating drug trafficking emanating
from Afghanistan. Today, in spite of the efforts of the
Afghan Government, drug trafficking continues to
provide the financial backbone of terrorists and forces
of instability in Afghanistan, threatening the
impressive achievement of the international community
and the Afghan people.

Given the fact that drug trafficking is inseparable
from terrorism and is being carried out by well-
organized and well-equipped international gangs that
enjoy connections in various continents, there should
be no doubt that combating it goes beyond the
resources of individual countries. In that context, we
View as welcome developments the reference, in
paragraph 4 of resolution 1373 (2001), to "the close
connection between international terrorism and
transnational organized crime, illicit drugs..." and other
things, and the emphasis in the same paragraph on

"the need to enhance coordination of efforts on
national, subregional, regional and international
levels in order to strengthen a global response to
this serious challenge and threat to international
security".

We note that the CTC has yet to take action with a view
to implementing that paragraph of the resolution. It is
our hope and expectation that the Committee will
consider measures to address that important aspect of
global terrorism as well.

