Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
would like once again to commend your leadership,
Mr. President, as well as to thank you for organizing
this very important debate to consider the report of the
Peacebuilding Commission on the work of its third
session (S/2009/444). I would also like to thank
Ambassador Mufioz, Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), who has just introduced the report.
We congratulate him and commend the Chairpersons of
the PBC's various country-specific configurations for
their unwavering commitment and determination when
it comes to peacebuilding in countries emerging from
conflict.

This morning's debate is a very timely one, for it
serves to make the efforts of the Commission more
visible and, in particular, to make it possible to assume
new commitments and respond adequately and
effectively to the needs of countries emerging from
conflict. We would especially like to commend the
efforts made both by the Organizational Committee
and the country-specific configurations of the PBC to
improve their working methods and procedures and, in
so doing, facilitating greater interaction among its
members and the countries on the Commission's
agenda.

It is clear that no peacebuilding process can be
successful without, first and foremost, involving
national stakeholders and having greater awareness of
the priorities of the countries concerned. It is therefore
reassuring that the Commission, through its various
country-specific configurations, has incorporated the
strategic approach and is drawing on experience and
good practices.

Although much still remains to be done, some of
the initiatives and positive actions undertaken by the
Commission certainly merit attention, for they take
into account many of the considerations and
recommendations that have been made, in particular
with regard to enhancing the Commission's role in
mobilizing resources from both traditional and
non-traditional partners; promoting ownership of the
peacebuilding process by national stakeholders,
including civil society and the private sector and
involving regional and subregional actors; planning
and coordinating the efforts of all stakeholders in order
to avoid duplication of effort; and strengthening
partnerships with bodies of the United Nations system
and with bilateral and multilateral partners, in
particular regional and subregional organizations and
international financial institutions.

The compelling nature of some of the challenges
that countries face in the aftermath of conflict requires
urgent support from the international community in
order to avoid the resumption of hostilities. In that
regard, we welcome the invaluable financial

contribution of the Peacebuilding Fund. In that
connection, it is essential that efforts continue to be
made to ensure the effective implementation of the
Fund's guiding principles, namely with regard to
transparency, flexibility, speed and ownership of
programmes by beneficiary countries. We believe that
the Peacebuilding Fund's revised mandate should make
it possible for it to be more effective and responsive, to
the benefit of post-conflict countries. When it comes to
strengthening the partnerships between the
Commission and other stakeholders, we absolutely
must take into account those regional and subregional
actors, such as the African Union, who play a
significant role in peacebuilding.

Given the indispensable role played by the
Peacebuilding Commission, it is incumbent on us to
furnish it with the appropriate resources in a reliable
way. We wish to commend, in particular, its role as an
advocate in mobilizing international support for
countries emerging from conflict. The strategic
partnerships and arrangements it is developing with
certain institutions, such as the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, are to be welcomed, as
they provide additional operational know-how and
resources for responding to the priorities of countries
emerging from conflict. Those efforts must be
continued and working methods and mechanisms
adapted to respond adequately and effectively to the
needs of countries emerging from conflict.

We also wish to take this opportunity to
commend the work done by the Peacebuilding Support
Office in support of the joint efforts undertaken
through the Commission. We remain convinced that the
commitment shown by all United Nations organs as
well as the international community and the
continuation of their efforts will make it possible to
carry out peacebuilding processes that are more
reliable and can lead to effective peace and lasting
development in countries emerging from conflict.

In conclusion, we await with interest the
recommendations that will accompany the outcome of
the review in 2010 of the resolutions that established
the Commission. We believe that that report will give
us an opportunity, by drawing on experience and
lessons learned, to strengthen the Commission's
support to countries emerging from conflict.

