Mr. Arreaza (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting to be
frank with the delegation of the United States. This
meeting once more affords us an opportunity to speak
the truth about what is happening in the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. Confronting Western
intervention, imperialism, interference in domestic
affairs and colonial arrogance, which we thought had
disappeared from the Security Council, has been an
exercise in patience.

First of all, we extend a greeting from the
constitutional President of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, Mr. Nicolas Maduro Moros, and from
the Venezuelan people, who are being subjected to
international aggression. It is only fitting that we
should discuss this here in the Security Council.
When powerful countries and other countries that are
subordinate thereto - I am referring to the United
States and Colombia - organize aggression against
the sovereignty of a free people, such as that of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, we are talking about
an issue that is undoubtedly a threat to the peace and
security of our region, which in turn affects international
peace and security, and that is a clear violation of the
Charter of the United Nations in its entirety.

With all due respect, allow me to say that the briefing
by Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo was
biased. She sought to disseminate information coming
from one source. Furthermore, again with all due
respect, that information does not correspond at all to
what we discussed in the three meetings we held with
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres. We denounce the
United States Government for organizing, financing and
leading this gross act of aggression against Venezuela,
which in effect began many years ago. In some countries
scandals are created by saying that some other country
interfered in their electoral campaigns. Intervention
by United States Governments has been taking place
in Venezuela since the Bolivarian revolution came to
power on 2 February 1999 - every day, every hour and
every minute of the 20 years that have elapsed.

We would also like to take this opportunity to
denounce here - according to information provided
to us by friendly countries, such as Cuba and the
Russian Federation - the mobilization of troops in
the Caribbean and the purchasing of weapons from
Eastern Europe intended for the radical opposition in
Venezuela in order to foment intervention. When it
comes to Venezuela, there have always been calls from
the United States and Western power centres for the
politics of death.

A well-orchestrated operation to violate the sacred
sovereignty of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
took place over the weekend. Our national armed and
police forces were able to contain it without using any
kind of deadly force, and that is why you saw tear gas
used at the two main bridges between Venezuela and
Colombia - between Venezuela's Tachira state and
Colombia's North Santander department - as well as
progressive and varied methods. And where did the
aggression come from? It came from Colombia. As
to the outlaws who are said to come from the Maduro
regime? They come from Colombia. Whether they are
Colombians or Venezuelans I do not know, but I do
know they were attacking Venezuelan law enforcement
personnel abetted and protected by Colombian police.

This photograph shows a man setting fire to
humanitarian vehicle with a Molotov cocktail - an
image widely disseminated by the press. Here is the
burning truck, which when inspected was found to
contain not only food and medicines but also tools for
putting up barricades and wire and nails for making
weapons of a type we in Venezuela are used to seeing
being used by the radical opposition. The proof right
here; members can see the videos. That truck was
burned on this bridge.

Here one can see Molotov cocktails being thrown
to burn the humanitarian aid. But there were also
some injured. Most of those injured - lo and behold,
the media did not get the news on this - are officers,
enlisted men and law enforcement personnel from
Venezuela's security forces. I have the report here.

This photograph shows a bus on Venezuelan
territory, making this an internal matter. The "masked
thugs" who burned it are not Chavistas. They are from
the Venezuelan opposition who, as in 2014 and 2017,
left our country in flames, including over a period of
four months in 2017. There was no condemnation from
any of those other countries.

Here they are on the Colombian side of the
bridge - we can see Colombian migration - protected
by Colombian security forces. There they are.

Here we can see the use of the Red Cross emblem,
without authorization from the International Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement or the International
Committee of the Red Cross. That happened in
Colombia and was denounced by the Red Cross.

This is under one of the bridges, where we see
homemade bombs and Molotov cocktails being - by the
way, with gasoline from Venezuela that was smuggled
into Colombia. This is the reality, unfortunately.

Here we see security forces. And note where the
Venezuelan barrier is. The truck was burned here, and
they were throwing Molotov cocktails over there.

But how easy it is to say that Maduro is massacring
his people and burning the trucks with humanitarian
aid. Some have even gone so far as to say that we are
in violation of the Geneva Convention with respect
to international humanitarian law. My God, is that
hypocrisy. This is what was in the truck: nails and
wire. When the security forces inspected the burned
truck, that is what they found. What was it for? To set
up barricades in the state of Tachira and set Venezuela
on fire.

This is the last photograph. I would like to ask
the representative of the United Kingdom: What is
this warship, which arrived last Saturday, doing just a
few miles off one Venezuela's Caribbean islands? My
goodness, what a coincidence. What is it doing there?
Why did the Commander of the United States Southern
Command meet with the head of the Colombian armed
forces in Bogota to talk about humanitarian assistance
in Venezuela? Since when do the military personnel
of other countries meet to discuss humanitarian
assistance? It should be humanitarian organizations,
whose be all and end all is precisely such work, that
meet, not military personnel.

What about all the messages that were sent by
Mr. Trump, Mr. Pence, Mr. Bolton, Mr. Pompeo,
Mr. Marco Rubio, Mr. Duque and Mr. Guaido? That is
the chain of command, in that order, for the intervention
against Venezuela, the purpose of which is to incite the
Venezuelan military to rise up and break their oath to
the Constitution. How many have there been? I have
lost count of how many tweets Mr. Bolton has sent out
using gangster-like language to attack the dignity of
our military, our people and our revolutionary forces. It
is truly incredible. But, as I said to Mr. Elliott Abrams
at our most recent meeting here in New York (see S/PV.8452), the coup d'etat failed. The last chapter in
the coup d'etat occurred on Saturday. Here they like to
say, "read my lips".

(spoke in English)
Itfailed.
(spoke in Spanish)

Now is the time to return to our senses and respect
international law and Venezuela's Constitution. We
are waiting to see the members of the Venezuelan
opposition - Mr. Guaido or anyone else; they will
decide - sit down with the constitutional Government
of Venezuela. Then, among Venezuelans, we can craft
our own solution without intervention or interference
from anyone, especially the United States. We can only
hope that the White House will give Mr. Guaido and
the Venezuelan opposition the authorization to sit down
with the Government so that we can find a solution
through dialogue and negotiation to each and every
political circumstance that may arise in Venezuela.
Mexico, Uruguay and the countries of the Caribbean
Community have proposed the Montevideo Mechanism.
Here we sit; tell us when we should go to Mexico,
Montevideo or Bridgetown, and we will sit down at the
table without any agenda and with our Constitution in
hand. Hold elections? Perhaps. Are other solutions a
possibility? Perhaps. That is why we have such a rich
Constitution.

The European Union and some Latin American
countries have also come up with a mechanism they
call the International Contact Group. Welcome. We met
with them for four hours - I personally for two hours
and then subsequently along with the Vice-President
and a delegation they sent to Caracas last week. We
hugged them and said thank you. Also, yesterday we
agreed upon a mechanism for technical humanitarian
assistance from the European Union through the United
Nations to Venezuela, but that was not reported in any
news outlet anywhere. As several Council members
have said, however, the Contact Group wants to impose
the outcome of the dialogue. It wants to impose one
solution only. By the way, I found it strange to see
some European Union countries disagree with High
Representative Federica Mogherini, who characterized
that supposed humanitarian assistance as politicized
and said that the European Union would not become
involved until humanitarian agencies ensured that
aid adhered to the criteria of humanity, impartiality,
depoliticization and independence. But they have not
been able to do so, and they will not.

We must also denounce the use of Colombia's
territory to launch aggression against Venezuela. This
is painful for us, given that 200 years ago the liberator
Simen Bolivar and Venezuelan plainsmen were crossing
the Andes and sacrificing their lives to fight for the
freedom of New Granada, or what is now the Republic
of Colombia. And they succeeded - without looting
or taking territory or anything else, before returning to
Venezuelan territory.

The Security Council is not here to make war
or establish conditions for others to make war. The
Security Council is not here to endorse violence or
breaches of the Charter of the United Nations. Rather,
the Security Council is here to maintain international
peace and security and preserve future generations
from the scourge of war. Let us preserve Venezuela and
the present generation from the scourge of war, for the
threat is here and now.

As the Ambassador of the Russian Federation
has made a proposal, we would ask the Security
Council - more than that, we would almost demand, and
do so - to agree on and adopt a draft resolution. What
do we want it to include? That it reject the threat or use
of force against the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela;
that the option be ruled out once and for all. Mr. Trump,
Mr. Pence, Mr. Bolton, Mr. Pompeo, Mr. Marco Rubio,
Mr. Guaido and Mr. Duque are putting that on the
table. I have here a quotation where Mr. Pence is saying
"all options are on the table", as well as others where
