Mr. Pal (India): It is appropriate that this meeting is
taking place under your presidency, Sir, given Japan's
interest in African affairs and your personal commitment to
this cause.

We read the Secretary-General's superb report with
very great interest. It was not an easy task that the Security
Council set the Secretary-General last September, and
perhaps the questions the Council posed, and the fact that
it was the Council that posed them, presupposed the
answers. The Council acts only when there is a grave threat
to international peace and security, and if it asks the
Secretary-General to produce a report on the causes of
conflict in Africa, it seems to follow that Africa must be
peculiarly prone to conflict, that there are special reasons
why Africa suffers from violence and that conflict is its
defining characteristic. But are these assumptions correct?
One of the great minds of this century, Octavio Paz, who
died earlier this week, wrote some lines about a country
which, modified, apply equally well to Africa: in general,
the world has not looked for Africa in Africa; it has looked
for its obsessions, enthusiasms, phobias, hopes, interests -
and these are what it has found.

In some ways, nothing has changed in a hundred
years. In 1898, too, the world could have wrung its hands
over a continent where nation-States had been formed in
recent years, often cutting across ethnic and linguistic lines,
leading to endemic discontent. Democracy had not quite
taken root. Development was patchy and its fruits available
only to a minority. Conflict was rampant, and fuelled by
arms merchants answerable to no one. This was not Africa;
it was Europe in the late nineteenth century. But it was
never assumed that there lurked in Europe a continental
malaise, peculiar to it, for which continental remedies were
available. Apart from anything else, international opinion
then meant European opinion, and Europe was driven by
the ambitions of the great colonial Powers rather than by
the problems of the new nations in its midst. This,
perhaps, led to the holocausts of the world wars. But
Europe has now recovered to levels of prosperity
unmatched by any other continent in history, though this
took it the better part of a century. It was made possible
after 1945 by extremely generous aid, through the
Marshall Plan. The World Bank, we sometimes forget,
was set up for the reconstruction and development of
Europe. Europe's recovery was aided by Europe's control
over a system of foreign trade that helped its nations on
an export-led path of recovery.

Africa has none of these advantages, but neither are
Africa's problems unique. They are not problems because
they are African; they are problems which have bedeviled
countries in similar situations, in Europe and elsewhere,
many times before. The solutions to Africa's problems are
the solutions that were found for Europe after 1945: aid,
development, trade and cooperation. The Secretary-
General has recognized this, since so much of his report
examines the questions of development, which are at the
heart of the problems faced by all developing countries,
whether they are in Africa or elsewhere. These, however,
are not problems which the Security Council can address;
they are completely outside its mandate, and we are glad
that the Secretary-General's report is also being submitted
to the General Assembly and to the other relevant bodies
of the United Nations system, including the Bretton
Woods institutions. We hope they will look at them
carefully.

Africa is not immutably set on a road to conflict and
violence. The Secretary-General's report notes that in
1996, 14 of the 53 countries of Africa were in conflict.
But this figure came down in 1997 and has continued to
fall in 1998. This is surely encouraging. But Africa, like
many other developing regions, has been on what Ben
Okri called the famished road. The UNICEF study on
Africa's recovery in the 19905 noted that while Africa's
economies benefited little from the policies followed in
the 19605 and 19705, the adjustment policies forced on
Africa in the 19805 did not contribute to the long-term
objectives of development adopted by the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) in the Lagos Plan of Action of
April 1980. Exactly 18 years after that Plan was adopted,
we need to ask ourselves why its objectives by and large
still remain unfulfilled.

It is virtually impossible now to determine whether
the decline or stagnation in parts of Africa were caused

 

by domestic policies, external shocks or the adjustment
policies imposed upon them, but there is a fair amount of
consensus that responsibility must be equally shared
between the three. It is against this background that we
should consider whether general prescriptions, however
well-meaning, address the real needs of Africa.

Current political orthodoxy recommends a weakening
of the State in Africa and elsewhere, through privatization,
a reduction of the role of government and greater reliance
on market forces. It is not explained how a weak State can
be expected simultaneously to tackle the strong interest
groups that are believed to have exploited national
economies and political systems or, furthermore, how it is
to impose the harsh adjustment policies that are still needed
to integrate nations into the global economy.

Adjustment and liberalization inevitably impose social
tensions, carrying with them the risk that large sections will
be pauperized, even if temporarily. This interim period
needs to be bridged. Governments going through this period
of transformation must have the money to pay for social
support, without which adjustment policies will fail. Such
failure carries with it the even greater danger that the
democratic experiment will also founder, creating precisely
those tensions that find release in violence. That countries
in transition need massive financial support to pre-empt
violence and entrench democracy has been recognized in
East Europe. It is a pity that Africa, which has exactly the
same problems, as the Secretary-General's analysis makes
clear, does not receive anywhere near the same support. As
President Vaclav Havel once wrote in a devastating essay
on "Evasive Thinking", which the Council could take to
heart before it pronounces itself on Africa,

"Between a detailed prediction of the future and a
broad interpretation of the past, there is somehow no
room for what is most important of all - a down-to-
earth analysis of the present."

This chamber should be haunted by the ghosts of the
millions of Africans who would be alive today if they had
not been drawn into proxy wars over the last 30 years, and
if in Africa in the 19905 the Council had not been held
back from action because of the disinterest of the powerful
when action could have saved countless lives. Africans
themselves, as in Sierra Leone, have tried to take up the
burden which the Council was expected to shoulder. If this
meeting means that the Council will make a new beginning
in Africa, it will have served some purpose.

The Secretary-General has made extremely important
suggestions in the section on humanitarian assistance. We
have two points to make on this.

First, humanitarian assistance is taking an increasing
share of official development assistance, at a time when
aid levels are falling just as sharply. Its share of overall
aid rose from 1.5 per cent in 1991 to 8.4 per cent in
1994. What this means is that the international community
has tried to staunch crises while less and less money is
being devoted to addressing the underlying causes, those
long-term problems of development that international
assistance could best address. In The State of the World's
Refugees J 997, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees noted that

"by donating large sums of money to highly
publicized relief operations, Governments have to
some extent been able to satisfy the demands of
public opinion and the international media".

In other words, aid has been channelled to humanitarian
assistance to raise the comfort level of donor States, not

necessarily to address the real needs of recipients.

Secondly, and even more tellingly, inter-agency
consolidated appeals for humanitarian assistance are rarely
funded in full for Africa, whereas they are oversubscribed
for situations in some other regions.

International interest, therefore, is focused on
humanitarian assistance only when a spectacular crisis in
Africa, of interest to the world's media, forces
international action. The challenge before us is to ensure
that there is sustained attention, both in providing
humanitarian assistance to those affected and in
addressing the long-term causes that create the problems.
We note the Secretary-General's intention to take a hard
look at the United Nations System-wide Special Initiative
on Africa; we trust that it will be strengthened,
particularly in areas like health, education, technology
transfer, trade and investment and food security which
would be of immediate and direct benefit to Africans.

Above all, we must not forget or ignore the many
remarkable achievements Africa has made when progress
has depended on African decisions and actions, and we
must remember that failures have quite often been for
reasons over which they had no control. The whole world
can learn a lesson about political wisdom and
magnanimity from South Africa, which has shown us how
the challenge of political reconciliation can be addressed,

 

even in apparently impossibly difficult circumstances.
Zimbabwe has shown the world how to balance the needs
of wildlife and the environment with those of the men and
women who make a living from the forests. In the early
years of the United Nations Development Programme-
sponsored Human Development Report, before political
prudence got the better of its authors, Botswana consistently
ranked higher in the index than several developed countries.
Mauritius surpassed the targets of the Lagos Plan of Action
some years ago. These are achievements to be proud of,
and to build upon.

And indeed, Africa is doing 50. Regional and
subregional groupings have emerged in Africa and are
stimulating cooperation and economic growth; the
international community should help strengthen them. The
Secretary General's report on "The World Economy at the
Beginning of 1998" forecast that African growth, which had
slowed to 3 per cent in 1997, would rebound to 4 per cent
this year. This in itself is encouraging, particularly because
the Secretary-General's analysis showed that growth had
slowed in 1996 only because either drought or floods had
affected agriculture. African Governments had continued to
follow sound economic policies, according to the Secretary-
General. The only exceptions were in six countries affected
by political instability or civil strife. In the 38 African
countries monitored for the report, the Secretary-General
noted that in 1991, only 6 had a gross domestic product
growth of 3 per cent or more, and this benefited only 8 per
cent of the population. In 1997, the number of such
countries had grown to 14, an impressive improvement, and
what was most remarkable was that growth in 1997
benefited 33 per cent of the population. In other words,
growth in Africa has increasingly become growth with
social equity. This is, therefore, not an alarming picture; it
is an encouraging one. Certainly, in light of the Secretary-
General's analysis, it could not be argued either that Africa
was in a systemic crisis, or that the policies of African
Governments needed drastic change or improvement.

But when all is said and done, Africa's needs are
special and need special attention. The Secretary-General is
to be congratulated for the candour with which he has
responded to the Council's interest in Africa. As a country
with very old historical ties to Africa, cemented after the
modern nations of Africa and we both became independent,
we have a very keen interest in what happens there. When
the Council has responded to conflict situations in Africa by
sending peacekeeping operations, India has participated in
every one. We share common problems, and we can benefit
from each other's experience. We have allocated the bulk
of our technical assistance programme to help build up
capacities in Africa in areas of African interest. Equally,
we believe we have much to learn from Africans as they
address challenges which we face in other continents. The
Secretary-General's report gives the international
community the chance not to preach, but to learn from
Africa, to help itself by helping Africa. We hope we will
all seize this opportunity.

