Mr. Pedersen (Norway): Norway welcomes
resolution 2118 (2013) as an important milestone in
the efforts to address the issue of chemical weapons in
Syria. Removing the chemical stockpiles in Syria and
eliminating the risk of anybody using those horrendous
weapons in Syria ever again is timely and necessary.
However, we know that that turn of events will not end
the war in Syria. Resolution 2118 (2013) should therefore
be a stepping stone towards stopping the bloodshed
in the country and finding a political solution to the
conflict, for which there is no military solution.

Norway urges the parties to participate in the
planned "Geneva II" conference. The conference
should build on the framework already established
under the first Geneva Conference. The goal must be to
reach agreement on a transitional body that can prepare
for free elections and a democratic constitution.
Such a body could pave the way for a truly inclusive
and democratic Syria and ensure respect for Syria's
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

At the same time, we must not forget the suffering of
millions of victims and the urgency of full, immediate,
unfettered and unimpeded humanitarian access. Today,
more than 2 million people are without access to
humanitarian assistance. That is unacceptable. We call
on the Security Council to see to it that the presidential
statement of 2 October (S/PRST/2013/15) is fully
implemented.

Norway remains resolute in its support for
the ongoing negotiations towards a final status
agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization. The courage shown by the top leadership
on both sides is truly commendable. It is encouraging
that the talks are continuing, as time is of the essence.
We urge both parties to make use of the opportunity
presented and to agree on a solution within the
parameters of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the Oslo Accords and agreements signed later.

We of course understand that reaching an
agreement involves painful concessions and tough
decisions for both sides. But reaching agreement now is
in the interests of the Palestinian people. This may be
the last opportunity for a long time for the Palestinian
people to realize their national aspirations. Reaching
agreement now is also in the interests ofIsrael. Broader
recognition of Israel's right to exist can only be achieved
by ending the occupation. Only the establishment of
a sovereign Palestinian State, in accordance with the
principles of the two-State vision of peace, can provide
the State of Israel with internationally recognized and
secure borders.

Norway is concerned about any external events
that threaten to undermine the talks. We condemn all
use of violence. We call for restraint from unilateral
acts on the ground. Settlement activities must stop and
all parties must refrain from provocations and stay the
course.

Norway, in its capacity as Chair of the donor
coordination group - the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians-calls on donors to follow up on the positive
spirit in the meeting held in New York on 25 September.
Additional contributions to the Palestinian Authority's
budget are urgently needed. The meeting concluded
that $350 million was required this year. It also called
for additional support from generous Arab States to
reduce the Palestinian domestic debt. The Palestinian
Government is expected to further align its expenses
to its resources. The Israeli Government is expected
to lift restrictions to private sector development of the
Palestinian economy. Both are expected to cooperate
to further improve the business environment, trade,
development, and the collection and transfer of taxes
and duties.

With renewed hope for a political solution to the
conflict, the donors agree to stay committed to the
State-building programme while negotiations are
ongoing. We, as donors, should now deliver on our
promises. At the same time, the donors call on the
parties to do their part.

