Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Portugal congratulates you
and thanks you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate. We believe that protection for humanitarian
assistance to refugees and others in conflict situations is
a major issue involving the responsibility of the
international community. Therefore, it must be properly
addressed by the Security Council with the participation
of the general membership of the United Nations.

We also believe it is timely for the Council to
discuss this issue openly and on the record. The Council
has recently been occupied with very serious crises to
which this problem of the protection for humanitarian
operations is central.

Also, the Council should not fail to develop thinking
on its role in this field in the light of the major dilemmas
faced today by United Nations humanitarian assistance, as
outlined by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees when she came to the Council last month.
Under-Secretary-General Akashi and representatives of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) and the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) reminded of these dilemmas very clearly
today. We welcome their forceful statements and pledge
to give full attention to the concerns and suggestions they
left with us.

The protection of civilian populations and refugees
involved in conflicts requiring humanitarian assistance
increasingly seeks to counter threats to international peace
and security. In recent conflicts, refugees and internally
displaced persons have not only been one of the
consequences of war but have actually been the target of
hostilities which threaten international peace and security.

 

Therefore, this question falls under either Chapter VI or
Chapter VII of the Charter, and thus calls for Council
action under Articles 41 and/or 42.

Later the Netherlands will be making a statement on
behalf of the European Union which we fully endorse. In
that statement, attention is called to the nature of intra-State
conflict, which increasingly characterizes most of the crises
developing in the post-cold-war era. The internal nature of
such conflicts might be recalled to resist or caution against
United Nations-backed international humanitarian
intervention in the name of the old banners of state
sovereignty, non-interference in domestic affairs and
territorial integrity. We could dwell on the legitimacy that
the Charter confers upon the Council to determine when
such intervention is necessary and justified. This decision
by the Council would then bypass the sovereignty and
correlative principles and require all Member States to
abide by it.

But we prefer instead to highlight the fact that in
almost all conflicts today, from Afghanistan and the former
Yugoslavia to the Great Lakes, the warring parties
themselves are keen on a United Nations humanitarian
presence, not only because of the benefits they themselves
receive from humanitarian aid provided to refugees and
civilian populations, but also because of the political
legitimacy they sense this presence bestows on them; and
this despite the fact that an international humanitarian
presence, regardless of the impartiality with which it carries
out its tasks, may be seen to be an embarrassing witness to
unspeakable atrocities.

The Council must clearly address three main
problems: first, how to protect those who need protection
most - that is, the civilian population caught up in armed
conflicts and the particularly vulnerable groups of refugees
and internally displaced people; secondly, how to protect
the protectors when they themselves are targets of attacks;
and thirdly, how to counter the impunity of the perpetrators
of such crimes.

In dealing with the first problem - how to protect
those most vulnerable - the Council must not forget a
crucial element: the fact that humanitarian assistance is
certainly not limited to the delivery of aid, be it food,
shelter or medical care. The central element of humanitarian
assistance is, in fact, protection of the most basic human
rights: the right to life, first and foremost, and other basic
rights inherent to the dignity of the human person. That is
the purpose and the essence of international humanitarian
law, which all Member States, all United Nations agencies,
all warring parties and all military forces are bound to
respect and enforce.

This is the message that was transmitted very clearly
to the Council by Mrs. Ogata when she stressed that
assistance to and protection of people are based upon
respect for the fundamental human rights of people. She
went further and called for a security concept that puts
human beings at its centre. That is precisely the approach
that Portugal urges the Council to adopt, assuming our
full share of responsibility for it.

This implies that, when measuring the success or the
needs of a humanitarian assistance operation, the Council
must take into consideration the extent to which those
core rights are being protected, not just whether food
convoys are reaching their destination. This also means
that when considering any kind of international military
intervention, through a peacekeeping operation, or another
kind of operation, in order to back and support
humanitarian action, the Council must spell out clearly in
its mandate the purpose of protecting human rights,
alongside the political and military objectives. An
integrated approach to crisis management is needed,
encompassing human rights in the humanitarian, political
and developmental dimensions.

We must ensure that all those involved in United
Nations humanitarian and military operations are aware of
all these dimensions and receive the proper training for
carrying out the tasks involved. And since the most
vulnerable groups of civilians in need of protection -
namely, refugees and displaced persons - are women
and children, due consideration must be given to the
gender perspective and to the specific needs of protecting
children, as the representative of UNICEF so forcefully
explained to us this morning.

The second problem - how to protect the
protectors - has emerged as a particularly pressing and
alarming one, as we have seen increasingly in many
recent conflicts. Not much has been done to address
properly this problem despite the many calls for military
support for humanitarian relief operations. One might say
that United Nations Member States have not been willing
to risk the lives of their military, just the lives of their aid
workers.

A special tribute, an expression of gratitude and
encouragement, is due to those brave and generous
women and men who work for the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United

 

Nations Children's Fund, the World Food Programme and
all other United Nations agencies, as well as to those
working for humanitarian and human rights non-
governmental organizations, who continue to carry out
those activities despite the hardship and the serious personal
risks involved. They need support. They need collective
Security Council action, not collective inaction. They need
us - officials, Governments and political leaders - to do
our job.

Peacekeeping operations in some cases have been used
by the Security Council to provide a military component to
facilitate humanitarian relief. In general, this has met with
success, even in cases where the humanitarian community
initially feared the corrupting implications of such military
backing. Bosnia is certainly such a case.

In other situations the Council has authorized the
deployment of an international military presence to protect
emergency humanitarian assistance at the initiative of some
Member States. The most recent example is Albania, and
so far it has achieved positive results. This shows how
important and desirable regional initiatives are, provided
their authors seek and obtain proper endorsement from the
Council.

But what happens when no State is prepared to act,
when the Council cannot be prompted to take an initiative
despite the seriousness of the situation? Can we continue to
leave humanitarian actors alone in the field facing the
extremely dangerous security situations which often arise
from unresolved political issues? We cannot, of course.
That is why we support the proposals made by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, among others,
calling for the establishment within the Secretariat of a
rapid-deployment capability. We call on the Council to
discuss this specific proposal and to seek the views of the
Secretary-General on how this could be rapidly put into
practice.

The third problem facing us is how to fight the
impunity of all those responsible for violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law, be it
against those who are being protected in conflict situations
or against those who are providing the protection. The
punishment of the perpetrators of such violations is both the
main deterrent against the spreading of a pattern of further
violations and the least that can be done out of respect for
the victims. Those on the ground, as well as their political
and military leaders, should be held accountable at the
national level and, when appropriate, before international
courts. In addition to whatever individual responsibility
criminal proceedings may establish, political leaders must
also pay a political price.

The same concerns justify the need for the Security
Council to consider at the earlier stages of conflicts the
imposition of selective sanctions targeted to really hurt
the warring party and its supporters, measures such as
arms embargoes, travel restrictions and the freezing of
assets, among others, which would be considered on a
case-by-case basis depending on their effectiveness.
Punishment requires evidence of the violations and of the
individual responsibility of the perpetrators. Investigation
by international monitors is therefore crucial. The Council
must hold warring parties accountable for cooperating and
facilitating such international missions.

Allow me to stress that my delegation believes it
would be important to have the community of non-
governmental organizations participating in this debate.
The United Nations, and all our Governments, cannot act
in the humanitarian and human rights fields without the
dedicated and persistent action of non-govemmental
organizations. We therefore hope that non-govemmental
organizations will be able to attend our open discussions
on this matter in the future and offer their substantive
input.

The revitalization of the Security Council after the
cold war places a particular responsibility on all of us
who serve on this body. We cannot afford to limit
ourselves to react whenever the "CNN factor", combined
with the effects of the "global village" and of "mobilizing
shame", press our Governments into belated action.

Humanitarian assistance cannot be delivered in a
political and military vacuum. It will never alone ensure
a lasting solution to a conflict. Humanitarian assistance is
all about protecting people trapped by armed conflict and
protecting their fundamental rights. International peace
and security are at stake if those fundamental rights are
grossly violated. Humanitarian assistance cannot be
delivered if its purveyors are threatened. The Security
Council must place these concerns high on the agenda
when dealing with specific conflicts and devise a long-
term strategy to deal with them and incorporate it in
effective preventive action.

Finally, let me say that Portugal believes it would be
useful to reflect this debate in a presidential statement by
the Council. We are ready to cooperate with your
delegation, Mr. President, to work towards such an
outcome.

 

