The President: At the outset of the meeting, I should
like, on behalf of the Security Council, to express deep
sympathy to the Governments and the people of Germany,
Poland, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America, and to the
bereaved families of the victims of the tragic crash in
Bosnia and Herzegovina of a United Nations helicopter,
which was carrying members of the United Nations
International Police Task Force (IPTF) and of the Office of
the High Representative. The Council pays tribute to them
for their ultimate sacrifice in the cause of peace. On behalf
of the Council, I wish the survivors a full and speedy
recovery.

I now invite the members of the Council to stand and
observe a minute of silence in memory of all those who so
tragically lost their lives.

The members of the Council observed a minute of
silence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Croatia

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Croatia and Germany, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Drobnjak
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Eitel
(Germany) took the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
is meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern at the lack of substantial progress by the
Government of the Republic of Croatia in fulfilling
the conditions and tasks that are key to the transfer
of executive authority to the Republic of Croatia in
the territories of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium, as noted in its resolution 1120
(1997) and the 23 June 1997 report of the
Secretary-General (S/1997/487).

"In this regard, the Security Council calls upon
the Croatian Government to meet its obligations and
commitments and to take immediate action in the
following areas: to remove all administrative and
legal obstacles to the two-way return of all displaced
persons as well as to the return of refugees; to
ensure security and social and economic opportunity
including property rights for all returnees; to take
effective measures to prevent harassment of
returnees; to implement measures to establish
effective local government administrations; to ensure
the regular payment of benefits to all pension and
welfare recipients and open Croatian pension offices
in the region; to ensure further economic
reintegration; to initiate a country-wide public
programme of national reconciliation and curb media
attacks on ethnic groups; and to implement fully and
fairly the amnesty law and cooperate fully with the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. In
this context, the Security Council notes the recent
information provided by the Croatian Government
on intended steps to address some of these issues
and urges the Croatian Government to implement
these steps without delay.

"The Security Council emphasizes that the
prompt completion of the tasks outlined above, as
well as the fulfilment by the Croatian Government
of its obligations under the Basic Agreement
(S/1995/951), the agreements between the Croatian
Government and the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastem Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium (UNTAES), as well as the letter of
the Croatian Government of 13 January 1997
(S/1997/27, annex). will determine the pace of further
devolution of executive authority for the civil
administration to the Croatian Government as well as
further Council action. The Council urges all parties
to cooperate fully with UNTAES and looks forward to
the report of the Secretary-General due no later than
6 October 1997. as requested in its resolution 1120
(l997)."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1997/45.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 515 pm,

