Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): Allow me first of all to commend the commitment of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), who continues to provide outstanding support for the region’s efforts in the search for peace and sustainable development. The Niger welcomes his support for inclusive approaches in national dialogues and elections, as well as his assistance in promoting and ensuring respect for human rights and institutional reforms. Despite the multidimensional efforts that have been made in the Sahelo-Sahara region, the security situation there remains extremely worrisome. The year 2019 saw more than 700 terrorist attacks in the region. Violent non-State actors, including terrorist groups, criminal networks and community and tribal militias, repeatedly carried out attacks on civilians and defence and security forces, in particular in Burkina Faso, Mali and my own country, the Niger. That has undoubtedly constituted an obstacle to achieving regional stability and the Sustainable Development Goals in West Africa and the Sahel. The Niger reaffirms its support for the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel, whose overarching goal is to complement the Strategy and build on the gains made. While recalling that the Sahel is the lynchpin in the fight against terrorism, the Niger recommends that UNOWAS be given a mandate that enables it to address, with the same level of effectiveness, the challenges facing the Sahel today, namely, terrorism and intercommunal conflicts, among others. In addition to its role in preventive diplomacy and support for political processes in the region, UNOWAS will need to address the challenges I have just outlined. It is heartening to note that, aware of the fact that peace, security and stability in the region are a prerequisite for the integration and economic development of their region, the Heads of State and Government of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), over which the Niger currently presides, have committed themselves to strengthening governance and democratic institutions in their countries, as well as promoting respect for the rule of law. In that regard, in addition to Guinea- Bissau, which recently completed an electoral process that was difficult but enjoyed a successful outcome, elections will be held this year in six other countries of the region, as detailed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General earlier. The progress made in Mali, with the launch in Bamako, on 14 December 2019, of the inclusive national dialogue, which saw the participation of nearly all parties of the Malian nation, must also be noted. Likewise, we must also welcome the progress made in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, emanating from the Algiers process, particularly in the area of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. Such progress, which was achieved in a particularly difficult context, deserves to be encouraged and supported. In addition to national commitments in the fight against terrorism, which varies from 15 to 30 per of a given country’s budget, mobilizing the region in the fight against terrorism has resulted in the adoption by the ECOWAS Priority Action Plan for 2020-2024, aimed at eradicating terrorism, with a financial package of $2.3 billion, of which $1 billion will come from internal resources. In the same vein, five countries of the region have established the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force, which, although having accomplished successful missions, is still struggling to reach its full level of operationalization due to a lack of adequate financial and material resources. Here too, the international community should help those countries, which are now directly affected by the attacks of armed terrorist groups, to deal with them in the most efficient way by helping them to secure predictable funding. We wish to express our deepest gratitude to the friendly countries that support our armed forces in these difficult times, through multifaceted support. The Council will have noted that, while serious security concerns persist, the political prospects in the region are rather encouraging. More than ever, West Africa and the Sahel need the solidarity and concrete action of the international community in order to ensure that the democratic gains achieved are not thwarted by the criminal activities of armed terrorist groups, which undermine the very foundation of the State. The Niger commends the tireless efforts of the Special Representative, as well as his personal commitment and that of his teams. We are also aware of the difficulties involved in the implementation of his mandate, the scope of which is broadening with the closure of some offices in the region, in addition to the growing security challenges. I take this opportunity to call on the Council, on behalf of the region, to provide him with all the assistance necessary, in terms of both human and financial resources, to enable him to continue his efforts to promote dialogue, peace and security in West Africa and the Sahel with the same effectiveness.
