Mr. Koncke Pizzorno (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to congratulate you, Madam
President, for convening this open debate and for
promoting the adoption of the presidential statement on
the protection of civilians (S/PRST/2014/3). Similarly, I
wish to thank the speakers who preceded me for their
contributions to the debate.

Uruguay aligns with the statement made by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group
of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict. Nevertheless, my delegation would like to
make some comments in its national capacity.

We welcome the comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General (S/20l3/689). Unfortunately, despite
the significant progress of recent years - for example,
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding, which as a troop-
contributing country we can affirm - the civilian
population continues to be most affected in armed
conflicts, with the highest numbers of victims. The best
remedy to that problem should be prevention.

The prevention of massive violations of human
rights is indeed a complicated matter. However, the
question that arises is whether or not we could do more
in that area. The early identification of signs from the
field and the prompt sending of appropriate signals
to the relevant actors on the obligation to respect
the physical and moral integrity of individuals are
fundamental. That is a crucial priority aspect that, in
the year of the twentieth anniversary of the Rwandan
genocide, should prompt deep reflection.
Finding a peaceful resolution, inclusive political
dialogue, the strengthening of State institutions, and
thus of the rule of law, the promotion of sustainable
socioeconomic development and reconciliation are
inseparable elements of prevention, while at the same
time represent fundamental elements for the creation of
durable protection environments.

But very often, certainly, prevention efforts are
fruitless or they fail. In those cases, it is absolutely
necessary to facilitate access by humanitarian
personnel and to ensure that all parties involved and in
all situations respect international humanitarian law so
as to ensure suitable security conditions for the those
personnel to perform their tasks. We agree with the
Secretary-General on the need to further discuss the
issue of arbitrary denial of access to relief operations
and the consequences of denial.

Promoting accountability is another basic element
in preventing the most serious human rights violations.
In that context, the competent organs must consistently
make use of the instruments established by the
international community, such as the International
Criminal Court and the fact-finding mechanisms.

On the other hand, the issue of registering victims
is among the areas of emerging attention that could
enhance the protection of civilians. We are sensitive
to that important activity, which is aligned with the
principles of humanitarian law, first in relation to some
of the most fundamental values of human dignity, and
also because of its potential practical effects, as such
a record could shed light on the causes of the harm
inflicted on civilians and the necessary measures to
stop the harm and prevent its recurrence.

For Uruguay, consultations with the troop-
contributing countries participating in peacekeeping
operations are of particular importance.

Uruguay has taken note of the unique and
exceptional nature of the situation in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo, which is reflected in what is also
a unique solution, contained in resolution 2098 (2013),
through the creation of an Intervention Brigade. It is
a solution that goes beyond the traditional concept of
peacekeeping operations. In my Government's opinion,
such operations must continue to be developed in
accordance with the basic principles of the consent of
the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in cases of legitimate defence and in defence of the
mandate.

It is essential, on the one hand, to receive
information from conflict zones in the most transparent
and accurate way possible, through authorities
competent in humanitarian and human rights matters.
On the other hand, we have to redouble the efforts to
strengthen consensus and confidence in the concept of
the protection of civilians, which is based on respect
for the universally accepted norms of international,
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.

