Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation wishes to thank Mrs. Ogata for her
briefing to the Security Council on the question of refugees
in Africa.

We would also like to thank the President of the
Council and the American delegation for organizing this
open briefing. We appreciate the efforts they have made.

We hope that Mrs. Ogata's presence in the Council
and her briefing on the question of refugees in Africa can
help raise the awareness of the international community on
the question of refugees in Africa and prompt it to make
greater efforts in this regard.

The Chinese delegation would like to express its deep
sympathy for the tragic plight faced by the large numbers
of refugees and internally displaced persons in Africa. We
would also like to express our appreciation for the efforts
made by the relevant international organizations and the
agencies and bodies of the United Nations to protect and
assist refugees and internally displaced persons. In
particular, we would like to thank the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Mrs.
Ogata and her colleagues for the great amount of useful
work they have long been doing to solve the problem of
refugees.

We would also like to call upon all sides concerned to
follow international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
laws and to actively cooperate with the international
community in its efforts to protect refugees and internally
displaced persons.

The Chinese delegation has on many occasions
emphasized that the key to the settlement of the question of
refugees lies in eliminating the root causes. We believe that
political instability, economic underdevelopment, poverty
and backwardness are the major reasons for the existence
of refugees in Africa. Those problems have gone on for a
long time with no solution and have become further
exacerbated.

At present, the international community understands
this point clearly. In the various open debates held by the
Council on the question of Africa, representatives of
many countries, including African countries, have
emphasized the need for the international community to
take effective measures to help African countries
eliminate poverty and develop their economies. We
support those ideas.

In this light, we call upon the international
community - on the basis of respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity and non-interference in internal
affairs - to increase its support and assistance to African
countries and to help them maintain peace and promote
development in order finally to solve the question of
refugees. In the meantime, we hope that in providing
assistance the international community will follow the
principle of fairness and avoid imbalances in the
provision of assistance throughout the world.

As a developing country China has, within its
capabilities, been providing various types of assistance to
African countries through multilateral and bilateral
channels. China has established a good cooperative
relationship with UNHCR, and we wish to continue and
to enhance that cooperation in order to make our own
contribution to the settlement of the refugee question in
Africa.
