Mr. Rock (Canada): Thank you, Mr. President,
not only for the opportunity to take part in this debate
today, but also for the contribution that Pakistan
makes, with over 7,000 military personnel and civilian
police deployed in missions around the world. It is
truly a remarkable contribution.

If I may say so, this meeting is very timely for
taking stock. As we look back over the past year, there
has been a real enhancement in the manner in which
United Nations operations are both planned and
managed, whether one refers to Liberia, the expanded
mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, cote
d'Ivoire, Haiti or the missions planned for Sudan and
Burundi.

Over the short term, providing the United Nations
with adequate financial resources is perhaps the single
most important manner in which Member States can
assist the United Nations to tackle the surge in
operations that are expected. However, over the
medium to long term, there are three pillars in the
Canadian vision of how we as Member States of the
United Nations can collectively address the challenge
of improving peace support operations.

First is the increasing importance to the United
Nations of regional and multinational arrangements.
Second is the need for capacity-building initiatives to
enable a greater number of those arrangements to
undertake peace support operations, and third is the
priority that the United Nations system must attach to
the rule of law within peace support operations. Let me
deal briefly with each of those elements in turn.

The increasing role of regional organizations and
coalitions of the willing as partners of the United
Nations is perhaps one of the most significant
developments in the field of peace support operations
since the early 1990s. In recent years the Economic
Community of West African States, NATO, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the European Union and, most recently, the African
Union have been playing greater roles in peace support
operations. As an innovative arrangement - but
without a regional basis, and one in which participation
is open to all Members of the United Nations - the
multinational Standby High Readiness Brigade, or
SHIRBRIG, seeks to provide the Organization with
rapid deployment capability. It has already proved its
value and its flexibility in Ethiopia/Eritrea, Cote
d'Ivoire and Liberia. With African leaders having
agreed to develop regional standby brigades for peace
support operations modelled on SHIRBRIG, and with
the multinational peace force South-Eastern Europe -
SEEBRIG - still evolving, we expect this trend will
continue.
What these arrangements have in common is that
they seek to provide a cohesive force that can be used
for peace support operations that have been authorized
by the United Nations. Such arrangements are a proven
way to overcome the problem of force inter-operability
that has historically been a serious one for peace
support operations. Such capabilities are all the more
important as the Council increasingly recognizes the
need for Chapter VII mandates that permit the use of
force to establish secure environments, re-establish law
and order, deter "spoilers" and protect civilians.

I would also add here that Canada views the
protection of civilians as integral to the Chapter VII
mandates that are increasingly being provided to peace
support operations. Here, lessons learned from recent
missions should be drawn out, and we are confident
that the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs have much to offer in this regard.

In implementing these mandates, it is of utmost
importance for those deployed on mission to set the
example and abide by the highest standards of conduct
to gain the confidence of the people they are there to
protect.

I would also point out that regional and
multinational arrangements are entirely consistent with
both the letter and the spirit of Articles 43 and 53 of
the Charter. They will have a critical role to play in the
future of peace support operations and in both
supplementing and supporting the capabilities of the
United Nations itself. In this context we recall the
Brahimi Panel recommendation that "Member States
should be encouraged, where appropriate, to enter into
partnerships with one another to form several
coherent brigade-size forces, with necessary enabling
forces" (S/2000/809, para. 117 (a)).

It is in this context that Canada views the
increasing role of regional and multinational
arrangements for United Nations peace support
operations and strongly encourages the Organization to
continue to develop its partnerships with them.

I turn to my second point, capacity building.
Canada recognizes that it is not enough simply to
encourage other nations to form regional arrangements.
When the political will to do so is present but the
resources and capacity are lacking, it is also in our
interest to assist those organizations to develop their
capability for peace support operations.

Within the African context, the Joint G-8/Africa
Plan to Enhance African Capabilities to Undertake
Peace Support Operations, adopted at the G-8 Evian
Summit in June 2003, provides the basis for ongoing
initiatives to be harmonized and new efforts to be
developed. While emphasis is placed on the role of G-8
countries and other donors in supporting this process,
the centrality of the United Nations to the successful
implementation of the plan cannot be overstated. Such
arrangements must be consistent with the Charter.

The United Nations has at its disposal a wealth of
information on standards, operating procedures and
best practices that should be drawn upon. Existing
training centres such as the Kofi Annan International
Peacekeeping Training Centre, as well as those
operating in Francophone Africa and in Kenya, can
also be used. In short, there is scope for greater
coordination of efforts between the G-8, other donors,
the African Union and the United Nations.

However, an underlying problem is the financing
of missions undertaken by regional organizations,
particularly in Africa. Though they may be mandated
by the Security Council, they are paid for not through
assessed contributions but through voluntary funding.
As we all stand to benefit from such operations, we
believe that there should be effective burden-sharing
arrangements for donor support and that consideration
should be given to whether such arrangements could be
modelled on the United Nations scale of assessments, a
pledging system of some kind, and/or whether the
African Peacekeeping Trust Fund could be used.

Finally, Mr. President, I come to the rule of law.
Of equal importance to ensuring that the United
Nations can draw upon the necessary resources to
undertake peace support operations is that an effective
exit strategy be realized. To create an environment in
which a mission can close, leaving behind it a
sustainable peace, the rule of law must be re-
established.

(spoke in French)

Missions must be provided with specific
mandates, strategic planning and resources to meet the
challenges. Building greater rule-of-law capacities into
the United Nations system in a manner which better
integrates all of its elements - police, corrections,
judiciary, legislation, transitional legal codes, etc. -
should be a priority for us all. Critical in this regard is
better coordination between the various actors and
donors that contribute to the rule of law in the field.

With that, allow me to close by reiterating how
crucial it is for what we increasingly see as an
interlocking network of peacekeeping and peace
support arrangements and entities - albeit with the
United Nations remaining at the centre - to cooperate
in addressing the complex of security challenges which
the international community currently faces.

