Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation wholeheartedly thanks you, Sir,
and your country for having organized this debate
during the Croatian presidency of the Security Council
in December. I welcome your leadership in today's
debate, as well as the presence of the Secretary-
General.

I have the honour to speak not only for France
but also on behalf of the European Union and the
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Montenegro; as well as Ukraine
and the Republic of Moldova, which align themselves
with this declaration.

Despite our best efforts, the threat of terrorism is
as real as ever, as the long and bitter litany of terrorist
acts that occur around the world reminds us. The
sophistication and determination of the terrorists who
struck at the heart of Mumbai a few days ago attests to
that.

To combat terrorism, we must do more and we
must do better. To that end, we must first understand
the mechanics of the global terrorism that, here in New
York, opened a new and bloody era in the history of
terrorism. Terrorism is global in its scope and in its
ability to blend in with globalization and to change
with modern times, despite the archaic nature of its
ideological referents. It is also global in its ability to
defy and threaten our States, despite the fact that there
are probably only a few hundred, or perhaps a few
thousand, terrorists scattered around the world.

The European Union regards terrorism as one of
the greatest threats to international peace and security.

Our duty is to combat that scourge using all possible
means. To do so, however, we must overcome the
deadly traps that terrorism has set for us: fear, division
and renunciation. Fear is abdication and defeat.
Division is reflected in the rifts between peoples,
cultures and religions that terrorists seek explicitly to
provoke. Renunciation is the abandonment of the
principles and values - dialogue, peace and human
rights - on which our democracies and, of course, our
Organization are built.

For the European Union, respect for human rights
and the rule of law are fundamental elements in the
fight against terrorism. It is a case not of arbitrary
power directed against indiscriminate violence, but
rather of the rule of law set against crime. It is by
respecting our values, law, public freedoms and the use
of clear and fair procedures that we will defeat
terrorism.

For the European Union, the United Nations is
the natural framework for developing standards and
structures to strengthen international cooperation
against terrorism. The United Nations has a central role
to play in this respect. From that perspective,
considerable efforts have been undertaken. The main
tools have been developed: 16 international counter-
terrorism instruments, several wide-ranging Security
Council resolutions, three subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council, and the recent Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, to which all United Nations
Member States have subscribed. With those texts, the
United Nations has developed both the key principles
of an effective global fight against terrorism and the
institutional and legal instruments necessary to that
end.

Through the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force established by the Secretary-General, and
in which the three Council Committees and their teams
of experts are actively involved, the United Nations
system has begun to develop a framework for
integrated support for the implementation of the
Strategy.

I would now like to emphasize some of the
challenges we must meet, as an international
community, in order to confront terrorism. We must
first pursue the important work to address more
generally the conditions that lead to the spread of
terrorism. Strengthening education, development
assistance and efforts to resolve crises and regional
conflicts are one objective in themselves, but this work
also focuses on the elements of frustration and injustice
that terrorist propaganda and recruitment exploit for
their murderous ends. Here too, the role of the United
Nations is essential.

We must also ensure that the international
community as a whole and the individual Member
States remain mobilized in combating terrorism. This
fight is not waged only in emergencies, when violence
breaks out for all to see. It requires determined and
patient work over time. How can we ensure that this
work receives the attention and political support it
requires? In that regard, Mr. President, your initiative
is a major step in the right direction.

Regional organizations also have a role to play.
The strengthening of regional cooperation against
terrorism is also a factor of integration, as evidenced
by the adoption of the European arrest warrant that
played a key role in the fight of both Spain and France
against ETA, which unfortunately again struck the
Basque country last week and murdered there.
Initiatives have been taken in other regions of the
world, recently in South-East Asia and West Africa. La
Francophonie has also drawn up an important
convention on judicial cooperation. The European
Union welcomes those efforts.

The primary responsibility for the fight against
terrorism, of course, lies with States. The States of the
European Union are committed to fully implementing
Security Council resolutions. The same is true for the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The European
Union itself developed a strategy against terrorism and
an action plan whose implementation is closely
monitored and assessed.

The European Union calls upon all States to
redouble their efforts to fully implement the Security
Council resolutions and the recommendations of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, to become parties to all
international instruments against terrorism and to
implement the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in an
integrated manner. As reports have confirmed, on a
global level we are far from achieving this goal, and in
some parts of the world the efforts being made are still
insufficient. From this perspective, nobody today can
afford to remain idle or feel immune to terrorism,
regardless of their region or level of development.

The Security Council did not hesitate to impose
sanctions on States harbouring or assisting terrorists.

This firm line must be maintained and strengthened,
particularly through the work undertaken by the
Council's subsidiary bodies on non-compliance, in
order to distinguish between States that are deemed
able but unwilling to meet their obligations and those
that do not have the means to do so.

In the face of a global threat that is capable of
exploiting all vulnerabilities, two key issues must be
addressed very carefully. How can the international
community prevent territories from becoming safe
havens for terrorists? How to ensure that States that
have the political will but lack the means receive
advice and support?

The European Union is committed to those goals
through its various political and financial instruments,
in particular the European Security and Defence Policy
and the Instrument for Stability. The same is true of its
member States, through their bilateral programmes or
their support for United Nations programmes for the
consolidation of peace or assistance in the field of anti-
terrorist legislation. But given the magnitude of these
challenges, the United Nations system should reflect
more broadly on the support it could provide as regards
capacity-building and assisting States in the fight
against terrorism.

In conclusion, my delegation would again like to
emphasize the paradox of terrorism, as it must be fully
understood if we are to be effective. No more than a
few hundred - perhaps a few thousand - people
scattered throughout the world are defying our 192
nations, and yet they have managed to turn this
weakness into a strength. We must strive to reduce the
impact of their attacks and to treat them as the
criminals they are. We owe that to all victims of
terrorism. But as States, we must also strengthen
measures of the struggle against terrorism, ensure their
consistency and increase our cooperation. It is a matter
of raising the level of anti-terrorism systems
throughout the world and enhancing their inter-
operability.

My delegation supports the draft presidential
statement and the call for solidarity contained therein.

