Mr. Olinger (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
First of all, I wish to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
debate on children and armed conflict and to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for her
tireless commitment and her presentation of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2009/158). I welcome its
quality and relevance. My delegation supports the
statement made by the representative of the Czech
Republic on behalf of the European Union.

I wish to emphasize a few points and principles
that are important to my country, which supports
bilaterally a number of organizations that are working
towards mitigating the plight of children in armed
conflict, in particular UNICEF and the International
Committee of the Red Cross.

Today, there is a range of legal and political
instruments that seek to prevent the most serious
suffering of children in armed conflict. Our common
action to protect children in armed conflict also
requires ratification, and especially implementation of
relevant international instruments such as the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. In that context, we must recall the importance
of ratifying the Rome Statute, which contains an
important provision defining the act of conscripting or
drafting children younger than 15 years of age into the
armed forces as a war crime.

My Government believes it is important to bring
to justice all of the perpetrators of war crimes and
massive violations of human rights and humanitarian
law, especially when those crimes have been
committed against children. Impunity cannot be
tolerated, and my delegation fully agrees with the
recommendation of the Secretary-General in his report,
that the Council must not hesitate to refer violations
committed against children in armed conflict to the
International Criminal Court.

The 2007 Paris Conference was also a turning
point that recognized that violations of the rights of
children are violations of international law and that a
State must not only protect children on its territory, but
must also do its utmost to put constant pressure on
armed groups to obtain the release of conscripted
children. Two years later, it is essential to continue to
follow up on those commitments.
Reading the report of the Secretary-General
confirms the fact that, in spite of strong international
mobilization, children continue to be the first
casualties of armed conflicts. I am speaking of child
soldiers, who are on the front lines of more than 30
conflicts throughout the world, as well of the millions
of children suffering from the atrocities of war,
including maiming and sexual violence. In that context,
my delegation fully supports the recommendation of
the Secretary-General to broaden the monitoring and
reporting mechanisms under resolution 1612 (2005) on
grave sexual violence against children.

Luxembourg calls upon the Security Council, in
line with the recommendation of the Secretary-
General, to ensure that all peacekeeping operations
have sufficient resources to implement a child
protection policy, in particular through the deployment
of child protection advisers. The advisers should also
draw attention to situations where peacekeeping might
be carried out in a way that acts to the detriment of
children.

All conflict situations in which atrocities are
committed against children require our urgent
attention. I wish to note a few specific cases. At
present there is fighting in Sri Lanka, and civilians,
including many children, are once again the main
casualties. While violations of the rights of children are
not known in their full scope, it is clear from the
Secretary-General's report that the various parties to
the conflict, in particular the Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam, have conscripted children, and that a large
number of children have been kidnapped.

While the Government of Sri Lanka has assumed
some responsibility for children leaving armed groups
by promoting their reintegration, indiscriminate aerial
bombardment and long-range artillery fire are causing
grave suffering among the civilian population,
particularly children. I join my voice to all those
calling for an immediate ceasefire.

In conclusion, I wish to say a word on Burundi,
on behalf of which my country is involved in the
Peacebuilding Commission. Luxembourg welcomes the
demobilization of former child soldiers, including girls,
from the ranks of the Forces nationales de liberation
(FNL), and appeals strongly to the FNL and the
Government to pursue the demobilization of other
children in compliance with international norms. It is
important now to facilitate their return and sustained
socio-economic reintegration through education and
vocational training programmes. This situation
demonstrates that the Peacebuilding Commission can
play a critical role in the mobilization of resources for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes and in supporting awareness campaigns
concerning child soldiers.

