Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Madam Minister, I should like to express our
great pleasure at seeing you presiding over the Security
Council and to congratulate you on the outstanding
manner in which your delegation, under the leadership
of Ambassador Kumalo and his team, has conducted
the work of the Security Council since the beginning of
this month. I should also like to express our
appreciation to your friendly country, South Africa, for
its particular interest in the issue of cooperation
between the Security Council and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in the
maintenance of international peace and security. I
thank you for convening this open thematic debate and
for submitting the valuable concept paper (S/2007/ 148, annex) in that regard.

While the Charter of the United Nations entrusts
to the Security Council the primary role in the
maintenance of international peace and security, its
authors realized that cooperation between the
Organization and regional arrangements or agencies is
the linchpin of collective efforts to safeguard
international peace and security. That is why they
devoted the whole of Chapter VIII to such important
cooperation.

Since then, international developments, new
forms of conflict and threats to international and
regional peace and security have made it imperative to
develop, update and expand such cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations on the
basis of their comparative advantages, their
complementarity and the experiences that they have
acquired. It should be noted that Chapter VIII of the
Charter still provides a generally accepted framework
for the nature of the relationship between the United
Nations - in particular the Security Council - and
regional organizations.

The leading role that can be played by regional
and subregional organizations in peacebuilding has
special significance, since such organizations are in a
better position to understand the root causes of the
conflicts in their regions and to assess the best means
for addressing and settling them.

Over the past few years, regional organizations
have become increasingly aware of the regional aspects
of conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. In addition, the actual role played by
regional organizations, particularly the African Union,
has increased in those areas and others, including
disarmament, preventing the proliferation of weapons,
protecting civilians and even dealing with natural
disasters. Some regional organizations have established
their own peacekeeping mechanisms to supplement the
role of the Security Council and the United Nations in
that regard. Here, the African Union Peace and
Security Council comes readily to mind.

In parallel, there has been a growing recognition
in the United Nations system of the regional aspects of
maintaining international peace and security, the role
of regional organizations in that regard and the
prospects for developing that role. That is clearly
reflected in a number of Security Council resolutions
and presidential statements, particularly resolution
1631 (2005) and presidential statement
S/PRST/2006/39. Moreover, the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1)
underscored the importance of a stronger relationship
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, pursuant to Chapter VIII of

the Charter. Moreover, in many of his reports on this
item, the Secretary-General has offered detailed ideas
regarding the multifaceted cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations and the
means to develop such cooperation.

This issue is not confined to its theoretical
aspects. The experience gained in peacemaking, in a
number of situations, in partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU) reveals the
great possibilities of such cooperation - particularly
cooperation between the United Nations and a regional
organization - and the great benefits that it can yield.
In that regard, we wish to indicate that the experience
gained from the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in Africa is not
particular to that region; rather, it is an asset that can
be used by the United Nations in similar situations in
the future.

It is imperative that we continue to consider
possible forms of partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations, including
providing support and resources to regional and
subregional organizations, enhancing their resource
base and building their capacities, as well as holding
regular meetings between the Organization and
regional and subregional organizations on the
maintenance of international peace and security, with a
view to developing means for cooperation and
partnership.

Cooperation between the Security Council and
regional organizations should not be limited to military
aspects and peacekeeping, but should include the other
aspects of peacebuilding and conflict prevention. These
issues must also be considered from a holistic, long-
term and non-selective perspective. That would
enhance the effectiveness of conflict prevention and
resolution efforts, promote respect for international law
and contribute to the attainment of the common
objectives of safeguarding national, regional and
international peace and security.

In conclusion, I should like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to the
delegation of South Africa for its strenuous efforts in
preparing the draft presidential statement. We look
forward to its adoption at the conclusion of this
meeting.

