Mr. Cavusoglu (Turkey): It is an honour to address
the Security Council on this special day, 23 April,
when in 1920, the Turkish National Assembly met for
the first time, in Ankara. The founder of our Republic,
Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, dedicated this day to children
worldwide. Today, our hearts and minds are with
children and youth who are oppressed, trafficked and
smuggled around the globe.

There are 1.8 billion young people in the world.
That is the largest youth generation in history, and it is
a key asset for our common future. Yet today, all around
the world, extremist ideologies, radicalization and
terrorism are targeting young people. Terrorist groups
such as Da'esh, Al-Qaida, the Kurdistan Workers Party,
the People's Protection Units and the Fethullahci Teror
Orgiitii abuse and recruit women, children and youth.
Xenophobia, anti-Islam currents, ethnic and religious
discrimination and socioeconomic marginalization are
the root causes of radicalization among youth. We must
stop this. What we need is a holistic approach.

In Turkey, half the population is under the age of3l.
In addition, we host almost 1 million Syrian youth, and
we have developed tailor-made Government structures
and policies to address their needs. We encourage youth
to fully participate in economic and social life in Turkey.
We have lowered the age limits for parliamentary
elections, and we make sure that they take part in
decision-making processes. We promote role models,
social reintegration and rehabilitation programmes.
Education is also a key factor. We leave no one behind
and provide equal opportunities for all. We also
promote dialogue among young people from different
backgrounds. All of those efforts complement our work
towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

We, the decision makers and politicians, have
important responsibilities. One of the reasons for the
rise of extremism in Western Europe in particular is
the divisive language used by some politicians. That
approach divides people along ethnic and religious
lines, and that is a very dangerous game. We must
refrain from creating stereotypes. Instead, we must
convey message of unity, positive messages.

Radicalization and violent extremism are not
limited to one particular religion, faith or community;
they are our common challenge, and we need to face it
together. Resolution 2250 (2015) is proof of the crucial
role of youth in peace and security. The new resolution
to be adopted should provide further guidance. We
must also use the potential of existing mechanisms,
such as the Alliance of Civilizations. Spain and Turkey
are trying to re-energize that initiative, which we need
more than ever.

We also need to create interaction among national,
regional and global measures. Good practices and
lessons learned in one part of the world can be
employed globally. That is why we need to expand the
United Nations capabilities to support Member States.
We will continue to contribute to all the efforts aimed
at empowering youth.

