Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President,
I wish to congratulate you on having assumed the
presidency of the Council. We appreciate your initiative
to hold this debate and to enable us to participate. We
agree with you on the importance of holding this debate
in an objective manner, free of political considerations,
and of thinking outside the box in order to prevent
and resolve crises and promote international peace
and security.

For decades our region has been marred by crises
and conflicts, with serious ramifications not only
for its security and stability but also in terms of the
unimaginable humanitarian consequences suffered
by its peoples. This poses a continuous threat to
international peace and security, and therefore the
Security Council has devoted efforts to addressing
these challenges. A holistic vision is required in order
to address these conflicts and crises, their causes and
the elements that could lead to their resolution.

We reiterated many times that addressing these
crises, both new and old, requires that we tackle their
root causes, meet the economic and development needs
of the peoples of the region, promote the rule of law
and good governance and respect human rights, as well
as kindle hope for the peoples of the region for a better
future, especially young people, so as to shield them
against extremism and violence.
Turning to the mandate of the Security Council,
it is extremely important to promote international and
regional collective-security mechanisms to resolve
conflicts in a peaceful way, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.

The maintenance of international peace and
security requires respect for international law and
a commitment to the Charter, respect for human
rights and a commitment to refraining from the use
of any policies that would exacerbate instability and
undermine international peace and security. In this
respect, the contrived crisis imposed on Qatar as
well as the unjust blockade and unilateral, illegal and
unjust measures against it represent the epitome of
irresponsible policies that contravene international
law and the provisions of the Charter, run counter to
good-neighbourliness and undermine relations among
countries and fraternal peoples, and do not safeguard
important regional organizations such as the Gulf
Cooperation Council.

This crisis, which is alien to the values of our
peoples and undermines their historical cohesion,
represents a threat to the security and stability of
this Vital region which is so important to the world
and has costly ramifications for international peace
and security. This contrived crisis has highlighted
new challenges to international peace and security,
such as the hacking crime against the State of Qatar
and the consequent lies upon which the contrived crisis
was built. It has demonstrated the seriousness of the
cyberspace threat to the security and sovereignty of
States. We must call attention to the threats that States
and societies are subjected to in this area, and how to
safeguard the cybersecurity. We welcome the fact that
the Secretary-General is focusing attention on this.

Through its foreign policy, the State of Qatar seeks
to maintain international peace and security and resolve
conflicts and disputes by peaceful means and dialogue,
while maintaining constructive collective work and
good neighbourliness. We therefore continue to call for
dialogue to resolve the Gulf crisis, and we appreciate
the efforts of friendly and fraternal countries, led by
His Highness the Amir of Kuwait, to resolve it.

The settlement of crises in the region must be
based on respect for international law, the Charter
of the United Nations, resolutions of international
legitimacy, friendly relations among the States, good
neighbourliness and abstaining from the threat or use
of force, in addition to addressing the root causes.
Collective efforts must be made to combat
terrorism and extremism, while taking measures to
eliminate terrorist groups, uproot them and ensure
that they do not re-emerge in different forms. That
calls for not only military and security action, but also
for a holistic developmental approach that addresses
the ideology and narratives of those groups and their
means of recruiting young people. That is the approach
that the State of Qatar is pursuing in our international
initiatives for education and youth employment.

The State of Qatar has launched initiatives to
support the efforts of the United Nations in various
areas, including support for the mandate of the Security
Council to maintain international peace and security.
We are determined to continue our efforts to put an end
to conflicts and crises and to resolve them peacefully
and to work in accordance with the letter and spirit of
the Charter of the United Nations.

We address the looming threats in our region and
our people's need for security, stability and prosperity
while also respecting the rule of law. At the recent
Munich Security summit, His Highness Sheikh Tamim
Ben Hamad Al Thani, Amir ofthe State of Qatar, called
for the establishment of a regional regime to contribute
to maintaining peace and security. He stated,

"It is time for broader regional security in the
Middle East. It is time for all nations of the region
to agree on basic security principles and rules
of governance, and at least a minimum level of
security to allow for peace and prosperity."

In conclusion, the State of Qatar will do its utmost
to contribute to all efforts aimed at maintaining
international peace and security. We will also continue
our policy of supporting and cooperating with the
United Nations and our partners in the international
community in order to achieve our shared objectives,
as we have always done.

