The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Egypt, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdelaziz
(Egypt) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: Following consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council:

"The Security Council unequivocally
condemns the terrorist attacks that took place in
Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, on 23 July 2005, and
expresses its deepest sympathy and condolences
to the Victims of these attacks and their families,
and to the people and Government of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, as well as to all other
countries whose citizens have been killed or
injured in these attacks;

"The Security Council underlines the need
to bring the perpetrators, organizers, financiers
and sponsors of this horrendous act to justice, and
urges all States, in accordance with their
obligations under international law and resolution
1373 (2001), to cooperate actively with the
Egyptian authorities in this regard;

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security and that any acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, whenever and by
whomsoever committed.
"The Security Council further reaffirms the
need to combat by all means, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, threats to
international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts.

"The Security Council reiterates its
determination to combat all forms of terrorism, in
accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/36.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.10p.m.

