Mr. Pascoe: We meet here today at a critical time
for Somalia. The situation in the country, particularly
in Mogadishu, remains very fragile. While there have
been some solid successes in consolidating the
Government, the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) continues to face intense pressure from
insurgent forces, backed by foreign fighters, who seek
to seize power. As the Secretary-General has reiterated
on several occasions, it is time for action on Somalia.
The choice before us is a stark one. Either we help the
Somali people overcome the current attempt to thwart
efforts towards peace or we allow the new unity
Government based on consensus and the Djibouti
accords to fall to a radical armed opposition.

Despite numerous challenges, the TFG, under the
leadership of President Sharif, has achieved some
notable accomplishments during its first six months in
office. The Government strives to maintain cohesion
despite the obvious difficulties faced by any
government of national unity.

The TFG has maintained an open-door policy to
those outside the Djibouti process by reaching out to
opposition forces and working to broaden its base of
support among community, religious and civil society
leaders. The Prime Minister has recently signed a
broad-based agreement with Ahlu Sunnah Waljama'a,
one of the major religious opposition groups in central
Somalia. This agreement, covering political, security,
humanitarian and development issues, was negotiated
within the spirit of Djibouti and underscores the
Government's determination to invite all groups to join
in the rebuilding of Somalia. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Abdallah, continues to work with the Government and
all opposition groups to facilitate dialogue in an effort
to make the peace process more inclusive.

The Government has attempted to win the hearts
and minds of the Somali people and to project a
moderate vision of Islam that is in keeping with Somali
culture. The recent pronouncements by President
Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed urging Somalis to reject
violence and extremism have also been helpful in this
regard. However, the Government will continue to
require more support in its public information and
09-3985]
outreach programmes to ensure that this message is
widely disseminated amongst the Somali populace.

By contrast, Al-Shabaab appears to have
intensified its strategy of coercion and intimidation of
the population, using targeted assassinations of clan
elders and government officials and harsh punishments
for seemingly minor offences. Recent examples of acts
that have shocked many Somalis, who practice a very
moderate form of their religion, include the
decapitation of local community leaders and the
dismemberment of youths for theft. Reports of
resistance by local populations and community leaders
to the presence of Al-Shabaab and foreign fighters will
bolster the Government's efforts aimed at political
mobilization.

Even in the midst of its fight for survival, the
Government has put in place more transparent and
accountable financial management measures. It has
contracted the auditing firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers
to assist with tracking and reporting on the use of
funds. That should generate greater donor
confidence - especially on the part of those who
pledged in Brussels - by making the entire process
more transparent. This is in addition to the tracking
mechanism that has been put in place by the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS), with the
support of the African Union, the United Nations
Support Office for the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the Government. The TFG has developed a
budget based on revenues generated from Mogadishu
seaport, which ensured initial payments of salaries for
the police, security forces and parliamentarians residing
in Mogadishu.

The role of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) in helping the TFG to resist this latest
assault in Mogadishu has been pivotal, even while the
mission has been operating in a very difficult and
challenging security environment. In that regard, we
would like to pay tribute to the Burundi and Uganda
contingents of AMISOM. for the commendable work
they are undertaking in Somalia on behalf of the
international community. We deeply appreciate the
leadership provided by Major General Okello, Force
Commander of AMISOM, who has demonstrated a
high level of professionalism and commitment to peace
in Somalia.

In Mogadishu in particular, the ongoing conflict
between insurgent groups and Government forces has
09-39851

taken a severe toll on the civilian population,
displacing more than 200,000 people since the start of
the recent spate of fighting on 7 May 2009. Overall,
the number of internally displaced persons in Somalia
stands at 1.3 million. The humanitarian situation is
being further exacerbated by the worsening drought in
Somalia and throughout the region.

Increasing insecurity in the Jubas and Mogadishu,
coupled with drought and food insecurity issues -
including in the Gedo region, which borders Kenya -
are cited as the main reasons for a noticeable increase
in the number of arrivals in Dadaab camp, in Kenya. A
total of 6,463 more refugees were registered in June.
As of 5 July, the overall population at Dadaab stands at
284,306, an increase of2l per cent since the beginning
of 2009. The implications of that new influx for
already congested facilities and for tense host
communities competing for resources are severe.

In this challenging context, while the
humanitarian needs for Somalia remain high, it is
critical that Security Council members encourage
donors to rapidly fund the consolidated appeal. At the
end of June, only 44 per cent of the $984 million
requested had been received, leaving a critical shortfall
in the areas of health, water and sanitation and security.

In order to consolidate the political gains of the
Djibouti accords, the Secretary-General has proposed -
and the Council has endorsed - a four-track strategy,
on political matters, security, recovery and combating
piracy. On the political track, in addition to fostering
national reconciliation and sustaining dialogue between
the TFG and opposition groups, the United Nations,
under the leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, has undertaken a series of
discussions with the Government to identify key
ministries whose capacities would need to be
strengthened in the first phase.

Having identified possible funding from
international financial institutions, UNPOS has made
several Visits to Mogadishu to reach agreement with
the Cabinet and the Prime Minister on, among other
things, the modalities of this capacity-building effort.
Consultations also continue on the development of a
constitution, including a future conference on the place
of sharia law in the new constitution.

On the security track, UNPOS has reached an
agreement with the TFG to use the Joint Security
Committee as the principal mechanism for
coordination between the TFG and the international
community on security matters. This would include the
establishment and functioning of the national security
force and the police force. The United Nations
Development Programme continues to coordinate the
training of Somali police in consultation with
AMISOM. The payment of salaries for the trained
police is ongoing, while bilateral partners are working
on training national security forces. We continue
working on an incremental approach towards the
possible establishment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. That approach calls for
expeditious assistance to the TFG in building its own
security forces and institutions and the strengthening of
AMISOM. to reach its mandated strength of 8,000.

On the recovery track, the United Nations country
team is initiating a series of projects to help Somalia
move beyond the current emergency and to ensure that
its people experience some benefit from the peace
process. Those projects include increasing access to
basic services, such as water, health and education;
creating livelihoods through rapid employment
generation; the rehabilitation of key infrastructure; and
other rapid-impact recovery programmes.

Finally, on piracy, the United Nations appreciates
the operations of the international maritime forces in
their anti-piracy efforts. Following the May meeting of
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia,
the United Nations was requested to serve as the
secretariat of the Contact Group and to establish a trust
fund to address the legal and land-based dimensions of
piracy. A plan of action has been developed with the
United Nations country team to implement a series of
activities that would provide alternative livelihoods
and enhance law enforcement. The Secretary-General
has dispatched his Legal Counsel, Ms. Patricia
O'Brien, to Kenya to explore possible initiatives to
combat piracy and armed robbery off the coast of
Somalia, including the development of a legal
framework for combating piracy and armed robbery off
the Somali coast.

In our View, there are three key measures that we
can take immediately to turn around the two decades of
instability in Somalia. The first is to heed the call made
by the African Union heads of State or Government in
Sirte last week to express our full support for the
Transitional Federal Government as the legitimate
authority in Somalia and to honour the financial
pledges made to support the Government during the

Brussels conference in April. In order to enable the
Government to enhance its legitimacy and broaden its
base, we must invest in building the security
institutions and improve its capacity to deliver public
services and employment, which could have a positive
impact on the hearts and minds of ordinary Somalis.
Projects aimed at encouraging youth employment and
enhancing the livelihood of ordinary Somalis need to
be given priority. These are essential to wean Somalis
away from conflict, including acts of piracy, which has
been the major employer in Somalia for most of the
past two decades.

Secondly, we need to build up AMISOM. and
provide it with the resources necessary to enable it to
continue to support the TFG and the people of Somalia.
As President Sharif recently stated, the TFG's
immediate physical survival is very much dependent on
a more robust AMISOM. presence. We strongly urge
Member States to support the strengthening of
AMISOM's capacity and to enable it to reach its full
authorized strength of 8,000. The United Nations is
committed to providing support to AMISOM, as
Under-Secretary-General Malcorra will discuss in her
statement.

Thirdly, we must focus on promoting
reconciliation while, at the same time, taking measures
against armed groups and foreign elements that are
undermining the reconciliation process. As the
Secretary-General has said on many occasions, the
Somali peace process is open to all groups that
renounce violence and are willing to work with the
Government. That is the message being sent by the
TFG to all parties that remain outside the peace
process. It will be important for regional actors to work
to encourage the armed groups to work towards that
end and towards peace in Somalia.

In conclusion, we acknowledge that national
reconciliation must first begin with the Somalis, yet we
are aware of the considerable investment that the
international community has made in the future of
Somalia. We must do what we can to preserve the gains
achieved through the Djibouti Agreement. It is in the
international community's interest to ensure not only
that the TFG does not collapse, but that it thrives.
Action now will avert the inevitable high price of
going in at a later date if we are not successful. We
believe that immediate and concerted action by the
international community can help the Somali people
turn a new page in their troubled history and create a

09-3985]

conducive environment for peace, stability and
recovery.

