Mr. Alfassam (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my appreciation to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her extensive briefing on the
fifteenth report of the Prosecutor of the ICC to the
Security Council in accordance with resolution 1970
(2011). The State of Kuwait welcomes the efforts of
the Court to ensure justice and prevent impunity, in
accordance with international law, especially in the
light of the difficult situation in Libya. We commend
the progress achieved by of the Office of the Prosecutor
in confronting the security challenges that impede
its endeavours to carry out its responsibilities of
monitoring and bringing to justice the perpetrators of
crimes, especially given the proliferation of weapons
and militias that have come to harm the Libyan people.

In that regard, we share Ms. Bensouda's concern
about the recent escalation of armed conflicts in
Tripoli, Benghazi, Sabha and Derna. We also express
our concern over the information contained in the
Prosecutor's report with respect to the perpetration
of crimes such as kidnapping and executing military
and civilian personnel and members of the competing
political factions, targeting the mayor of Misrata,
Mr. Mohamed Eshtewi, and committing crimes against
migrants. Those are all tantamount to flagrant violations
of international humanitarian law. We therefore renew
our strongest condemnation of such crimes.

In that regard, the greatest responsibility falls to
the Libyan authorities to uphold justice throughout all
Libyan territories by exercising their jurisdiction. The
ICC should take into the account the national criminal
jurisdiction in Libya for cases being considered by
Libyan courts in the context of realizing the desired
integration between the national judiciary and the
ICC, which is a complement to the national criminal
jurisdiction, in accordance with article 1 of the
Rome Statute.

To that end, we commend the important
cooperation that the Libyan authorities provide to the
Court and Prosecutor in line with the requirements of
resolution 2174 (2014). Furthermore, the State of the
Kuwait underscores the importance of the international
community's continued support to the Libyan
Government with a view to developing a comprehensive
strategy to address the heinous crimes committed in
Libya and providing the necessary assistance to the
Libyan authorities for them to establish the rule of law,
administer justice and implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

While the State ofKuwait recognizes the magnitude
of the security challenges facing Libya, which in turn
undermine the role of the ICC experts in conducting
their investigations, we welcome the field visit by a team
from the Prosecutor's Office to Libya in March. It took
place after a hiatus that lasted more than five years. We
also value the support provided by the relevant Libyan
authorities and the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya. Such cooperation will undoubtedly further the
effectiveness of the investigations conducted by the
Office ofthe Prosecutor in the discharge of its mandate.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
appreciation for the important work being done by
the Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and her Office
in carrying out her mandate to investigate the serious
crimes committed in Libya. We emphasize the need
for the Council to provide its continued support to
those efforts.

