Mr. Dah (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
enlightening briefing on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.

Cote d'Ivoire is concerned about the escalation of
violence during the Great March of Return, organized
by the Palestinians along the fence separating the
Gaza Strip and Israel; that violence is entering its
third consecutive week. Our concern is justified by the
heavy toll accompanying those demonstrations, which
have resulted in the deaths of 37 Palestinians and more
than 4,000 injured as a result of the various clashes.
My country would like to highlight the fact that such
violence only exacerbates the tensions between the
Israeli and Palestinian sides, sustaining the doubts
and uncertainties over the continuation of the peace
process, which has been stalled since 2014.

In View of that new outbreak of violence, my
country remains convinced that there is no alternative
to peace. It urges the parties concerned to exercise
restraint, to engage in constructive dialogue and to
refrain, on both sides, from unilateral actions, which
can only further distance the prospects for a peaceful
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian crisis. My country
takes this opportunity to reaffirm its principled position
in support of a negotiated settlement that prioritizes the
two-State solution, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security.

My delegation also remains concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Gaza, which is heavily
impacted by the ongoing blockade, youth unemployment
and the shortages of water and electricity. We welcome
the pledges made at the extraordinary ministerial
conference held in Rome on 15 March aimed at
reducing the budget deficit of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, which has been facing a decrease in the usual
contributions to its operation.

Finally, we reaffirm our full support for the
initiatives under way to find a peaceful resolution of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in particular the plan of
the President of the Palestinian Authority to organize
an international peace conference in mid-May, with
broad international participation.

In addition to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the
Middle East also faces a series of security challenges,
such as the situations in Syria and Yemen and the
Iranian nuclear issue.

With regard to Syria, despite the relative calm, my
delegation deeply regrets the lack of progress towards a
political solution to the conflict, as well as the continuing
fighting, which exacerbates the humanitarian situation.
Given that worrisome situation, my delegation again
regrets that the ceasefire unanimously called for by
the Security Council as part of such a solution has not
materialized and that the dire humanitarian situation
in Syria continues to persist without any apparent
end to the conflict. In the light of all of the above,
cote d'Ivoire reiterates its appeal to the parties to the
conflict to fully implement resolution 2401 (2018) with
a view to allowing unhindered access to humanitarian
assistance for those in distress.

My country would like once again to reaffirm its
conviction and its principled position that the response
to the crisis in Syria cannot be a military one. We
continue to believe that the priority still is and always
will be to find a political solution that can defuse the
Syrian crisis based on an in-depth dialogue involving
the key international, regional and Syrian stakeholders.

To that end, Cote d'Ivoire calls on the warring
parties to support the path of inclusive political dialogue
in the context of the Geneva talks and resolution 2254
(2015), which paves the way for a lasting political
settlement of the Syrian crisis. In that regard, Cote
d'Ivoire commends the efforts of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General to secure the resumption of the
peace talks and encourages the Council to lend its full
support to that end.
With regard to the conflict in Yemen, my delegation
remains particularly concerned about the continuing
deterioration in the humanitarian situation and the lack
ofprospects for a political settlement ofthe crisis in that
country. My country remains, convinced, unfortunately,
that, despite our joint efforts, the humanitarian situation
in Yemen will continue to deteriorate in the absence of
a viable political track.

Finally, my delegation would like to reaffirm its
commitment to the unity, sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Yemen. We therefore call on
the parties to the conflict to return to the negotiating
table with a view to achieving a peaceful settlement of
the crisis. In that regard, we welcome the appointment
of Mr. Martin Griffiths as the new Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General charged with working to achieve the
resumption of the intra-Yemeni political dialogue.

We strongly condemn the air strikes on a wedding in
Haj jah, in the north-western part of the country, which
allegedly killed at least 50 civilians, including children,
and injured dozens of people. My delegation also
condemns the firing of missiles by the Houthis towards
Saudi Arabia, endangering the lives of innocent people.

With regard to the Iranian nuclear issue,
my delegation reaffirms its support for the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, adopted under resolution
2231 (2015), It represents a major achievement for
the non-proliferation regime and allows for better
supervision of Iran's nuclear activities in return for the
gradual lifting of the sanctions against that country.

