Mr. Prosor (Israel): In the face of terrorists
kidnapping our children, we were left with no choice.
In the face of rockets raining down on our citizens,
we were left with no choice. In the face of jihadists
tunneling under our borders, we were left with no
choice.

A few hours ago, the Israel Defense Forces
entered Gaza to restore sustained quiet to the people
of Israel while degrading Hamas' terror capabilities.
We did everything in our power to avoid that. Prime
Minister Netanyahu made the courageous decision to
accept every ceasefire offered, even as the people of
Israel were under attack. But Hamas rejected every
overture to restore the quiet. That was not what we
wanted. We have sent our children - our sons and our
daughters - to face an enemy that lives by violence
and celebrates death.

I want to be clear. Our forces are fighting in Gaza but
they are not fighting the people of Gaza. For years, the
citizens of Israel have been the victims of unrelenting
attacks perpetrated by a murderous terrorist group.
Hamas has attacked us in our homes and our schools
and on our buses. The Council should stand now with
Israel to prevent the next barrage of rockets, the next
kidnapping, and the next suicide attack, so that we may
once and for all remove the threat of terrorism casting
its dark shadow over the people of Israel.

The past month alone offers a glimpse into the
unrelenting threats that Israel faces. We are being
attacked on four fronts. Rockets have been launched
from Syria, Lebanon and Sinai, and over 1,500 rockets
have been fired by terrorists in Gaza. Israel's great
restraint is being met with unrestrained aggression.
For six hours on Tuesday, Israel held its fire. During
that time, the world witnessed Hamas' understanding
of ceasefires. Israel ceases and Hamas fires. Hamas did
not fire one or two rockets; it battered Israel with 50
rockets. Every one sent a message loud and clear that
Hamas is determined to wage war on the Jewish State.

Two days later, the United Nations asked for
a limited humanitarian truce. Once again, Prime
Minister Netanyahu agreed and proved that Israel
is not interested in a war. As aid workers transferred
goods to assist the people of Gaza, Hamas continued to
defiantly launch rockets into Israel. How did Hamas use
the humanitarian ceasefire? It sent 13 heavily armed
terrorists through a terror tunnel towards Kibbutz Sufa
with the sole purpose of committing a massacre. This
is the third time in the past two weeks that Hamas has
used its tunnels to infiltrate Israel and tried to carry out
attacks. All the while, it is still launching hundreds of
rockets.

For 10 days, the life of 5 million Israelis has meant
having just seconds to run for a bomb shelter and save
their lives. Our largest cities - Tel Aviv, Haifa and
Jerusalem - are being bombarded on a daily basis.
There is no country in the world that would tolerate
such an assault on its citizens, and Israel should not be
expected to do so either. We are acting solely to defend
Israelis from constant terror attacks.

Throughout Operation Protective Edge, Israel has
been committed to upholding international law. Our
army is a moral army like no other in the world. It
does not aspire to harm any innocent person. We are
operating only against terrorist targets and genuinely
regret any civilian loss. In contrast, there is no red line
that Hamas will not cross. It will stop at nothing and
there is no depth that it will not sink to. It is even using
ambulances filled with children to move its terrorists
around Gaza.

There is no site that is off limits for Hamas. It is
storing its weapons in family homes and launching
rockets from mosques, and has established its
headquarters in the basement of a Gaza hospital.
Yesterday, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
admitted that it had found, mysteriously, 20 missiles
in one of its schools. I am sure that if UNRWA took
the time to check its other facilities, it would discover
that this is just the tip of the iceberg. Hamas is using
United Nations facilities to commit a double war crime
by targeting Israeli civilians while hiding behind
Palestinian civilians. From the safety of their luxury
hotels in Qatar, Hamas leaders like Khaled Mashaal
order room service with one hand and order Hamas to
use Palestinians as human shields with the other.

But Council members do not have to take my word
for it. The Palestinian representative to the United
Nations Human Rights Council has admitted as much,
saying:

"The missiles that are now being launched against
Israel - each and every missile constitutes a crime
against humanity, whether it hits or misses, because
it is directed at civilian targets."

I hope the Palestinian representative will remember that
when making threats to enter certain United Nations
organizations.

Israel has been faced with a choice that no nation
should have to make - refrain from responding and
subject its civilians to rocket attack, or engage with
terrorists and risk injuring civilians. Hamas uses
Palestinian casualties to fuel its propaganda machine.
Hamas' strategy is clear. It perpetuates the killing of its
own people in the hope that the international community
will place pressure on Israel to grant its demands.
Sadly, many people have fallen for this cynical
campaign by describing the fighting as moral
equivalency, or a "cycle of violence". All those who
argue that both sides are equally to blame are playing
into Hamas' hand and sentencing the people of Gaza and
Israel to further suffering. Ill-informed condemnations
of Israel strengthen the hand of terrorists. There is a
clear difference between Israel and Hamas. The Jewish
people believe in the value oflife, while Hamas believes
in the value oftaking lives. How many more Palestinians
must fall victim before President Abbas finally breaks
his partnership with Hamas? Abbas is the President
of the unity Government that includes a murderous
terrorist group. What exactly is his Government united
for? Obviously, not for peace.

Even as alarms sound throughout Israel, some
members of the international community are sounding
false alarms here in the United Nations. They told us
that as soon as Israel retreated to its 1967 lines and
dismantled its settlements, there would be peace.
They insisted that the conflict was fueled by the so-
called occupation. Occupation? Does no one remember
anything?

In 2005, when I headed Israel's foreign service,
Israel turned every inch of Gaza over to the Palestinians.
In the process, the world watched as we uprooted
thousands of families from their homes and dismantled
their businesses. When we were done, there was not a
soldier, not a settler and not a single Israeli left. All
we left behind were greenhouses and other structures
that would develop the Gaza economy and allow the
Palestinian people to build a peaceful society. We
opened border crossings and encouraged commerce
because we wanted Gaza to succeed. We hoped that this
would serve as a model of two societies living side by
side in peace.

But it did not. Hamas used the pretense of democracy
to create a militant theocracy. First, it waged a civil
war against Fatah and executed its political opponents.
Then it destroyed the greenhouses and businesses we
left behind. Instead of using them to build economic
institutions, it built a terrorist regime complete with
miles of underground tunnels. Finally, it seized the
funding that flowed from the international community
to flood Gaza with weapons.
In each and every month for the past nine years,
Hamas has fired rockets towards Israeli towns and cities.
Over time, it has expanded its arsenal of rockets from
a few hundred to thousands. The weapons it has today
are more sophisticated and can reach further into Israel
than ever before. Every few years, Hamas escalates its
attacks by launching a massive offensive. In 2008, over
the course of three weeks Hamas fired 800 rockets that
could reach a million Israelis living in the area near
Gaza. In 2012, Hamas fired 1,200 rockets in a single
week that could reach 3.5 million Israelis in southern
and central Israel. Over the past two weeks, Hamas
has fired 1,500 rockets that threaten 5 million Israelis,
or 70 per cent of our population living throughout the
country.

After each escalation, the international community
brokers a ceasefire and Israel accepts it, hoping that it
will finally bring peace. After three rounds of major
assaults and over 12,000 rockets in nine years, it has
become clear that Hamas is not interested in bringing
quiet to Gaza. It is employing the Hudna strategy. When
Hamas finds itself on the verge of defeat, it agrees to a
brief recess to reset, rearm and resume aggressions.

For years, we have told the Security Council about
the thousands of rockets that Hamas was smuggling
into Gaza. We have talked and we have repeated these
facts. We have been met with silence. Time and again,
we have called on the international community to
condemn the rocket fire and we have been met with
silence. It is time for the international community to
face the consequences of its inaction. Hamas used its
foothold in Gaza to trample on the Palestinian people
and build a terror base in Israel's backyard. Now it sees
an opportunity to do so again. Hamas is using the unity
Government to export its terrorist capabilities from
Gaza to Judea and Samaria. If Hamas is not stopped, it
will mean more terror for Israel and more tragedy for
the Palestinians.

The international community embraced the unity
agreement between Fatah and the terror organization,
believing that it would move us closer to peace. Does
that sound logical? How could embracing a terror
group whose raison d'etre is the eradication of Israel
bring about peace? By now it should be clear that
Hamas is using the cover of a political agreement to
gain legitimacy for its extremist objectives. Following
the establishment of the unity Government, Hamas
Minister Fathi Hamad declared that,

"the whistling bullets, the sound of bombs and

missiles exploding and the capture of Israeli

soldiers was music to our ears".
The danger could not be clearer. Supporting the unity
agreement gives Hamas the opportunity to weave
incitement, violence and terror into the basic fabric of
Judea and Samara, just as it did in Gaza.

The citizens of Israel want to live in peace. We
want to see our children grow up and grow old without
ever having to run for a bomb shelter or put on an army
uniform. Our hope is that some day - some day - we
will read about attacks on Jewish people in history
books, rather than in newspapers. But that day has not
yet come. For now, we are forced to wage war against
a terrorist group committed to our destruction. As we
speak, night has fallen in Israel. Rather than sleeping
soundly in their beds, our sons and daughters are out
there in the darkness standing guard over Israel and the
people of Israel.

In the Book of Psalms, King David says, "Too long
have I lived among those who hate peace. I am for peace,
but when I speak, they are for war" (The Holy Bible, Psalm 120:6-7). Israel was left with no choice. But each
and every individual in this Chamber has the choice to
stand against terrorism and for the right of people to
live in peace; to stand against the use of human shields,
and for human rights; to stand against oppression and
for the freedoms that we hold dear. The leaders of many
Governments represented in this Chamber have already
expressed their support for Israel's right to defend
itself. We thank them for standing by our side at this
important hour. I ask the rest of those present to join
them.

I have here with me a compass. I offer it to the
international community in the hope that it will guide
its members towards making the right decision and
standing for greater clarity, for good against evil and
for right against wrong.

