Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank you for having convened this
meeting of the Security Council to address the link
between hunger and conflict. I wish also to thank Mark
Lowcock and David Beasley for their briefings.

The Secretary-General was the first to alert us, in
February 2017, as to the tragic humanitarian situation
ofthe almost 20 million people in Africa and in Yemen
on the brink of famine. His observation was clear:
armed conflicts are both the common denominator and
the leading cause of these humanitarian disasters. In
response to that appeal, France, together with the World
Bank, took an initiative last June to organize an Arria
Formula meeting to address the issue. In addition to the
World Bank, whose commitment is to be commended,
several Member States joined us in this undertaking,
which was aimed at beginning consideration of this
issue by the Council. Building on these exchanges,
we adopted a presidential statement last summer
(S/PRST/2017/4), and then heard a briefing by the
Secretary-General in October (see S/PV.8080). Six
months later, it is important that we meet once again
to identify concrete measures that can be envisaged by
the Council.

A number of important factors have already been
underscored, so I will therefore focus my statement on
three points: an observation, a reminder and several
avenues towards specific solutions.

First, it has been proved and documented that
famine is often linked to armed conflict, which is either
its leading cause or significantly aggravates it. The
humanitarian situation in South Sudan, Yemen, Somalia,
Burma and north-east Nigeria are sad reflections of
this link. Sixty per cent of people suffering from food
insecurity worldwide live in conflict zones.

Persistent drought can play a major role. This is
true in East Africa, for example, where drought has led
to smaller harvests in countries affected by high levels
of food insecurity. United Nations and World Food
Programme reports are categorical, as our briefers have
clearly and strongly reminded us. Conflicts remain the
leading causes of the risk of famine, setting in motion a
vicious circle: conflict increases food insecurity, which
in turn fuels violence. Civilians are the main victims
of this Vicious circle of food insecurity and armed
conflict. Often people's livelihoods are the direct
targets of by violence. Civil infrastructure, aid convoys
and humanitarian workers are also being targeted.

Yemen is witnessing an alarming number of
obstacles to the free, prompt and ongoing access of
humanitarian assistance to civilians. France recalls
the need to open all ports and airports to humanitarian
assistance and commercial imports so as to alleviate
the suffering of the Yemeni people.

Hunger is not a natural disaster but the consequence
of a combination of human factors. It can even be the
result of a deliberate strategy, as Mark Lowcock and
David Beasley underscored. Access to food is used by
armed groups as a recruitment tool in areas where hunger
is widespread. The United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights recalled that in Burma, where ethnic
cleansing of the Rohingya minority has forced more
than 670,000 people to flee the country since August
2017, that phenomenon is continuing today. What is new
is that it now includes deliberate starvation, deprivation
of access to basic services and the destruction of means
of production. We condemn these intolerable violations,
which must immediately be brought to an end.

In Iraq's Nineveh governorate, one of the country's
agricultural centres, Da'esh, before being driven
out, destroyed more than 90 per cent of irrigation
infrastructure, thereby delaying by several months or
even years a solution to the food-insecurity situation. In
eastern Ghouta, one of the most fertile regions of Syria,
the Bashar Al-Assad regime has been using the same
methods, shelling civilian infrastructure and besieging
entire cities to starve the people.

Famine used as a weapon of war against civilians
constitutes a violation of international humanitarian law
and can even constitute a war crime. Today it is more
important than ever before to arrive at lasting solutions
to the conflicts that lie at the heart of these humanitarian
tragedies. This is our collective responsibility, which
the Council must steadfastly shoulder.

Secondly, in the light of this observation, a
legal reminder is necessary: namely, violations of
international humanitarian law must be condemned and
cannot go unpunished. It cannot be overemphasized that
humanitarian access must be secure, comprehensive
and unfettered. That is far from being the case
everywhere. In Yemen, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Syria, as well as in South Sudan and
Somalia, red tape and security-related obstacles prevent
not only humanitarian assistance from reaching people
in need but also humanitarian workers from doing
their work. Humanitarian workers themselves are also
being targeted.

In this context, the protection of humanitarian
staff and medical professionals must be prioritized.
In October 2017, the Secretary-General alerted us to
an uptick in violence against humanitarian workers.
In the first 10 months of 2017, humanitarian workers
suffered more than 130 attacks. This is completely
unacceptable. Let us not mince words: these attacks
are war crimes that must not go unpunished. Medical
personnel deliver assistance to the ill and wounded, at
the epicentre of conflict, at the risk of their own lives.
Their commitment obliges us to act.

It is for that reason that the French Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Jean-Yves Le Drian, proposed last
October a political declaration to protect medical
personnel in conflict zones that to date has been
endorsed by 13 countries; France calls upon all Member
States to join this initiative. Beyond this, we wish to
work to better protect humanitarian staffin this respect,
as Minister Le Drian indicated yesterday during our
national humanitarian conference, in which Ms. Ursula
Mueller took part.

Thirdly, under those circumstances, the International
Committee of the Red Cross has called for a surge
of protection to improve the behaviour of the parties
to conflicts, as well as people's livelihoods. Let us
see what the Security Council can do to that end.
In Somalia, north-east Nigeria, Sudan and Yemen,
large-scale famines have been averted thanks to a
prolonged humanitarian response. There are three
courses of action that can be pursued.

First, we could work on improving prevention and
early-warning systems to act more effectively to prevent
cases of hunger. We could systematically include in
our monitoring mechanisms data on alarming food
insecurity levels and the restriction of humanitarian
access to populations in the form of hunger indicators.
Such indicators could be integrated, for example, into
peacekeeping operations and country reports submitted
to the Security Council.

Secondly, investments in health services and water
supply could be an integral part of a strategy to eradicate
hunger in conflict zones. In food and humanitarian
crises, infectious diseases, such as cholera or measles,
are a major cause of death as public services collapse
and populations become more vulnerable to disease.

Thirdly, ending and preventing hunger in conflict
zones requires a multifaceted, coordinated response
and close cooperation between humanitarian relief
and development efforts as part of the humanitarian-
development nexus.

As the Secretary-General has said, we have a
moral obligation to do better. The Security Council has
the tools. France will continue to play its full part in
that regard.

The meeting rose at 1.05 pm.
