Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I wish to join other speakers in expressing our

11-3390]
gratitude to the Permanent Representatives of
Germany, India and South Africa for their detailed
briefings giving an account of their work during their
first months chairing the respective Committees. Given
the important place that these Committees have in the
overall counterterrorism framework, we believe that
the continued exchange of views through these regular
briefings further contributes to the improvement of the
Council's efforts in countering this global and ever-
present challenge.

The face of terrorism changes every day, taking
new forms, using new methods and manifesting itself
in ways that compel us to continuously reconsider and
re-evaluate the steps we take, the tools we use and the
measures we deploy. Our efforts need to be
multifaceted and comprehensive in order to adequately
respond to the threats and dangers posed by terrorism.
The demise of Osama bin Laden is considered as a
critical development in that regard, and crucial in our
joint efforts to fight terrorism.

We have on a number of occasions pointed out
that the committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) has evolved into one of the most critical
instruments in the fight against the threat posed by
Al-Qaida and the Taliban. We have thus far witnessed
considerable improvements in the Committee's
procedures, but its work is a continuous dynamic
undertaking that requires our full attention and
thorough and careful consideration of each new step,
all in order to further strengthen the effectiveness,
transparency and credibility of this sanctions regime.
However, we are aware that there are still some
concerns, and we believe that they will be adequately
addressed in the coming period in order to strengthen
the counterterrorism framework. We extend our full
support to the Committee and its Chairman in further
improving the sanctions regime established by
resolution 1267 (1999).

In addition, I wish to emphasize that we attach
great importance to the role of the Ombudsperson,
which in our opinion can only significantly enhance
and contribute to regime's fairness and transparency.
However, it is very important to consider our next steps
in order to realize the full potential of this institution.

The effective implementation of resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005) is an essential prerequisite and
key element of an unyielding and consistent
counterterrorism framework. We are of the view that
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), with the
valuable support of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, remains one of the key elements
of that framework. We therefore strongly support the
work of the Committee to improve its efficiency and
transparency. Thematic discussions and regional
presentations are making the Committee more focused
on challenges, deficiencies and difficulties in the
implementation of the respective resolutions. We are
pleased to see that the Chairman plans to move towards
the Committee's continued engagement in these
discussions and to make greater use of their outcomes
and results.

Here, it is appropriate to mention very successful
outcome of the recent CTC meeting at the Council of
Europe in Strasbourg with international, regional and
subregional organizations. Furthermore, regular
briefings for Member States proved to be an
indispensable tool in enhancing transparency and
creating a forum for exchange of views and
recommendations.

I would now like to address the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). Over the past seven years, resolution 1540
(2004) has demonstrated its great relevance among
international instruments dealing with the issue of
global non-proliferation and counter-terrorism. The
1540 Committee also proved to be an indispensable
mechanism in extending support and assistance to
Member States in building and further developing their
capacity to face the threat of non-State actors acquiring
weapons of mass destruction. Bosnia and Herzegovina
acknowledges and commends this work. We therefore
voted in favour of resolution 1977 (2011) and the
extension of the 1540 Committee's mandate for 10
years.

Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) cannot
be fully and effectively implemented by one State
alone. Such implementation is rather a long-term task
that requires continuous efforts by Member States at
the national, regional and international levels. The
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) is also a very complex and costly process. We
therefore call upon Member States able to provide
resources to extend their voluntary financial
contributions to States in need of assistance to
implement the resolution. No financial cost is too high
if it helps prevent the potentially devastating
consequences of terrorist attacks with weapons of mass
destruction.

In conclusion, we are thoroughly convinced that,
under the able chairmanships of the Permanent
Representatives of Germany, India and South Africa,
the Committees will continue to pursue effective and
stronger measures in the fight against terrorism. Bosnia
and Herzegovina will, for its part, continue to fully
support and contribute to the overall international
efforts in countering terrorism, at both the national and
international levels.

