We would like to start by thanking Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo, Lacroix and Khare for their valuable briefings. We welcome the signing of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan and the presentation of the national plan on civilian protection, which are vital elements for the new Government and important measures for restoring confidence and regaining stability. Both instruments represent starting points for the protection of civilians and for addressing the root causes of the conflict. There is no doubt that, if the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) is equipped with the right policies, resources, leadership and political support, it will be afforded the opportunity to become an essential tool for the transition in the country. However, to fulfil that task, the Mission requires complete and genuine commitment from the Sudanese Government. UNITAMS support to the Sudanese Government in protecting civilians is vital. All efforts in that regard must be a priority and a shared responsibility. We continue to advocate for UNITAMS to provide new opportunities to broaden the approach to protecting unarmed civilians. However, much remains to be done. Unfortunately, intercommunal violence remains a concern, highlighting the fragility of the political transition and the potential risk of further violence following the withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. In addition to being in the midst of that fragile transition, the Sudan faces a deteriorating economic situation, popular mistrust and inadequate judicial mechanisms, all of which is occurring while the country is facing the outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the effects of historic flooding and increasing humanitarian needs. According to the latest reports, some 65 per cent of Sudanese live below the poverty level and more than 9 million are in need of humanitarian assistance. At the same time, insecurity and human rights violations persist. Women and girls continue to be exposed to sexual violence, both in internally displaced persons camps and throughout the country. In that respect, the Mission's human rights capabilities will be critical in Darfur. The reporting and monitoring of human rights violations remains essential, as does the establishment of judicial institutions to end the culture of impunity that persists in the Sudan. Accordingly, we welcome the transitional Government's commitment to cooperating with the International Criminal Court (ICC), which was expressed during ICC Prosecutor Bensouda's high-level visit to the Sudan last October. We continue to advocate in favour of the inclusion of women in the political process. We join with Azza Hasan, coordinator of the Sudanese Women's Group for Peace and Security, who said that "[t]he revolution came to change concepts", but that "women and other vulnerable and marginalized groups in the various states of the Sudan have not yet obtained their rights as required". While recognizing improvements in the protection of women's rights and gender equality, we reiterate our call for the achievement of 40 per cent representation of women in decision- making processes. Beyond the Mission itself, the Sudan's political transition remains fragile. Successfully addressing that challenge will require strong commitment and creative decision-making. As that process evolves, tangible progress on human rights, social justice, the administration of justice and inclusive governance will ultimately define whether the aspirations of the Sudanese people become a reality. UNITAMS, even with its imperfections, has a real opportunity to become a valuable tool for that purpose, with the support of the international community and such regional bodies as the African Union.
