Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from French):
At the outset, on behalf of Chile I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on the very effective and experienced way in
which you have guided the Council's work. You, and the
French team assisting you, may rely on Chile's full
support in the exercise of your important functions.

(spoke in Spanish)

 

I also wish cordially to thank Egypt for its excellent
and effective conduct of the presidency last month. Once
again, Ambassador Elaraby demonstrated the personal and
professional abilities that we all admire and which have
earned such prestige for his country and himself. I
congratulate the outstanding team that helped him in his
work and thank them for the consideration they showed us
during Egypt's exercise of the presidency.

The excellent report submitted by the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) reveals an improvement in the political
situation in that country. The encouraging news in that
document has been supplemented by other information
provided orally by the Secretariat and other parties during
discussion of this item.

Like others who have spoken before me, I wish very
briefly to emphasize some of the achievements made in the
peace process, including such fundamental aspects as the
maintenance of the cease-fire; the ongoing quartering of
troops of the Uniao N acional para a Independencia Total de
Angola (UNITA) and the incorporation of some of its
personnel into the Angolan Armed Forces; the quartering of
the rapid reaction police; the promulgation of the Amnesty
Law; the demining of roads; and the expansion of
humanitarian assistance coverage.

All of this is cause for satisfaction and should provide
an important incentive to the international community for
maintaining and increasing its support for Angola.
However, and unfortunately, this progress is unfolding
against a general background of delay in the fulfillment of
commitments assumed by the Government and UNITA.
This would explain the occasional tendency of some
analysts to underrate the importance of these achievements.

As we have heard in the course of this debate, the
peace process has reached a critical stage. The Council and
the United Nations as a whole should therefore insist on
respect for the agreed timetables for achieving the
objectives.

That is why the parties, and UNITA in particular,
must show clear proof of their willingness successfully to
complete the peace process and to begin the reconstruction
of Angola. Accordingly, there are certain steps that are
indispensable in creating a climate of confidence in the
political resolve to strengthen peace and give the Angolan
people hope for a safe life. These steps include the handing
over of the heavy weapons, including munitions, that
UNITA still possesses; the formation of the Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation; and the incorporation
of UNITA members into State administration, Parliament
and the Armed Forces. I would also mention the need to
make progress towards the complete demining of the
existing 10 million mines, which instil a deep sense of
insecurity in anyone travelling through Angolan territory.

It is important for the parties to bear in mind the
approaching end of UNAVEM. III and the beginning of its
personnel reduction so that they can act to establish a
climate conducive to moving from the final cessation of
hostilities to a new stage of consolidating peace through
development to improve the living conditions of those
who have suffered most in this civil war: the people of
Angola.

The economic and social challenges facing Angola
are of such magnitude that they require the efforts of all
the country's inhabitants, especially its leaders. The
Secretary-General's report calls attention to the country's
critical economic situation and the large sums that will be
required to support Angola's rehabilitation. According to
this report, the amount of aid already committed - much
less the quantities actually contributed - is insufficient
to cover the implementation of the most urgent
rehabilitation programmes, especially as regards the
demobilization and socio-economic reintegration of
former combatants.

A climate of political stability and civil calm is
therefore indispensable for attracting private capital and
the support of the international community. Delays and
postponements of political agreements also set back the
implementation of the urgent and necessary international
support so sorely needed by Angola. We all know that
true peace will come when there is true development to
the primary benefit of the disadvantaged sectors.

We believe that the draft resolution before us
contains a balanced text that recognizes the progress
achieved in Angola but that also emphasizes the priority,
at this stage of the process, of the timely and complete
fulfillment of outstanding commitments.

The Government, and especially UNITA, should step
up efforts to consolidate peace, because that alone will
encourage the international community to provide the
support necessary to overcome the massive crisis in
Angola.

I wish to convey my thanks for the efforts made by
the United Nations personnel in the field and the workers

 

of humanitarian organizations and for the work done by the
United States of America, the Russian Federation and
Portugal towards a solution of the problems afflicting
Angola.

In conclusion, I would say that, despite the tragedies
of the past, despite the slow progress towards peace, and
despite all that remains to be done, Chile is firmly
convinced that, given time, the leaders and people of
Angola will have set the world an example of sensible and
stable reconciliation. This is the time to think only of the
needs and interests of the families of Angola and the
communities in which they live. This process will succeed
only when it has brought peace to the hearts of the people
and fearlessness in looking forward to a new life of security
for all.

