Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Iwould
like to begin by commending the Lithuanian presidency
of the Security Council for having convened this open
debate on the promotion and strengthening of the rule
of law in the maintenance of international peace and
security, a topic that is particularly close to our heart.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
his report (S/2013/34l) on measuring the effectiveness
of the support provided by the United Nations system
for the promotion of the rule of law in conflict and post-
conflict situations.

I fully agree with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.

We welcome the fact that the Security Council has
repeatedly made the issue of the rule of law the theme
of its debates. Today, it is widely accepted that the
restoration of the rule of law in post-conflict societies
is a crucial element to prevent the resurgence of
conflict. National reconciliation and transitionaljustice
are closely linked to that. Since the adoption in 1993
by the General Assembly of the first resolution on the
rule of law (resolution 48/132), the concept of the rule
of law has been established as the essential element of
any system of governance based on democratic values
and the primacy of the law, whether at the national or
international level.

The work of the United Nations to promote the rule
of law is essential to international peace and security.
During conflicts and afterwards, it is important to help
countries restore the rule of law by ensuring respect
for the principle of accountability, providing assistance
to victims, improving the normative framework for
transitional justice and restoring citizens' confidence
in their legal institutions and security bodies.

The 2012 Declaration of the High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels (General Assembly resolution 67/1) rightly emphasized the need to help
countries develop more effective civilian capacities and
strengthen their institutions in the aftermath of conflict,
including through peacekeeping and peacebuilding
missions. Given the scope of the undertaking, it is
important that the Organization plan its missions
through a coordinated and strategic approach. In
that regard, we welcome the appointment of a global
focal point that links the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the United Nations Development
Programme in overseeing the areas of the police,
justice and prison systems and the empowerment of
those working in the field.

The Council also has an active role in promoting
the rule of law. As the Secretary-General recalled
this morning, currently 18 of the 28 United Nations
missions are mandated to promote the rule of law. The
most recent case is the mission in the Central African
Republic. By adopting resolution 2134 (2014), we
also strengthened the mandate of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic in its support for the strengthening of the rule
of law.

The belief that crime will not go unpunished is an
integral part of the very notion of justice. Therefore,
there can be no amnesty for perpetrators of the most
serious crimes, namely, genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and crimes of aggression. The
establishment of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
is a result of such thinking, and it has strengthened the
fight against impunity for those crimes as well as the
credibility of the rule of law.

As we have noted many times before in the Council,
the roles of the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court are also complementary, insofar as
the two institutions are working for peace and justice.
Resolution 2100 (2013), on Mali, therefore mandates
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali to contribute to the
work of the Malian authorities to bring to justice the
perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in Mali, taking into account the fact that
they have referred the situation in their country to
the ICC. That example clearly illustrates the support
that United Nations missions can provide national and
international justice.

I should like to stress in this context the importance
of the Secretariat's fully applying, including for current
operations on the ground, the guidelines that exist with
regard to relations between United Nations officials
and those subject to an arrest warrant or called upon to
appear before the International Criminal Court.

The report of the Secretary-General quite rightly
stresses that the strengthening of national capacities
in the area of collecting, verifying and analysing data
should be an integral part of the design of projects and
programmes, in order to strengthen cooperation in the
area of analysing the results. I welcome the elaboration
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
High Commissioner for Human Rights of a number of
benchmarks for the rule of law that make it possible to
assess progress in conflict and post-conflict situations.
We are particularly pleased to hear that this project,
which Luxembourg actively supports, has already
proved worthwhile in Haiti, Liberia and South Sudan. In
order to best promote the rule of law, the effectiveness
of institutions must be judged according to empirical
criteria.

Allow me to conclude by stating the importance
of taking into account the protection of children in
the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law.
Children are very often the first victims of conflicts,
and sometimes they are even forced to become
combatants. They therefore have very specific needs
that must be taken into account in conflict and post-
conflict situations, including in the framework of
programmes relating to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; security-sector reform; and
transitional justice.

