Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): For the
fourth time in the course of a short, yet tragic period
fraught with killing and destruction and drenched in
blood, the Arab Group along with other good people,
has requested the convening of an open meeting of the
Security Council concerning the Palestinian question.

But after all we have seen, heard and read, what
can we say to the Security Council? The Security
Council is supposed to act spontaneously, without
request from anyone, to deal with blatant violations of
the Charter and with threats to international peace and
security.

Should we speak of the magnitude of the crimes
perpetrated on the land of Palestine against the
Palestinian people? Or should we speak of the nature of
those crimes? Should we speak of crimes of genocide,
or war crimes, or crimes against humanity, or
aggression, or should we speak of all of them together?
Should we speak of violations of the Charter, of
international humanitarian law and of international law
in general? Or should we speak of the political
dimensions of such crimes?

What has long been taking place is a blatant
violation of all moral values, of all laws, of all customs
and all covenants. The Security Council has
unfortunately been unable to take account of all these
violations in its resolutions to date.

Here, in this forum of the Organization to which
we all belong, we cannot but wonder: Is it not time for
the Council to rise to the level of the events, to the
level of the dangers threatening Palestine, the region
and the entire world? Is it not time for the Council to
hear the moans of the thousands of wounded and the
screams of mothers and of children, of those in
Palestine who have lost everything, save their dream
and their hope?

Is it not time for the Council to impose respect
for the Charter, without any selectivity or double
standards, and to punish those who violate the Charter,
be they great or small - particularly the rogue Zionist
entity, the oppressive Zionist entity?

Is it not time for the Security Council to speak the
truth and not to consider the perpetrator and the victims
as equal? Is it not time for the Council to impose
respect for international legitimacy embodied in
resolutions that the Council itself has adopted
concerning the Palestinian question?

We also wonder, what are the real demands of the
Palestinian people? Are they illegitimate demands? Are
they against international law or against the Charter of
the United Nations? Or are they, in fact, legitimate
demands?

All the Palestinian people want is to recover their
land that has been usurped and to defend their dignity,
their sovereignty and their right to establish their
independent State on their land in accordance with the
rules of international law. But it would seem that those
who struggle to recover their rights, particularly their
rights to freedom and to self-determination, are
labelled "terrorists" by some - by those who attempt
to overturn the principles that are internationally
accepted in order to justify their policies of hegemony
and aggression.

We all have to admit and recognize that the
Security Council has been so far unable to stand on the
side of right in this just cause because of a prior threat
by one single State to resort to the veto even before
studying the Arab draft resolution, which is already
weak enough.

What is happening in the Council, unfortunately,
is not an application of the rules of law or the rules of
justice and peace. It is, rather, a reflection of the
principle of the rule of force, a principle that is rejected
under the Charter. It is an imposition of ready-made
recipes that reflect and express the interests of a very
small number of States.

What is happening in Palestine - killing,
destruction, siege, starvation, terror, violation of the
dignity of holy sites - represents, according to all
divine and human laws, a complex crime. It is indeed a
crime of genocide, a crime against humanity and a war
crime the likes of which humanity has never before
seen, even in the time of the Tartars and the Nazis.
The Arab people in Iraq and in all other Arab
States are witnessing the events in Palestine with heavy
hearts and pain at seeing the years of persecution to
which our people in the occupied Palestinian territories
have been subjected by the occupation forces. Anyone
observing the events could not but be amazed, for the
Zionist entity has not hesitated to perpetrate any and all
acts against innocent civilians, destroying, killing,
expelling and humiliating them within the framework
of a well-known, organized policy, and in so doing
defying one and all, including the members of the
Council.

The position of the United States of America has
encouraged, and continues to encourage, Israel in the
pursuit of that policy. The United States has to date not
condemned what has taken place. This makes it
incumbent on the international community to demand
that those criminals be brought to justice for all the
crimes they have perpetrated. In Jenin, in Ramallah, in
Nablus, in the Church of the Nativity of Jesus Christ -
may the peace of God be upon Him - the occupation
forces have had no respect for the religious feelings of
hundreds of millions of Muslims and Christians all
over the globe.

Where are the Charter-mandated instruments to
deter all those who violate the rules of international
law? Where is the embargo? Where are the economic
sanctions? Where are the other coercive measures? Are
they to be used against some and not against others? It
would seem that a decision has been taken in advance,
as usual, to exempt those forces from international law
and from the provisions of the Charter. This
jeopardizes the credibility of the Security Council, and
future generations will see what is happening now as a
shameful event in the history of the United Nations.

The thoughts and hearts of the Iraqi people are
with our brothers in the occupied territories, and the
Iraqi people, who are suffering from the consequences
of an unjust embargo, have insisted on sparing no effort
in helping to put an end to this tragedy. Among other
things, they have made the decision to stop exporting
oil to those who have supported, and continue to
support, the Zionist entity in its aggression against, and
occupation of, the Palestinian territories. They are
committed to drawing attention to the horror of the
tragedy suffered by the Palestinian people and to help
them in their resolve, despite Iraq's own, well-known
need for resources.

However loud the voices of hypocrisy and
however persuasive the false concepts they espouse,
the voices of truth and right will not be overcome.
Those who defend their land against occupation are not
terrorists. They are acting in accordance with the rules
of international law. The international community
cannot continue to accept this doublespeak, which is
being used to justify aggressive policies that have
recently been revealed clearly and in no uncertain
terms, to the extent that the threat of force has been
used against particular States - including my country,
Iraq - in order to turn the world's attention away from
the heinous crimes being perpetrated in the occupied
Palestinian territories, and in an open and blatant
attempt to terrorize States and to shirk the
responsibility of abiding by international commitments
to respect and implement international law.

Finally, I am certain that we all are aware that the
reason for the suffering of the Palestinian people in
particular and the Arab region in general is the Zionist
occupation, which has resulted in continuous, decades-
long suffering and in the events we have been
witnessing over the past 20 days. Consequently, all
attempts to find an equitable solution to the just
Palestinian cause cannot be successful unless we put an
end to this hateful occupation.

