Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom strongly supports the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2270 (2016). I join my colleagues in
welcoming the robust new measures that it brings
into force, thanks to strong and united action by the
Security Council.

This resolution is a step change. It contains some
of the toughest measures the Security Council has
ever taken. It addresses the will of the Council as we
expressed in our press statement of 6 January 2016
(SC/12191), the day that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea announced it had conducted its
fourth nuclear test. Since then, on 7 February, we saw
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea conduct
a satellite launch using ballistic-missile technology.
Those events were clear and deliberate violations of
previous Security Council resolutions. We could not
allow them to pass without a robust response. We must
deter and impede the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea from continuing to pursue such illegal actions.

We remain deeply concerned by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's continued development
of nuclear and missile programmes. It is in flagrant
defiance of the Security Council's resolutions and flies
in the face of international condemnation, and it means
that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea regime
has even fewer national resources available for the
health and welfare of its people.

Resolution 2270 (2016) is not intended to have
adverse humanitarian consequences for the country's
civilian population. The resolution is not intended to
negatively affect activities not prohibited by this or
previous Security Council resolutions. The resolution
is not intended to negatively affect the work of
international organizations or non-governmental
organizations carrying out assistance and relief
activities in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

Taking this intention into account, it is clear that
the resolution's provisions, including on the export
of aviation fuel, are not intended to curtail legitimate
humanitarian and diplomatic activities in the country.
The Council will need to be vigilant in that regard.
Additionally, we note for clarification that the new
provisions on cargo inspection are consistent with
the obligations set out in the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations.

Finally, we again welcome the resolve of the
Council in expediting this robust new resolution.
We strongly encourage all States to implement its
provisions in full. And above all, we continue to urge
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to return to
credible and authentic multilateral talks on its nuclear
programme, to abide by its obligations under the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and
to commit to full access by the International Atomic
Energy Agency.

