Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Rwanda takes the
floor to explain its vote on draft resolution S/2014/9l6
on the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
We note with appreciation the efforts of Jordan in
drafting and submitting the text on behalf of the Group
of Arab States.

Rwanda's position on the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, as reiterated every month in our two-year
membership of the Council, is well known. Our country,
as well as all States members of the African Union,
has always been in favour of a two-State solution. We
regret, however, that despite the efforts of regional and
international actors, including Arab States, the Quartet
and the United States, there is yet to be a breakthrough
in the peace process.

For Rwanda, any final settlement to the conflict
should be achieved through direct and genuine
negotiations, however painful they may be. We fully
believe that only a negotiated settlement between the
parties will result in the emergence of an independent,
sovereign, and viable Palestinian State living side by
side in peace and security with Israel. In this regard,
the Security Council and other stakeholders should
step up their efforts to ensure the resumption of direct
negotiations for ajust and lasting solution of the Israel-
Palestinian conflict, building on previously agreed
frameworks. The parties, for their part, should make
serious commitments to addressing the underlying
causes of the conflict and refrain from any provocative
action that could undermine the prospects for a durable
peace in the region.

In this context, Rwanda does not believe that any
unilateral action by either side could bring lasting peace
to the region and a final and comprehensive settlement
to this crisis. On the contrary, unilateral initiatives,
well-intentioned as they may be, could jeopardize the
current situation, which is already very fragile. We
believe that a Security Council resolution could help
the parties to speed up the conclusion of negotiations
for the establishment of a Palestinian State, provided
that such a resolution were consensual, as it should be
agreed on by the negotiating parties and supported by
all major stakeholders. Therefore, Rwanda believes that
the proposed draft, which has not garnered consensus
in the region or within the Council, could not help
parties to achieve that goal.

Moreover, it is regrettable that the 15 members of
the Security Council were not given a single opportunity
to discuss, negotiate and improve the draft, which was
drafted, negotiated and amended outside the Council.
All those reasons - the lack of a consensual approach
in the region, the negative impact on the peace process,
and a lack of an inclusive and transparent procedure in

New York - explain Rwanda's abstention in the voting
today. Going forward, we would invite all Council
members, in coordination with the negotiating parties,
the Arab Group and other stakeholders to work together
towards a more consensual draft resolution, which
should give a new impetus to the peace process.

To conclude, we firmly believe that, given the
current and irreversible momentum for peace, the
status quo will no longer be an option. There is a
unique window for the international community and
the negotiating parties to act decisively if we wish to
realize our common vision of two viable States for two
vibrant peoples, living side by side in peace, security
and mutual recognition of each other's legitimate
rights. The Government of Rwanda will remain fully
committed to this process and contribute, as much as
it can, to a peaceful and lasting solution to this crisis,
which has been going on for too long.

