Mr. Antonio (Angola) (spoke in French): First of
all, Mr. President, I should like to express my
delegation's appreciation to you personally and to all
the members of the Council for having agreed to give
us the floor on a question so vital for Africa. Angola is
speaking as Chair of the Southern Africa Development
Community (SADC) Organ on Politics, Defence and
Security Cooperation.

As all Council members will know, that Organ
and the facilitator of the intra-Zimbabwean dialogue,
His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki, President of South
Africa, are sparing no effort to implement the African
Union decision adopted recently in Sharm el-Sheikh
encouraging the parties to initiate a dialogue to
promote peace, stability, democracy and reconciliation
between themselves. Very fortunately, this dialogue, is
getting under way with South African mediation.
Moreover, a delegation headed by His Excellency
Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Angola, went to Zimbabwe this week, as
Thabo Mbeki had done before him.

There is ongoing cooperation between Luanda
and Pretoria in these efforts. As was mentioned by the
representative of the Russian Federation, President
Jose Eduardo dos Santos and President Thabo Mbeki
are sparing no effort to help the endeavours for a viable
solution succeed. Given all the efforts that I have
indicated, the adoption of a draft resolution sanctioning
one of the parties would tend in the present
circumstances to further complicate things on the
ground and exacerbate tensions to the point of
damaging the ongoing dialogue.

The efforts in the region are in keeping with the
spirit of the United Nations Charter. Recognizing the
importance of such endeavours, the Security Council
has devoted several public meetings to the role of
regional and subregional organizations and has adopted
statements and resolutions on that subject that were not
intended to remain dead letters. The outcome of this
year's New York meeting between the Security Council
and the African Union (AU) Peace and Security
Council (see S/PV.5868) is of interest here. Paragraph
9 of resolution 1809 (2008), for example, clearly
stipulates the need for coordination between the
African Union and the Security Council on peace and
security.

In a number of situations the Security Council
has demonstrated that it can truly listen to the region.
Thus, when appropriate, it would be logical for the
Council refrain from creating exceptions, giving the
impression that it listens to the region only when the
message suits certain Council members.

Having experienced more than 40 years of
conflict, the Southern African subregion is in a good
position to appreciate the true value of peace and
stability in the region. Thus, it is working towards that
goal - including through economic integration, as
SADC has continued to demonstrate.

It is clear that we are all concerned about the
situation in Zimbabwe. But there are differences in
approach as to the methods to find a sustainable
solution. For our part, we believe that we should give
dialogue a chance: we recognize the virtues of such
dialogue.

