Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to join earlier
speakers in thanking all the briefers for their respective
briefings, to which we have listened with much
interest. We particularly appreciate the perspective
of Ms. Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim in describing the
harrowing difficulties endured by the people of
the Sahel.

As noted by previous speakers and the briefers, an
inhospitable climate, environmental degradation, food
insecurity and malnutrition are some of the factors
that ensure that life for the people of the Sahel is
harsh and that make them extremely vulnerable. Their
hardship is further compounded by violence, conflict
and insecurity, which have risen at an alarming rate,
particularly during the past few years. We wish to
emphasize that the linkages between these so-called
non-traditional threats and the peace and security
situation in the region are real and have clearly resulted
in increased suffering and deterioration of the quality
of life for the people of the Sahel.

The wide-ranging nature of the threats faced
by the Sahel and its population requires an equally
comprehensive and holistic approach to reverse, or at
the very least mitigate, their consequences. Therefore
Malaysia believes that the discussion today is timely,
and we thank the delegations of Egypt and Spain for
organizing it.

Ongoing exposure to an extreme climate, coupled
with erratic weather conditions causing increasingly
severe and frequent flooding, as well as longer and
unpredictable droughts, has resulted in crop failure
and food insecurity across the Sahel. Such conditions
exacerbate the region's pre-existing vulnerabilities,
pushing its population to the brink of humanitarian
disaster. A recent report by the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
highlights that 4.5 million people have been newly
displaced throughout the Sahel region, almost three
times more than in 2012, just four years ago. The report
further noted that the key drivers for such massive
displacements include the adverse impacts of climate
change as well as increased violence and conflict in
the region. Such massive displacements exacerbate
an already fragile humanitarian situation, placing
both host States and those displaced at greater risk of
insecurity and instability.

We share the concerns expressed regarding the
rapidly deteriorating capacities of States and institutions
in the region to provide essential services, including
health, security, water, sanitation and education, as
they struggle to cope with the massive influx of newly
displaced persons. In that regard, we wish to commend
the tireless work and perseverance of humanitarian
actors and agencies on the ground, despite themselves
being subject to persistent threats, especially from
armed groups and criminal elements.

We are convinced that for the Sahel, climate change
is a key driver of insecurity and instability. Drawing
from the lessons of the Sahel, climate change, if left
unchecked, could in fact become one of the most
significant threat multipliers at the global level.

We also share the assessment that the pervading
atmosphere of an impoverished existence and near
hopelessness across the Sahel means that youths in
the region are especially vulnerable to radicalization
and recruitment by terrorists and violent extremist
groups. It is imperative that this threat is addressed
now, before it constitutes a bigger threat in the future.
In that regard, we welcome initiatives, such as the
ongoing collaboration between the European Union
and the United Nations Interregional Crime and
Justice Research Institute, to promote inclusive and
credible deradicalization activities in the region. We
also support the efforts currently being undertaken to
counter terrorism and violent extremism in the region
by the Group of Five Sahel (G-5 Sahel) countries,
supported by France through Operation Barkhane. We
note that the African Union is currently contemplating
a similar effort.

We believe that the stabilization of the security
situation in the Sahel is a key strategic element that must
continue to be prioritized in plans and programmes at
the national, regional and international levels. Therefore
we welcome and support the continuing focus by the
African Union (AU) on the Sahel and its emphasis on
governance, security and development in its strategy
for the region, mirroring the priorities of the United
Nations itself. Recalling the open debate earlier this
week on the future of the African Peace and Security
Architecture (see S/PV.7694), we believe that there is
scope for greater coordination between the AU and the
United Nations on the Sahel to ensure the continuity
and complementarity of the programmes and initiatives
in the region.

On that note, Malaysia believes that the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS)
has a vital role to play in connecting the United Nations
with regional and subregional actors, particularly the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the G-5 Sahel. UNOWAS should
seek to improve the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. The need for
better coordination among relevant entities should also
be factored into the review of that Strategy.

The scale ofthe crisis faced by the Sahel region and
its complexity and potential for further deterioration
require our urgent attention and collective efforts.
Additional resources must be mobilized not only
to support the needs for development and for the
consolidation of the rule of law and good governance,
but also to break the cycle of crises and instability in
the region. As a member of this Council, Malaysia
remains committed to continue working closely with all
regional and international partners and the countries in
the region to address and find a comprehensive solution
to the challenges in the Sahel.

