Mr. Koncke (Organization of American States) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Organization
of American States (OAS) to participate in this open
debate today.

We are pleased to see that the presidency of
Venezuela has completed a three-month cycle in which
the presidency of the Security Council has been the
responsibility of member States of the Organization
of American States: the United States in December,
Uruguay in January and Venezuela in February. We
want to express our appreciation for the briefing made
by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon this morning.

Before entering into the substance of my statement,
my delegation wishes to inform you, Mr. President,
that it will be sending a communication regarding
the modalities for participation in the open debates of
this body by regional organizations. As the regional
organization that obtained permanent observer status
to the United Nations before any other, on 16 October
1948 - with a membership of 35 States from the
Caribbean, South America, Central America and
North America and 70 observers, 9 of which make
up the Security Council - the OAS deems it unfair
that its participation in this type of debate should be
contingent upon the intercession of one of its States
parties. That is especially pertinent when that practice
is not standardized for all regional organizations and
not based on any public or published norm.
Although it has been in existence for over 70 years,
the Charter of the United Nations continues to be the
main normative common denominator for international
society. The purposes and principles set out in Articles
1 and 2 of the Charter have protected humankind from
the catastrophe of another world war, such as those wars
that we lived through during the twentieth century, and
we must pay lasting tribute to the drafters of the Charter
for the work that they achieved. Nevertheless, the
setbacks and failures of the international community to
prevent crises, to calm violence, to end terrorism and
extremism and to build bridges of dialogue have been
and continue to be the cause of suffering and pain for
millions of people on the planet.

Every failed attempt to prevent a conflict, to
mitigate a humanitarian crisis, to bring parties in
conflict closer together or to implement a principle
has resulted in the death, suffering and poverty of
men, women and children. The Secretariat General
of the OAS believes that the recognized principles of
sovereignty, non-intervention and domestic jurisdiction
are fundamental and must be fully respected and
reaffirmed, without entailing any detriment to the
respect for human rights, the protection of civilians
and the responsibilities of international society.
It is incumbent on the United Nations, regional
organizations and the States parties to work to resolve
the apparent tension between the aforementioned
principles and efforts to ensure international peace and
security. In order for the work of the United Nations
and regional organizations to have value, it must have
a direct impact on people's lives, while improving the
enjoyment of their rights and their quality of life. In that
regard, the Charter of the United Nations recognizes
the role of regional organizations and their contribution
to the maintenance of international peace and security
and conflict prevention.

In its inter-American scope, the work of the OAS is
guided by the Charter of the Organization of American
States and the Inter-American Democratic Charter.
Similarly, the four fundamental pillars of the OAS
constitute the set of principles that define its work and
guide its actions, namely, democracy, human rights,
integral development and multidimensional security.
We believe that the best way to work for people in every
type of situation of crisis, vulnerability and emergency
lies in unconditional compliance with the those guiding
principles, which, in turn, best prevents the repetition
ofpast mistakes. With the purposes and principles as its
guide, the OAS of today has acted in various scenarios
and contexts in compliance with the legal instruments
that underpin its existence.
Without being exhaustive, proof of that can be
seen the recent special mission to Haiti, whose task,
at the request of then President Martelly and with
the consensual approval of the OAS Permanent
Council, was to work together to achieve a Haitian-
led constitutional and negotiated solution, allowing
for the holding of the second round of elections in a
timely manner. We welcome the agreement achieved
between former President Martelly and the speakers
of both legislative Chambers, as well as the recent
appointment, in the framework of that agreement, of
a transitional President, Jocelerme Privert. We expect
that the second round of the presidential election will
be held, as agreed, on 24 April, and the OAS reiterates
its full support to the Haitian people, political actors
and civil society in cooperating to support the holding
that event.

Likewise, we want to mention the work of the OAS
in Colombia, with its support mission to the peace
process, which has been playing an important role,
as recently reaffirmed by President Santos Calderon
and OAS Secretary General Almagro. In the case
of Honduras, the OAS has worked jointly with the
Government, the opposition, the judiciary, social
actors and the broadest range of participants to create
a support mission to combat corruption and impunity
in Honduras. Another action that could be mentioned
is the mission in the Dominican Republic and Haiti in
response to the migration crisis, which, along with the
efforts of the Dominican Government, led to a reduction
in the level of unrest and number of deportations.

In the case of Venezuela, and in compliance with
the obligations and privileges arising from the Charter
of the OAS and the Inter-American Democratic
Charter, Secretary General Almagro Lemes has made
assessments based on inalienable principles, both in the
process leading to legislative elections on 6 December
and in subsequent aspects of the installation of the
new National Assembly. Again, in this case the OAS
reaffirms its mission to contribute constructively
to necessary dialogue and reiterates its readiness
to collaborate at all potentially relevant levels of
international cooperation.

The relevance of the topic of today's discussion on
respect for the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations demonstrates the magnitude of
the work ahead. In such efforts, the General Secretariat
of the OAS understands that it must never lose sight of
the interests of the weakest and most vulnerable, whose
only shield is precisely the inalienable, indivisible
and interdependent nature of human rights and the
obligation of countries and international and regional
organizations to ensure that those rights are protected.

