The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Senegal.

Whatever one's point of view on the Syrian
conflict, which is entering its sixth year, one image is
unavoidable: that of a country ravaged by war; a country
in ruins; a land of fire, blood and tears. The situation
there is one of the worst humanitarian disasters of
our time. The grim toll it is taking is unending. How
many orphans, how many widows and widowers, how
many elderly people and children have been abandoned
to their sad fate without any assistance? How many
people have been wounded or maimed for life? How
many are now refugees or displaced persons? No one
really knows.

What is happening in Syria is untenable. The
bombs keep raining down. Meeting after meeting
takes place, negotiation after negotiation is held,
resolution after resolution is adopted even as human
lives continue to be annihilated and homes, markets,
schools and hospitals destroyed, in violation of all
norms of international humanitarian law. Despite the
laudable efforts of humanitarian organizations and
good intentions, an entire people is dying and an entire
country is crumbling, along with its economy and its
centuries-old sociocultural heritage.

How much longer can this go on? Yet the cost of
peace is never higher than the cost of war. That is why
Senegal hopes that a negotiated solution to the crisis in
Syria is still possible.

Those were the sentiments expressed by my
President, Mr. Macky Sall, when he addressed the
Council on 21 September, in this very Chamber, during
the New Zealand presidency (see S/PV.7774). The
Senegalese delegation thanks France and the United
Kingdom for having taken the initiative to hold this
meeting, which once again is providing us with the
opportunity to consider the humanitarian situation
in Syria.

The Senegalese delegation would like to reiterate
its call for a cessation of hostilities and in particular
for a humanitarian truce so as to allow humanitarian
agencies to provide assistance to those who need it,
especially in Aleppo. We would also like to recall the
obligation incumbent upon all warring parties to respect
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. I would like to pay tribute to members of the
medical and humanitarian assistance community, who
continue to risk their lives to help the Syrian people in
their quest for peace and a somewhat normal life and
dignity. My delegation takes this opportunity to call on
the various parties to the dispute to allow humanitarian
agencies proper access in order to meet the monthly
humanitarian targets.

As much a priority as it might be, the catastrophic
humanitarian situation in Syria is but one of the
symptoms of the political crisis in Syria. We have
entrusted Mr. De Mistura with the task of finding a
solution to the crisis. We renew our call to members
of the International Syria Support Group, especially
its co-Chairs - whom we must name, the United
States and the Russian Federation - to redouble
their efforts to bring about a cessation of hostilities,
which is the sine qua non condition for the provision
of humanitarian assistance as well as the main element
needed for relaunching the political process. The
Council therefore ought to effectively play its due
role as guarantor of international peace and security,
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, by
assuming its full responsibilities given the ongoing
situation on the ground.

I would also like to recall the interregional
initiative focused on the General Assembly - launched
by Canada aimed at addressing the situation in Syria,
especially in Aleppo - given the failure of the Security
Council, where certain members continue to be mired
in disagreement on the topic. That is why my delegation
renews its support and encouragement to the three
penholders - Spain, Egypt and New Zealand - in
their efforts to address the humanitarian dimension of
the conflict through the adoption of a draft resolution
to put an end to the violence in Aleppo and by breathing
new life into a cessation of hostilities throughout the
entirety of Syrian territory by effectively implementing
resolution 2268 (2016).

In that connection, in addition to contributing
to developing practical responses to the disastrous
humanitarian situation, we believe that an overarching
approach to the question of Syria is more necessary
than ever, including political, humanitarian, security
and non-proliferation aspects. We should also
focus more closely on security concerns, to include
non-proliferation and the fight against terrorism, and
in particular on countering terrorist groups such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra
Front, so that we can get a better and more complete
picture of the situation. To that end, I would reiterate
our proposal for the holding of a joint briefing to
look into all the mechanisms in place with regard to
Syria. Whether it is held in public or private, such a
briefing should be followed by closed consultations on
the various views on Syria, with the aim of gleaning
a clear perspective on the emergence, evolution
and the manifold implications - internal, regional
and international - of the situation and to move
towards finding a political solution, which is the only
possible outcome.

The price of peace is never higher than the cost
of war. And, as Senegalese President Sall has said,
inter-Syrian peace is still possible because war cannot
be the destiny of an entire people.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

