We thank France for convening today's open debate and express our gratitude to the briefers for their valuable briefings. Portugal is fully aligned with the statements submitted by the European Union and the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict (, annexes 32 and 24, respectively) and would like to make some additional remarks. The protection of children in armed conflict is pivotal in the peace, security and development agenda. We welcome the report of the Secretary-General covering 2019 (S/2020/525). In this regard, we wish to express our deepest regret for the 25,000 serious violations against children verified by the United Nations - a figure that has grown in comparison to the previous reporting period, in which 24,000 violations were registered (see S/2019/509). More than half of these violations were committed by non-State actors and a third were committed by Government and international forces. We would also like to reaffirm Portugal's support for the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. The recently published Practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict is a commendable important action-oriented document. The year 2020 marks the fifteenth anniversary of resolution 1612 (2005), which established the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and the monitoring and reporting mechanism. Notwithstanding the challenges posed by the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic, it is essential that the mechanism remains operational. The collection and reporting of information in a transparent and accurate way remains a key priority. We would like to highlight the importance of the Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. This year, as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of this legal instrument, we call on States not yet having done so to ratify the Optional Protocol. Besides the Optional Protocol, Portugal has also endorsed the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups - the Paris Principles - the Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers. In armed conflicts, children, including those associated with armed groups or born to their members, must be regarded and treated primarily as victims. As stated in resolution 2467 (2019), a survivor-centred approach must guide the prevention of, and response to, conflict-related sexual violence. On the other hand, the vulnerability of children with disabilities in armed conflict also deserves our careful attention, as established in resolution 2475 (2019). Attacks on schools have a particularly long-lasting effect, risking the future of entire generations and disproportionately affecting girls. The safeguarding of educational opportunities, under Sustainable Development Goal 4, is therefore crucial and contributes to preventing recruitment as well as child, early and forced marriage. We need to work on the reintegration of children and the rehabilitation of their families and communities. The protection of children can be a first step to resolving or mitigating conflicts. Establishing it as priority in negotiations in peace processes and ceasefire agreements can create engagement between parties to conflict. Finally, Portugal recognizes and supports the work of UNICEF and other United Nations bodies in this field. We call for States to cooperate with these entities, as well as with civil society organizations, to protect the rights of children in armed conflict.
