Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her briefing and
for presenting the eighteenth report of her Office to
the Security Council, and to thank the Ambassador
of the Sudan for his statement. We take note of the
efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor aimed at
investigating violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law in Darfur.

The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur constitutes
the primary basis for dialogue and sustainable conflict
resolution. We note that some important steps have been
taken to defuse intercommunal tensions and promote
reconciliation in Darfur.

At the same time, the security situation in
Darfur continues to be volatile. Intensified attacks
by non-signatory armed groups and their attempts
to expand combat operations to other regions of the
Sudan have resulted in civilian casualties, substantial
population displacement, the looting of civilian property
and deterioration in the humanitarian situation on the
ground. The allegations of continued sexual and gender-
based violence in Darfur are a matter of particular
concern. The reports of human rights violations and
abuses committed against civilians should be properly
investigated so as to bring those responsible to justice
and prevent such violations from being repeated in the
future.

The persistent refusals of non-signatory armed
groups to join the peace process seriously hamper the
prospects for further progress in the implementation of
the Doha Document. We believe that greater pressure
should be exerted on those groups, including through
targeted sanctions, to make them renounce violence
and lay down their arms.

Unfortunately, the international presence in
Darfur, including United Nations staff members,
aid workers and peacekeepers, has continued to face
attacks throughout Darfur during the reporting period.
Azerbaijan strongly condemns all such attacks, which
constitute a crime under international law. The ongoing
investigation must be finalized in order to bring the
perpetrators to justice and avoid impunity for such
offenses. We note that the Office of the Prosecutor has
put a priority on addressing that issue.

In conclusion, we once again stress the need for
the international community's further support for
the implementation of the Doha Document and the
importance of rebel groups renouncing violence as
vital prerequisites for ensuring durable peace and
reconciliation in Darfur.

