President Zuma: We thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely debate, which allows us to
further explore ways to strengthen and consolidate
preventive diplomacy. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his statement and for the report
(S/2011/552) on which it was based.

In our view, the theme of this year's Security
Council summit complements the theme of the sixty-
sixth session of the General Assembly, which is "The
role of mediation in the settlement of disputes by
peaceful means". It proves that the United Nations in
its entirety is focused on the primary objectives and
principles of the Charter. Preventive diplomacy is
anchored in the Charter of the United Nations. Article
33 specifically provides for the pacific settlement of
disputes.

In 2005, during the world summit, world leaders
reaffirmed this principle in the Millennium Declaration
by stating: "We are determined to establish a just and
lasting peace all over the world in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter" (General Assembly resolution 60/1, para. 5).

Today we gather once again in this Council to
recommit ourselves to the noble objective of
international peace and its achievement through
preventive diplomacy. In fact, the necessity for
preventive diplomacy has been reaffirmed by this
Council many times before. Last July, under the
presidency of Nigeria, the Council acknowledged the
importance of a peaceful settlement of disputes. In
September last year, under the Turkish presidency, the
Council at summit level stressed that "the
comprehensive and coherent use of preventive

diplomacy, peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding tools is important in creating the
conditions for sustainable peace" (see S/PRST/2010/18).

It is a fact that preventive diplomacy initiatives
are more cost-effective than the deployment of
peacekeepers once a conflict has broken out. Thus
preventive diplomacy is an effective tool at our
disposal. To succeed, it requires a sustained injection
of resources. This will enable the United Nations to
plan and deploy in a timely manner appropriate human
and financial resources in potential conflict situations.

We welcome the progress that has already been
made by the United Nations through a plethora of
initiatives. These include the Secretary-General's good
offices, special envoys, the establishment of an early
warning system, the deployment of special political
missions and of the Mediation Support Unit, the
deployment of country teams and regional offices, as
well as other diplomatic initiatives aimed at preventing
conflicts.

While these fulfil a central role in conflict
prevention, it is our opinion that a great deal can still
be done, especially through utilizing the unique
capacities and experiences that regional organizations
provide. The Security Council has often stressed the
importance of partnerships between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations. In that
regard, we appreciate the efforts undertaken by such
regional organizations as the Organization of American
States, the Union of South American Nations and the
African Union (AU), to name but a few.

With regard to the African Union specifically, it
is important to note that since its inception, in 2002, it
has established and consolidated a comprehensive
Peace and Security Architecture. The Architecture is
based on a paradigm that recognizes preventive
diplomacy, post-conflict reconstruction and
development as central to eradicating conflicts on our
continent. These mechanisms that the African Union
has put in place bear witness to the commitment of our
continent in addressing peace and security challenges
in a comprehensive manner.

The African Union has also made great strides in
developing its early-warning systems that help the
organization to determine which countries are likely to
lapse or relapse into conflict. These mechanisms afford
the organization the opportunity to avert an imminent
conflict. However, for these systems to be effective,
early warning should be followed by early action.

In our subregion, the Southern African
Development Community continues to play a critical
role in ensuring subregional peace and stability. In that
context, its Organ on Politics, Defence and Security
has undertaken numerous preventive efforts in quelling
potential conflicts. It has also spent a great deal of
energy and resources in resolving conflicts through
dialogue and mediation, such as in Madagascar.

Moreover, it is essential that the efforts of both
the African Union and the numerous subregional
organizations across the continent working on
preventive diplomacy be respected and supported by
the United Nations and the international community as
a whole. In fact, the Security Council has adopted
several decisions in which it expresses its intention to
build a strong partnership with the African Union in
that regard.

However, over the past few months, we have seen
that partnership falter as the African Union has been
undermined in its preventive diplomatic efforts, in
cases such as Cote d'Ivoire, the Sudan and Libya.
Especially in the case of Libya, the AU initiative to
ensure a political rather than military solution to the
Libyan crisis was deliberately undermined in spite of
the decision set forth in resolution 1973 (2011) to
support the African Union road map. Such blatant acts
of disregard for regional initiatives have the potential
to undermine the confidence that regional
organizations have in the United Nations as an
impartial and widely respected mediator in conflicts.

Although conflict prevention remains the primary
responsibility of Member States, civil society also has
a role to play. In addition, it remains imperative that
the international community, and the United Nations in
particular, provides support to local or national conflict
prevention mechanisms. These efforts can be executed
without negating the important principles of the
national sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States.

Most important, we must bear in mind the link
between development and security. Prevention will be
optimized if the root causes of conflicts are addressed
effectively. As the 2011 World Development Report, on
conflict, security and development, reminds us, the
root causes of conflict in the majority of instances are
related to a lack of resources or unequal development
or distribution of often scarce resources.

For the international community to address those
causes effectively, strengthened and enhanced
cooperation and information-sharing between the
Security Council and other United Nations bodies, such
as the Peacebuilding Commission, are required.
Furthermore, there is an essential need for greater
coherence, coordination and interaction between the
various United Nations organs and other international
organizations, such as the international financial
institutions. Furthermore, Member States should share
their experiences in building the United Nations
capacity in preventive diplomacy.

There is no one-size-fits-all solution in conflict
prevention diplomacy. We should be open to consider
important elements that can contribute to the
prevention of conflicts, including cultural orientation,
local preferences and local expertise in developing
strategies aimed at preventive diplomacy.

In that regard, the full and effective participation
of women at all levels and stages of the prevention of
conflict, as well as in all aspects of the peaceful
settlement and resolution of disputes, is critical. We
therefore reiterate our appreciation for the
establishment of the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women, as an
institution that acknowledges the need to enhance the
role of women in all aspects of life and in society,
including preventive diplomacy.
In conclusion, South Africa supports the draft
presidential statement before us, as we believe that it
makes a significant contribution to our preventive
diplomacy efforts and to the execution of the Council's
mandate to uphold and preserve international peace
and security.

