Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I congratulate you, Sir,
and your friendly country Uganda on your presidency
of the Security Council. We are confident in your able
guidance of the agenda this month. We express
appreciation as well to the friendly country of Turkey
for its skilled leadership of the Council in September. I
also wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing.

Today, we find ourselves at yet another critical
juncture in our long, tormented search for a just and
peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine - the
core of the Arab-Israeli conflict - and the realization
of peace and security in the Middle East. There are two
paths before us that we must all choose from. That
choice must be made with full awareness that the path
chosen will determine the future prospects for peace
and stability in the Middle East region and beyond.

The first choice is clear: to together seize, with
full determination, the significant opportunity that is
before us to resume and accelerate the peace process,
on the basis of its agreed terms of reference for the
realization of the two-State solution on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders. With good faith and a genuine
commitment to international law, relevant United
Nations resolutions, the principle of land for peace, the

Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map, it is
this path that will speedily advance us towards the
achievement of a final, just resolution of all core issues
in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, including the issues
of refugees, Jerusalem, settlements, borders, water and
security, bringing a definitive end to the Israeli military
occupation that began in 1967, the independence of the
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital and
a just and agreed solution to the plight of Palestine
refugees.

This is the path preferred and supported by the
overwhelming majority of the international community.
It has been given new impetus by the serious efforts of
the Quartet, including with the active engagement and
leadership of the United States Administration of
President Barack Obama, as well as by the League of
Arab States and all other concerned, peace-loving
countries. The urgency of pursuing this path is widely
recognized as absolutely vital for achieving a just,
lasting and comprehensive solution of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, and of the Arab-Israeli conflict as
a whole, and for making peace and security a reality in
our region.

The second choice is also clear: to allow the
intransigence, violations and impunity of one State -
Israel, the occupying Power - to not only undermine
but to completely sabotage the prospects that remain
for realizing the two-State solution for peace. At this
critical point in time, it is widely recognized that the
status quo in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, is untenable, unsustainable
and volatile as a result of Israel's ongoing illegal
actions and provocations against the Palestinian people
and their land. It must also then be recognized that if
recklessly forced down this path by the occupying
Power, we will be taken on a trajectory that will bring
only more violence, suffering, loss and instability for
both the Palestinian and Israeli peoples, as well as the
region as a whole, propelling us into yet another era of
darkness and taking us further away than ever from our
noble goal of realizing a future of peace, security and
coexistence in the Middle East.

We come before the Security Council today to
appeal once again to the members of this body to
uphold their Charter responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. This critical matter
must be given due attention, and action should be taken
to ensure that it is the first path - the path of peace -
that is seized at this moment and resolutely pursued.

Breaches of the law via acts of colonization,
aggression and collective punishment against the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and contempt for the will of
the international community must be confronted and
firmly rejected. Israel, the occupying Power, must
choose either to pursue the path of peace or to bear
responsibility for its obstruction.

The Palestinian leadership has for decades been
decisively committed to a peaceful settlement in
accordance with the two-State solution on the basis of
the pre-1967 borders, beginning with the 1988
Declaration of Independence of the State of Palestine
and onwards. Our commitment and good faith were
displayed once again in our willingness to take part in
the recent proximity talks conducted by the United
States and in the direct negotiations launched in
Washington in September by President Obama,
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Senator George
Mitchell, despite the less than favourable
circumstances in both the political environment and the
situation on the ground.

It is well known that the proximity talks were
supported by the Palestinian leadership, the Arab
countries and the international community as a means
to bridge the gap between the two sides on the issues of
settlements, borders and security and to reaffirm the
agreed terms of reference of the peace process in order
to pave the way for direct negotiations.

Those talks, however, did not make tangible
progress due to Israel's intransigence and refusal to
comply with its legal obligations and the Road Map
requirement to cease all settlement activities, including
so-called natural growth. Those activities are
illegitimate, are unquestionably a major obstacle to
peace and are totally contradictory to the two-State
solution and the core principle of land for peace.

We reiterate here that the cessation of all Israeli
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, is essential for the
resumption of a credible process aimed at achieving
the two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967
borders. This is not a Palestinian condition for the
peace process; it is a legal obligation incumbent upon
Israel, the occupying Power, under the Fourth Geneva
Convention, numerous Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, and the Quartet Road Map. It is
also the unanimous position of the entire international

community and has been an unwavering demand
throughout the years if the peace process, before the
process, and even during periods when it has been
suspended.

In that regard, it is important to recall the special
Security Council meeting on 26 September 2008,
which specifically addressed the ever-present problem
of illegal Israeli settlement activities and which was
addressed by President Mahmoud Abbas, among other
high-level officials (see S/PV.5983).

On the other hand, the Israeli conditions now
being imposed on the Palestinian side are indeed
arbitrary preconditions intended to exact further
political gains for Israel based solely on the imbalance
of power and impunity that it enjoys and that allow it
to arrogantly make such demands while totally
ignoring its own long-standing legal obligations and
commitments. Such preconditions distort the reality on
the ground, distract the focus of the debate from the
core issues and have been used by Israel as a pretext to
evade responsibilities in the peace process and to
sabotage the process, revealing not only bad faith but
total disrespect for the most fundamental principles of
the process.

Nevertheless, the Palestinian leadership, with the
support of the Arab Ministerial Committee, has heeded
the international calls for resumption of direct
negotiations, on the understanding that our
participation would be on the basis of the Quartet
statement of 20 August 2010. That statement
reaffirmed the commitment to previous statements,
including the 19 March 2010 statement, which, inter
alia, called on Israel to abide by its obligation to freeze
all settlement activities, including natural growth, and
to dismantle outposts erected since March 2001. The
August statement expressed the "determination to
support the parties throughout the negotiations, which
can be completed within one year, and the
implementation of an agreement".

Moreover, it was clear to everyone at the time
that once direct negotiations commenced, the so-called
Israeli moratorium on settlement activities would
continue for the duration of negotiations or until the
conclusion of a peace treaty.

On that point, I must be clear that, despite our
very deep reservations about the moratorium *
especially with regard to its partiality and non-extension
to East Jerusalem, and which we continue to insist must

be a complete settlement freeze without exception -
that gesture gave some credence to Israel's stated
commitment to the two-State solution and could
potentially help to create an environment more
conducive to launching indirect and then direct
negotiations.

Despite the adverse circumstances that prevailed,
the resumption of direct negotiations in September was
widely welcomed and once again raised hopes that the
political impasse was about to be overcome and that,
with serious efforts, a peaceful settlement could be
achieved.

President Obama's statement before the General
Assembly on 23 September 2010 (see A/65/PV.11)
further clarified the commitment to the goal of
realizing within one year an end to the 1967 Israeli
occupation and the realization of an independent,
sovereign State of Palestine, living side by side with
Israel in peace and security, as well as of a
comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace on all tracks. The
strong support of the international community for that
goal was continually voiced by the majority of the
world leaders who took the Assembly's rostrum. It
seemed possible at that time that the momentum and
hope generated would not be lost, despite the looming
expiration of Israel's settlement moratorium.

Yet, regrettably, none of that was enough to
compel Israel to extend its moratorium and comply
with its obligation to freeze settlement activities to
allow for an atmosphere truly conducive to the
successful resolution of all final status issues,
beginning with borders and security. Rather than acting
in good faith and in a manner respectful of the
circumstances and that would allow for the
negotiations to be convened, the Israeli Government
has chosen to blatantly disregard the global calls to
cease its unlawful colonization of the occupied
Palestinian territory, persisting with its illegitimate
policies and revealing its intention to continue
pursuing its narrow, reckless expansionist agenda, at
the expense of the prospects for peace and security.

Even a cursory review of the situation on the
ground reflects the deplorable reality of the ongoing
Israeli violations and crimes in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
Settlement construction and expansion continues, with
new and provocative projects being undertaken daily
by settlers and officials, who continue to gloat in the

perpetration of the crime of confiscating and
colonizing another people's land, further fuelling
already high tensions and doubts regarding Israel's
credibility as a peace partner.

Since January of this year alone, the Israeli settler
population in the occupied Palestinian territory
increased by 8,000. In addition, fanatic and extremist
settlers continue to terrorize, harass and intimidate
Palestinian civilians, including children, and to destroy
and vandalize Palestinian properties. There has been
yet another arson attack on a mosque, as well as
ongoing attacks on Palestinian agricultural fields and
orchards, with particular malice during this the olive-
harvesting season.

These settlers are undoubtedly driven to persist in
such acts of lawlessness and violence by Israeli
religious and political leaders who continue to
shamelessly provoke and incite them with
inflammatory rhetoric, racist initiatives and hate-filled
and offensive remarks, including from the rostrum of
the General Assembly of this Organization.

The situation in occupied East Jerusalem remains
most volatile, as Israeli settlers continue to act with
aggression against the Palestinian residents of the city
and continue to seize Palestinian properties. We have
alerted the international community on numerous
occasions to the extremely fragile situation in the
Jerusalem neighbourhoods of Silwan, Al-Bustan,
Sheikh Jarrah and others as a result of the constant
encroachment by Israeli settlers in these areas, with
official governmental support, as well as of the
ongoing demolition of homes and eviction of
Palestinian families. None of these illegal actions have
ceased, even after the launch of direct peace
negotiations.

At the same time, the situation in the Gaza Strip
remains critical. In spite of Israel's declared intentions
to case its illegal, inhumane blockade, the occupying
Power continues to obstruct the entry of essential
goods into Gaza. Barely 25 per cent of needed goods
and supplies are allowed to enter, and the obstruction
of the entry of construction materials and supplies for
industrial production continues, as does the prohibition
on the export of Palestinian goods.
The reconstruction process thus continues to be
severely hampered, including efforts by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and other United Nations
agencies on the ground to reconstruct destroyed and
damaged facilities and to build the schools necessary to
accommodate Palestinian children in Gaza - 40,000
of whom were turned away at the start of the school
year for lack of classroom space.

It is deplorable that in spite of the incessant calls
for a full lifting of the blockade, Israel continues its
defiance, and the humanitarian crisis, trauma and
instability inflicted on the civilian Palestinian
population by the Israeli blockade and military
aggression persist unabated.

As stated at the outset, the situation is untenable,
unsustainable and volatile and requires immediate
redress. The most effective remedy is adherence to the
law and pursuit of a peace settlement through an
active, accelerated, good faith political process on the
basis of the agreed terms of reference. Regrettably, at
the moment, this option remains elusive.

Israel stands alone in rejecting the global call to
honour its legal and moral obligations, as it continues
to carry out illegal acts that are totally contradictory to
those required for a peaceful settlement in accordance
with the two-State solution, on the basis of the pre-
1967 borders. Such actions - which have focused on
altering the demographic composition, character and
status of the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, further fragmenting its contiguity,
unity and integrity and imposing a fait accompli - are
seriously, and perhaps permanently, threatening the
viability of the two-State solution.

It is thus Israel that is responsible for the critical
situation on the ground and for undermining peace
negotiations, and it must be held accountable. The
international community must act in unison to bring
Israel into compliance with the global consensus to
salvage the peace process. It is unacceptable for us to
waver and change our legitimate position to
accommodate Israel's intransigence and unlawful
actions, permitting it to continue to shirk its legal
obligations to the grave detriment of our collective
future prospects for peace and security. Israel should
be held accountable and held to the same legal standard
as all countries in the world. The preferential treatment
given it, which has fuelled its contempt and impunity
over the decades, must stop.

The Palestinian leadership has consistently
participated in the negotiations in good faith and, in
spite of the many challenges, has repeatedly affirmed

its willingness to engage in direct negotiations for
peace. In addition to our constructive efforts in the
political process, the Palestinian leadership, with
strong international support, has simultaneously
continued its efforts to ensure law, order and security
and has been forging ahead with the implementation of
the second year of the programme initiated by Prime
Minister Salam Fayyad to build the strong foundations
and institutions of the Palestinian State in preparation
for independence.

At the same time, the Palestinian leadership
stands firm in its rejection of Israeli settlement
activities. This position received unanimous Arab
support at the recent summit in Sirte, Libya. The
summit also decided that, in deference to the role being
played by President Obama, an extended period of time
should be given to allow the United States
Administration to succeed in its efforts to compel
Israel to cease its settlement campaign and to respect
the very basis of the peace process. We remain
supportive of President Obama's efforts, and our
commitment to peace is clear, but we also remain
insistent that settlement activities and the peace
process cannot coexist and that one negates the other.

Now, it is time for Israel to decide. It must choose
whether it wants peace and security for its people and
with all of its neighbours, or whether it wants to
remain an occupier, oppressor, human rights violator
and aggressor State. The consensus position is
obviously in favour of the first choice, and the
readiness of the international community to support the
parties in seizing the historic opportunity for peace is
clear.

However, if Israel once again decides to defy the
law and the will of the international community,
choosing instead to listen to its extremists and settlers,
then it should be made to bear the consequences that
all other violators of the law are made to bear. The
international community, including this Council, must
act accordingly, following through with the long-
overdue implementation of resolutions of international
legitimacy and taking the necessary practical measures.
It must put an end to the exceptional treatment that has
been granted to Israel for decades now, which has
permitted it to act as a State above the law and to make
a mockery of the international community and of all
efforts being exerted for a peaceful settlement.

The solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict -
the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict - is before us and
has been for decades. Courageous, decisive decisions
must be made, while recognizing that time is of the
essence and that the decisions made at this critical
juncture will determine not just the short term but the
years ahead for our region.

I reaffirm today that, despite the grave difficulties
before us on all fronts, the Palestinian leadership
remains committed to peace and to engaging in a
credible peace process on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms of
reference, including the principle of land for peace, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map.

We continue to strive with full commitment
towards the goal of a peaceful settlement of the
conflict that will bring a complete end to the Israeli
occupation of our land; that will allow the Palestinian
people to realize their right to self-determination and to
live in freedom and dignity in their independent State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, side by side with
Israel and all other neighbours in peace and security on
the basis of the pre-l967 borders; and that will achieve
a just and agreed solution to the plight of the Palestine
refugees on the basis of international law and United
Nations resolutions.

