Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are happy to see you,
Madam President, presiding over this briefing. I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
and David Beasley of the World Food Programme for
sharing their views on the link between conflict and
hunger and their experience in the field. We want to
express appreciation to both for the very good work
they and their respective institutions and programmes
have been doing.

We recognize that slow and sudden-onset disasters,
including the impact of climate change, continue to be
one of the major triggers of food insecurity and hunger
in different parts of the world. As recognized in the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, as well as the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, disaster-
induced food insecurity and hunger have an impact
on the overall development of a country and require a
development-oriented solution supported by enhanced
international cooperation. In our View, these issues
should continue to be considered within their primary
forums, particularly the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council.

Unresolved conflicts and certain measures taken
by parties to an armed conflict also continue to
exacerbate hunger and food insecurity in different
parts of the world. Lack of progress in resolving some
pressing conflict situations have also led to serious
humanitarian crises, including hunger and chronic
food insecurity. We are of the view that the focus of
the Council, including today's briefing and possible
follow-up, should be limited to conflict-exacerbated
hunger and food insecurity. In that regard, we would
like to underline the following five points.

First, preventing conflict-exacerbated food
insecurity and hunger in different parts of the world
requires addressing the root causes of conflicts and
finding durable solutions aimed at preventing further
relapses. It is important for the Council to use all
available tools at its disposal, including through
enhanced engagement with regional and subregional
organizations, with a view to preventing and addressing
the root causes of conflicts in different parts of the
world. In that regard, of course, nothing meaningful
can be done without some level of unity within the
Council. That might seem trivial because of repetition,
but it is a fact that cannot be denied.

Secondly, pending durable solutions for the
root causes of conflicts, the provision of life-saving
humanitarian assistance to civilians remains critical.
While recognizing the minimal role of development
actors and development-oriented solutions in conflict
situations, humanitarian actors indeed play a significant
role in responding to food insecurity in complex
situations. However, securing humanitarian access
has become a major challenge and has been one of the
issues that we keep on discussing in the consideration
of various conflict situations. In some situations, the
Council has been trying to facilitate humanitarian
access. In that regard, one cannot deny that political
differences have proved to be major obstacles, while
highlighting again the need to prioritize the unity
of the Council. How we can prioritize addressing
humanitarian tragedies, hunger and famine in the face
of deep political differences is the major challenge the
world faces today and that appears to be extremely self-
evident.

Thirdly, peacekeeping missions continue to play a
significant role in the safe provision of humanitarian
assistance and facilitating humanitarian access. It is
also important to note that a lack of or limited resources
have, over the years, impacted the role of peacekeeping
missions to that end, thereby limiting their contribution
to efforts aimed at the prevention of conflict-induced
food insecurity and hunger. In our view, that requires
further consideration by the Council.

Fourthly, the Security Council could use some of
the subsidiary bodies, such as the Working Group on
Children in Armed Conflict or mandated sanctions
committees, to reduce and prevent conflict-induced
human suffering, starvation, hunger or food insecurity.

In conclusion, we believe that respecting the
principles of complementarity among the various
United Nations organs is important to ensure achieving
the goals enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations across the Organization's various pillars. That
is why we believe there is a need for caution to avoid
overstretching the discussion and for limiting its scope
to conflict-exacerbated hunger and food insecurity.
Given that, using hunger as a weapon of war is a
gross violation of international law, which should be
vehemently condemned.

