Mr. Ellinger (Czech Republic): The Czech
Republic would like to thank the Spanish presidency
for convening today's open debate on the working
methods of the Security Council. The Czech Republic
supports strongly the reform of the Security Council,
including its working methods. We have expressed our
opinion both in the form of an input to the framework
document of the Chair of the intergovernmental
negotiations and during the interactive dialogue in
May. The Czech Republic also wishes to reiterate its
support for Ambassador Rattray's efforts to facilitate
the intergovernmental negotiations on the reform of the
Security Council, which, 70 years after the birth of the
United Nations, is clearly overdue.

We agree with the Spanish concept note (S/2015/793, annex) that there is certainly room for improvement
in the way the Security Council interacts with other
bodies of the United Nations, notably with the General
Assembly. We also feel that open debates with an
outcome pre-agreed beforehand do not give rise to an
interactive nature for such debates, nor does it give the
Member States outside the Security Council a feeling
that the reviews matter to this body. We therefore
support further debate on how those deficiencies can
be remedied. That goes also for draft resolutions and
presidential statements, where the exchange with
non-member States of the Security Council could also
be intensified.

The Czech Republic considers the question of the
selection of the Secretary-General to be one of the
most important parts of the process. We appreciate
the fact that the Spanish delegation has not overlooked
that issue. The current way of selecting the Secretary-
General is clearly outdated. The Czech Republic fully
supports a more transparent process of selection, as set
out in General Assembly resolution 69/321, which goes
in the right direction. We especially welcome the idea
that candidates for Secretary-General should introduce
and present themselves to the General Assembly during
informal dialogues and meetings. We would be happy to
go even further towards transparency and inclusiveness
in the selection process.

The Czech Republic also appreciates the efforts
to improve and intensify the Security Council's
relationship with other United Nations bodies, in
particular with the Peacebuilding Commission but
especially with the Economic and Social Council.
The recently adopted 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1) lends
new impetus to the relationship between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council and
underlines the important link between security and
development.

In that context, we would like to remind delegations
of the candidature of the Czech Republic to the
Economic and Social Council during the elections to
be held tomorrow in the General Assembly. The Czech
Republic would like to stress its commitment to Agenda

2030 and supports further building on the link between
sustainable development and sustainable peace.
