Mr. Grey-Johnson (Gambia): My delegation is
speaking in its capacity as Chairman of the Group of
African States.

At the outset, let me commend you, Mr.
President, for convening this meeting at the request of
the Non-Aligned Movement, which constitutes a
sizeable chunk of the membership of the United
Nations. As you are aware, the member States of the
African Union together make up a significant bloc in
the Non-Aligned Movement. It stands to reason that the
position of the African Union on issues such as the one
we are at present considering would be prominently
reflected in the concerns of the Non-Aligned
Movement on those issues. It is therefore our hope that
those concerns will inform the decisions that the
Council will, from our debate today, ultimately make
on the burning question of Iraq.

The subject of today's meeting has engaged the
whole world for a very long time now, and all peace-
loving nations sincerely wish that it may be speedily
brought to closure, peacefully and for the greater good
of all. In striving towards that objective, the entire
international community has a responsibility to ensure
that the process is managed in such a way that does not
unleash negative and destabilizing effects on our
security, our economies, our societies and our political
systems.

Experience has taught us in Africa that when
elephants fight it is we, the grass, who suffer. We are
fully aware that just as we bore the full brunt of the
conflagrations of the cold war, so also do we now stand
to suffer if the impending conflict is not averted
through proper management and a peaceful resolution.
Already, it is on our soil and among our innocent
people that terrorism has reared a good part of its ugly
head. We cannot forget the terrorist attacks in Nairobi,
Dar-es-Salaam and Mombasa that caused huge loss of
life and extensive destruction to property. We shall
surely be even more exposed if mismanagement of the
Iraq issue leads to the provocation of terrorist attacks
on member States. Our nations do not have the
sophisticated security, detection and early-warning
capacities that aid preventive actions in developed
countries. Our systems are not so highly developed as
to be able to easily anticipate and ward off terrorist
attacks, nor is it so easy for us to quickly recover from
such attacks.

It is to be expected that recourse to war as a
means of resolving the crisis will also naturally have a
negative impact on the already weak economies of our
countries, at a time when we can ill afford or sustain
such an unwelcome outcome. The African economy is
already showing signs of stress as a result of the
uncertainties surrounding this looming conflict. War
will certainly further frustrate the efforts being made
by African Governments to tackle poverty and prevent
conflict on the continent.

The sparring that has been going on between the
opposing forces on the subject of our debate is leading
many to believe that the prophetic clash of civilizations
is already upon us. In many parts of the Muslim world
ordinary people believe that a war on Iraq is a war on
Islam. Erroneous as that perception may be, it does not
give much comfort in many quarters. Africa has one of
the largest concentrations of Muslims in the world. In
the Sahel alone there are more than 100 million
Muslims. For those large numbers of Muslims in our
communities to be made to feel that they are being
singled out for attack by the international community,
of which we are all a part, is an eventuality that all
African Governments earnestly wish to pre-empt.

Africa does not want war. In the declaration of
the Central Organ of the Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution of the African
Union on the Iraqi crisis, which was made at Addis
Ababa on 3 February 2003, African Governments
stated that

"military confrontation in Iraq would be a
destabilizing factor for the whole region and
would have far-reaching economic and security
consequences for all the countries of the world,
and particularly for those of Africa".

Further, the Central Organ declared that

"the territorial integrity of Iraq should be
respected and all diplomatic means should be
pursued by international community to ensure
that the Iraqi Government complies fully with the
provisions of resolution 1441 and that, in any
case, any new decision on the matter should
emanate from the UN Security Council after a
consideration of the final report of the inspection
team".

The position taken by African Governments on
the issue is clear and is fully consistent with the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, Article
51 of which permits the use of force only "if an armed
attack occurs", and even then, only "until the Security
Council has taken measures necessary to maintain
international peace and security". We are satisfied that
the Council has taken those measures in authorizing,
and continuing with, the inspections in Iraq.

Just a few days ago the Council received reports
from Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei on the work of the
inspectors in Iraq. Most members of the Council agreed
that the Iraqi authorities were beginning to cooperate
and that progress was being made. Such a development
encourages us all to expect that, through the work of
the inspectors, Iraq will be made to disarm itself of all
weapons of mass destruction without having to suffer
the pains of war.

My delegation strongly urges the Iraqi authorities
to cooperate fully and unconditionally with the
Security Council and to comply with all the
requirements put before it, not only in resolution 1441
(2002) but also in all the other resolutions that relate to
the situation between Iraq and Kuwait. In particular, we
call upon them once again to release the several
hundred Kuwaiti prisoners of war they are holding and
to return the Kuwaiti archives to where they rightfully
belong, that is, in Kuwait.

The voices that have appealed for patience and
for the inspections not to be interrupted or rushed are
many. We urge the Council to listen to those voices and
to pay heed to their most reasonable appeal.

