Ms. Sison (United States of America): We would
like to thank Mr. Grandi, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, for his briefing. It is good
to have him here with us this morning. The United
States remains steadfast in our support for the High
Commissioner's mandate and for the work of his Office,
which is more critical now than ever.

With new and protracted crises leaving over
65 million people forcibly displaced worldwide - over
22 million of whom are considered refugees - the
stakes of this global challenge could not be higher or
more evident. The Council has a vital role to play in
curtailing the underlying political dysfunction and
conflict that give rise to and prolong mass displacement
and humanitarian need.

When we act on our mandate and follow through
consistently, we can be successful. It is therefore
imperative that we do more to act on our mandate and
work to prevent and mitigate conflicts, especially by
following through on the decisions we make in this
Chamber. As we do so, it is important to have briefings
like today's from the High Commissioner in order to
remind us of the critical nature, real-world impact
and human dimension of crises occurring worldwide.
As described to us today by the High Commissioner,
several situations globally highlight the importance of
more robust action to solve these problems.

In Burma, more than 603,000 Rohingya have fled
into neighbouring Bangladesh only since late August
to escape escalating insecurity and alleged human
rights abuses by security forces. An unknown but
likely significant number of Rohingya are internally
displaced within Burma after their villages were burned
or they were forced out of their homes. While reported
violence has lessened, continued insecurity and fear of
further violence threaten to drive more Rohingya into
neighboring countries.

The Government of Bangladesh has stepped up
impressively, taking in the displaced and providing
for their safe temporary care, but undeniably this is a
burden on Bangladesh's resources and, of course, many
Rohingya simply want to be able to return safely to
their rightful homes in Burma. We welcome Burmese
State Counselor Aung San Suu Kyi's commitment that
refugees will be able to return home. We encourage
the Governments of Burma and Bangladesh to work
closely with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) throughout this
process and to allow it and other relief organizations
full access to displaced populations across the country.

In South Sudan, we can see the human cost
of a Government's failure to uphold its most basic
obligations to its citizens. More than 2 million South
Sudanese have fled to Uganda, the Sudan, Ethiopia,
Kenya and other countries. Refugees have found safety
and protection in those neighbouring countries, but the
resources of host communities and Governments are
limited. Inside South Sudan, another 1.9 million people
are displaced, facing ongoing food insecurity and threat
of famine.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, nearly
4 million people are now internally displaced. Many
internally displaced persons (IDPs) in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo live in protracted displacement
due to continuing conflict, limited access to livelihoods
and basic services, and the absence of political will on
the part of the Government to address conflict and
underdevelopment, thereby deterring the investments
needed to pave the way for durable solutions. The
devastating impact of renewed and intensifying
conflicts in the Kasai region there have led to the
displacement of nearly 1.3 million people over the past
year, both within the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and into neighbouring countries.

As the civil war in Syria continues, an estimated
13.5 million people remain in dire need inside
Syria alone, including 6.3 million IDPs and another
5.3 million refugees. These numbers are simply
staggering, amounting to half of Syria's population
before the civil war began. In Syria, the Al-Assad
regime has used chemical weapons against civilian
populations and bombed entire cities into ruins, in
explicit and irrefutable contravention of international
law. Adding to this, the Syrian regime's obscene
refusal to allow humanitarian organizations to access
vulnerable populations, its continued practice of
redirecting humanitarian assistance for political
purposes, and its military tactics further compound
suffering. Those who make it out alive have fled,
largely to neighbouring countries like Turkey, Jordan
and Lebanon, which are playing an indispensable role
in providing safety and support to these refugees in the
midst of the unimaginable and indescribable conditions
caused by both the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) and the Al-Assad regime.

The spread of violent extremism over the past
decade has also created a new wave of suffering and
displacement, characterized by unthinkable violence
and inhumanity. Boko Haram, for example, has
continued to drive the humanitarian crisis in Nigeria
and the Lake Chad basin to devastating proportions,
while recent gains against Boko Haram and ISIS in West
Africa have led to nearly 1.3 million persons returning
to areas of origin; nearly 2 million still remain internally
displaced or are refugees in neighbouring countries.

Ultimately, in each of these situations and in
others around the world, a sustainable resolution to
the underlying political conflict and development
are essential to ending the global refugee crisis. The
Council must therefore take action towards these ends.
We also have a duty to press Member States to step
up and ensure that UNHCR is fully resourced for
delivering on the growing demands it faces. Given
the magnitude of this global crisis, the UNHCR 2018
budget and the wider global humanitarian appeals have
once again climbed above last year's figure to historic
highs, reflecting the extraordinary humanitarian needs
of forcibly displaced people all over the world. The
United States provided over $8 billion in humanitarian
aid in the fiscal year 2017 - representing a historic
high - including nearly $1.5 billion to UNHCR.
We must all follow through on our commitments to
increase contributions to humanitarian appeals and
promote durable solutions for the displaced. We all too
often throw around numbers - 20 million, 4 million,
600,000 - to describe people in a way that is easier
to handle. We talk about numbers instead of actually
talking about real people.

However, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
last week, Ambassador Haley met with women in
camps who described living in absolute fear - fear that
if they left the camp, they would be raped, and fear that
if their children left the camp, they would be abducted.
No person should have to live like that. No individual
should have to experience what those individuals
experience each and every day.

But in the photos from Ambassador Haley's trip
of those same camps, there are children smiling and
waving, showing the innocent hope and joy that they
still have while living in a world where horrible things
are happening all around them. The sad reality is that
without action by their Government and the engagement
of the international community, they will likely end up
like their parents, with their fathers pulled off to war
and their mothers living in constant fear.

However, we can change that. If those children can
have hope in such a dire situation, so should we. We must
translate that hope into concrete action to change their
lives for the better. We owe it to them and to children
all over the world to take our mandate as a Council
seriously and to hold those Governments accountable
when they fail to protect their people. Only then can
we do our part to create a future where they can live,
live out their dreams and fulfil their potential. We want
those children to know that we hear their voices, we are
here for them and we will act for them.

