I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his presentation. I would also like to welcome Ambassador Bashar Ja'afari, Permanent Representative of Syria, for joining us this morning. The Niger reiterates its support for the calls by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for a nationwide ceasefire in Syria to enable an all-out effort against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. However, we remain very concerned about the humanitarian situation, as we are witnessing an increase in the number of COVID-19 cases in Syria. Additionally, we heard from Mark Lowcock that the economic crisis is deepening poverty and pushing more people to need humanitarian aid. The Niger commends the efforts of humanitarian agencies in delivering much-needed assistance to the most vulnerable population throughout Syria, as well as their ability to adapt to the shifting conditions on the ground. As we have stated in previous meetings, there can be no military solution to the Syrian crisis. The Russia and Turkey ceasefire agreement of 6 March, although fragile, is still holding and has helped reduce hostilities in north-west Syria. The Niger reiterates its calls for Security Council members and Special Envoy Pedersen to build on this momentum in order to make progress towards a comprehensive ceasefire and on the political front, as mandated by resolution 2254 (2015). The Niger remains convinced that the formula for ending the Syrian crisis must be inspired by Syrians themselves, in their various components, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). We are therefore pleased to hear that the Constitutional Committee session is happening next week and that an agreement was reached on the agenda. Although my delegation remains optimistic about the upcoming round of talks, we would like to reiterate our call for all parties to be more flexible during these rounds of negotiations in order to advance the political track and achieve lasting peace in Syria. In the same vein, in an effort to help build confidence between the parties as the Constitutional Committee session convenes, the Niger calls on both sides to show empathy in these unprecedented times by proceeding with the release of detainees on both sides and clarifying the situation of missing persons. In conclusion, the Niger recognizes the danger posed by terrorist groups in Syria. We believe that the Syrian Government, like any other State, has the right to fight terrorism in tandem with the fight against the pandemic, in compliance with international human rights and humanitarian obligations with regard to the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure and the principle of proportionality.
