Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): I have the honour
today to speak on behalf of the five Nordic countries:
Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden and Iceland.

It is a well-known fact that small arms and light
weapons maim and kill hundreds of thousands of
people every year, create fear and insecurity, divert
resources needed elsewhere and hinder post-conflict
recovery. Security is a precondition for development,
and the interlinkages among security issues,
humanitarian problems and development are
increasingly recognized. Combating and eradicating
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all
its aspects is therefore fundamental to improving
global, regional and national security and necessary
social and economic development.

Let me reiterate that the five Nordic countries
fully support the efforts to deal with the challenges
posed by man-portable air defence systems.

The United Nations Programme of Action of
2001 remains the global framework for cooperative
efforts to combat illicit arms. The five Nordic countries
firmly support the full implementation of the
commitments set out in the Programme of Action.

In doing so, we call for enhanced partnerships
with all relevant stakeholders. We call for enhanced
cooperation among Governments. All relevant parts of
the United Nations family must contribute. In this
respect, let me reiterate the importance of the Security
Council. It is vital for the Council to address the
challenges posed by small arms and light weapons in
relation to human security. In this respect, we must
fully recognize the gender implications of this threat.
Likewise, we believe that the Peacebuilding
Commission must take fully into account the
complexities in carrying out its task. We cannot
achieve progress unless we engage regional
institutions. We must further strengthen the partnership
with civil society.

The five Nordic countries intend to continue
contributing in this joint undertaking. We are ready to
provide financial resources, as we have done in recent
years. Within the framework of the Nordic-African
ministerial meeting, we have met with African
colleagues both in Geneva and in New York to discuss
specific issues relating to the illicit trade and the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and their
negative impact on development in Africa.

We cannot allow the third Biennial Meeting of
States under the Programme of Action to fail, as was
the case with the 2006 Review Conference. We must
aim for a successful third Biennial Meeting that brings
the Member States together around the priority issues
identified by the Chair-designate and that makes
recommendations on improved implementation of the
Programme of Action. This will be crucial in order to
strengthen international efforts on small arms and light
08-32416
weapons. A successful third Biennial Meeting will pave
the way for more ambitious and more effective global
work to combat the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in the coming years.

First, we must take stock of where we stand on
the implementation of the 2005 Instrument on marking
and tracing. Most of us would have preferred a legally
binding instrument. Yet, now the challenge is to ensure
that all countries adhere to this politically binding
Instrument.

Secondly, the Nordic countries have for years
called for more effective international cooperation in
addressing the question of brokering in small arms and
light weapons. We have advocated an international
instrument against illicit brokering. Yet, we note that
the recent United Nations Group of Governmental
Experts has drawn other conclusions. Our challenge is
now to identify practical measures which will make a
difference in our common efforts to fight illicit
brokering. The recommendations made by the Group of
Governmental Experts should form the basis of this
discussion during the third Biennial Meeting.

Thirdly, the upcoming third Biennial Meeting, to
be held in New York, should also consider national
implementation of the Programme of Action. It is
therefore vital that all Member States submit their
national reports in a timely manner.

Fourthly, we consider civil society, such as
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and
academia, to be important partners, both in shaping
policy and in implementation. We support enhanced
NGO participation in meetings under the Programme
of Action, and not least at the upcoming third Biennial
Meeting of States.

While the Programme of Action is valuable, we
need a legally binding treaty to regulate the arms trade.
We look forward to the outcome of the Group of
Governmental Experts which has been established to
clarify the modalities for an arms trade treaty.

Last year, all the five Nordic countries articulated
their views on such a treaty to the Secretariat. From
our perspective, an arms trade treaty is feasible, doable
and desirable. We are convinced that such as treaty
could facilitate the task for the Security Council. We
are also of the view that an arms trade treaty should
properly capture key dimensions such as human rights,
08-32416
and development and should contribute to a broader
humanitarian agenda.

Illicit small arms and light weapons represent a
threat to human security, peacebuilding efforts and
development. We must forge an even stronger global
partnership to combat this menace. The United Nations
must be in the lead, but regional institutions play a
vital role in our broader international efforts.

