Mr. Pamir (Turkey): Like previous speakers, I
should also like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
having taken the helm of the Security Council during
this busy month of June.

The Council is again deliberating on a matter that
has preoccupied the international community for more
than 10 years now. We believe that a comprehensive
approach is required to overcome the present standstill
in connection with the sanctions on Iraq. Like all those
nations that are voicing their concerns and hopes here
today, Turkey is deeply distressed by the ongoing
suffering of the Iraqi people under the prevailing
conditions. We are also one of the foremost countries
to have been heavily affected by the sanctions against
Iraq.

Let me place on record the fact that Turkey's
principal wish is to see these sanctions lifted altogether
in the nearest possible future. For this to happen, a new
spirit of cooperation between the Security Council and
Iraq will have to take hold. We want to see the current
negotiations among the membership of the Council
lead to precisely that. This exercise should stay its
course and effectively eliminate the existing stumbling-
blocks that stand in the way of the Iraqi people's access
to all civilian goods.

Similarly, the distance between the Security
Council and Iraq should be bridged in a manner that
would bring them within the range of cooperation on
monitoring and verification issues relating to
paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 of resolution 687 (1991).

I cannot overemphasize my country's
longstanding concern over the deployment and
development of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery in our region.

We were heartened when a fresh dialogue started
between Iraq and the Secretary-General last February.
We believe that this momentum should be maintained.
We think that it is even more important now for this
dialogue to continue in the light of the ongoing drafting
process in the Security Council, as it seems that the
resulting text will give more discretion to the
Secretary-General in the execution of the humanitarian
programme.

Our view of the future is clear. We are now faced
with the critical need to alleviate the humanitarian
situation in Iraq and to relieve the bordering countries
of the disproportionate economic and social burden
they have been shouldering all these years.

The idea should therefore not be to make the
present scope of trade with Iraq more restrictive and
render the procedures more cumbersome, introducing
new uncalled-for obligations into the system. It should,
rather, pave the way for a more liberalized trade system
that will both guard the economic and commercial
interests of these countries and draw Iraq's
cooperation, which is essential, thus making
arrangements workable.

