Mr. Djangone-Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): It is both an honour and a privilege for me to
take part in this high-level meeting of the Security
Council, in this first month of the year 2002, to engage
once again in an exchange of views on the situation in
Africa.
I should like to take this opportunity to thank
you, Mr. President, for the kind invitation you
addressed to your Ivorian counterpart, Mr.
Aboudramane Sangare, who, unfortunately, was unable
to attend this meeting because of previous
commitments. I should like also to express the
satisfaction of Cote d'Ivoire at the excellent initiative
you have taken in inscribing on the Council's agenda
the item on the situation in Africa.

Moreover, I am pleased to welcome the presence
here and the statement made by the Deputy Secretary-
General, Ms. Frechette, representing the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, whose commitment to Africa
and to finding solutions to its problems is well known
to, and appreciated by, my country.

I am also pleased and proud to see Mr. Amara
Essy, Secretary General of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), at this high-level meeting, where he is
being called on to speak about Africa's problems. Who
could be in a better position to tell us about Africa's
situation and its prospects at this time of transition
between the OAU and the African Union, when the
international community is focusing its attention on
other challenges?

Lastly, I should like to welcome the presence of
the President of the Economic and Social Council and
to commend all of the members of the Council for their
willingness to address the African cause. I would be
remiss if I did not extend my congratulations to the
representatives of Cameroon and of Guinea, as well as
to the other new non-permanent members of the
Security Council, and to say how delighted we are to
see them join this very important decision-making
body of the United Nations. They can rely on the
cooperation of the Ivorian delegation.

This meeting of the Council on the situation in
Africa is being held in a very special context, because
it is the first of this magnitude since the tragic events
of 11 September 2001. In the wake of those sad events,
we have appreciated the way in which the Council was
able to deal with the delicate questions raised by
terrorism. Indeed, it was in a spirit of responsibility
and a climate of calm that the Council responded, to
the great satisfaction of all.

The various resolutions that it rapidly adopted,
which unreservedly condemned acts of terrorism and
advocated appropriate measures in order to effectively
fight this scourge, have demonstrated once again how
great its willingness is to respond to the expectations of
the international community and how important it is for
actions to be taken comprehensively to stem any evil
that threatens international peace and security.

We are gathered here again to address the
situation in Africa in a single day. That is a genuine
challenge, even if we only choose certain important
points. We also incur the risk of having an exchange of
platitudes, since the subject has been so much
rehearsed during recent decades in all international
forums and bodies.

Indeed, who has not heard reference made,
concerning the African continent, to such subjects as
the substantial increase in official development
assistance, debt alleviation, the improvement of access
for African products to the markets of developed
countries, and so on and forth. These subjects have
been repeated endlessly, but without any real, lasting
application on the ground.

At the Council's request, the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, has published excellent thematic
reports on the situation in Africa, including particularly
the one on the causes of conflicts in Africa and the
means to address them, in order to achieve peace
leading to sustainable development, for the benefit of
African peoples and the international community.

Questions such as those related to refugees and
displaced persons, for which African has set the sad
record, HIV/AIDS, cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
to cite only a few, have been discussed and examined
thoroughly in the Council. Resolutions or
recommendations clearly indicating the ways and
means to the solutions for African problems have been

adopted. Despite all this, it seems that we are still at
square one.

One may wonder under these circumstances why
it is that the Council is dealing with the situation in
Africa in an almost cyclical way, as if it were only to
clear its conscience. Yet one cannot accuse the
Africans themselves of not having taken positive and
far-reaching steps to meet the challenges they face.

In response to any criticism one can point out that
Africa has been working resolutely for several years to
find solutions to its numerous political, economic and
social problems. Tangible results have been achieved in
the area of conflict resolution, thanks to the action of
eminent African statesmen and leaders. In this context,
we can recall Presidents Nelson Mandela and Quett
Masire in the cases of Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and President Abdelaziz
Bouteflika in the case of the Ethiopian-Eritrean
conflict.

In the West Africa subregion, the leaders of the
Economic Community of West African States have
spared no effort, despite great obstacles, to ensure that
peace is gradually restored to the region, where areas
of tension threatened the existence of countries like
Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau. Naturally, all
these encouraging results have been achieved with the
appreciable and appreciated help of the United Nations.

Dialogue and cooperation, chosen as a means of
resolving problems without inopportune foreign
intervention, are beginning to bear fruit today. My
country, Cote d'Ivoire, expresses the wish that other
countries affected by conflicts should adopt this path,
in keeping with the recommendations of the reports of
Secretary-General of the United Nations on the causes
of conflict in Africa.

This approach, which was established by the
Africans themselves to resolve their political problems,
honours African tradition and must be welcomed and
encouraged by the international community. It
demonstrates, moreover, that the continent is indeed an
entity that is viewed by its own leaders as being unified
and that the heads of State are ready to hold a
constructive dialogue among themselves, regardless of
the disputes that separate them, provided that all agree
to work for the benefit of the African people. The
international community must have trust in them and
assist them sincerely, without ulterior motives.

Efforts in the search for solutions to political
problems, particularly concerning conflicts, are also
evident in the economic and social spheres.

It is no secret to anyone that Africa and its
leaders are actively seeking to create mechanisms to
manage domestic reforms and to strengthen good
governance. The building and the maintenance of
democracy are crucial not only for the maintenance of
peace and stability within States, but also because this
contributes to combating other evils. Today there are
very few African States that are not moving towards
pluralistic and democratic systems of government.

The African context has changed a great deal in
general terms. The evolution of political leadership is a
source of optimism. Efforts for good governance are
genuine, and, even if much remains to be done, certain
progress has been achieved in the sphere of combating
poor management of public administration.

Democracy takes root slowly but surely. The era
of single parties is over, and it is worth noting the
establishment of a civil society aware of its
responsibilities. Indeed, democracy is not the business
only of Governments. It also involves establishing a
culture at the level of the citizen and the entire civil
society of a country.

It is, however, clear that democratization cannot
flourish in a climate characterized by poverty. As
Maurice Duverger said, "Democracy is also a matter of
purchasing power". In other words, to be real and
lasting, this democratization needs development and,
consequently, the readiness of the international
community to sincerely assist this continent. We cannot
persuade Africa to engage in democratization solely by
brandishing conditionalities that are often poorly
adapted to the daily realities of the African people.

The evolution and the developments that I have
referred to require that the international community as
a whole make a very firm and long-term commitment.
Without peace and the cessation of pernicious conflicts,
as far as political issues go, there can be no security or
stability and, above all, no development. Neither can
there be any question of victory over poverty nor the
full integration of the African continent into
international life.

According to the estimates of the United Nations,
52 per cent of the people living on less than $1 per day
are found in Africa. In the last decade, there has been a
substantial decrease in resources provided to the
United Nations for its activities in the region.
Likewise, flows of official development assistance for
Africa fell from $23.4 billion in 1994 to $15.3 billion
in 1999. Foreign investment in Africa has stagnated at
less than 5 per cent of all investments made in all
developing countries.

The African continent, it must be recalled,
comprises 20 per cent of the world population.
However, it represents only 3.5 per cent of the world
gross domestic product and 1.5 per cent of world
exports. In order to achieve the objectives of the
Millennium Declaration to reduce poverty by half
between now and 2015, experts tell us that African
countries must experience an annual economic growth
rate of7to9per cent.

We in Cote d'Ivoire are convinced, along with the
Secretary-General, in order to help Africa defeat
poverty, strike a skilful balance between financial
assistance, debt alleviation and improvement of access
to the markets of developed countries, as well as
appropriate and ongoing support for efforts to diversify
the African economy.
In the social sphere, the Security Council is aware
that 25 million of the world's 36 million HIV-positive
individuals are Africans. The scourge of HIV/AIDS
thwarts Africa's development plans because it
particularly strikes young people and, according to the
experts, affects educational systems throughout the
continent. It is well known that in some African
countries the epidemic has hit teachers at such a pace
that it is no longer possible to replace them.

Here too, the outcome of the work on HIV/AIDS
by the General Assembly 4 which on the initiative of
the Secretary-General has set up a Fund to wage an
effective war against this scourge, especially in
Africa- awaits implementation by the international
community. Moreover, who here has not heard this cry
of despair: "The disease is in the south, but the
medicine is in the north"?

Last July the Secretary-General called upon the
G-8, meeting at Genoa, to contribute to the world fight
against AIDS by providing the main financing for the
Global Fund established to that end. The Secretary-
General noted that the Fund was far from reaching its
goal of between $7 billion and $10 billion a year. And
Mr. Annan expressed the hope that everyone -
Governments, civil society, foundations and others-
would join the fight against AIDS, which is a pandemic
of appalling proportions, especially in Africa. Here, we
should recall that already, at Abuja, Nigeria, Africa
decided to devote approximately 10 per cent to 15 per
cent of African Government budgets to combating
AIDS.

Here as elsewhere, Africans are striving to create
conditions in which they can take charge of their own
future. They do not admit to the "Afro-pessimism" that
they are accused of. Africans are more than ever
determined to take the future of the continent and its
inhabitants into their own hands.

It was in the awareness of this reality that, by
creating the African Union, Africa devised for itself a
new political structure that takes account of the new
challenges.

The New Partnership for Africa's Development,
which the international community has rightly
welcomed, is an ambitious programme by Africans for
Africans and their foreign partners. Without going into
the details, let us understand that it is aimed at
restoring peace, security and stability to the continent,
promoting good governance and effective leadership,
finding ways to achieve healthy growth and sustainable
development, reducing poverty and inequality, and
rehabilitating and rebuilding the infrastructure that is
indispensable for the well-being of the peoples of
Africa.

Those ambitions are in line with the African
continent's legitimate hopes for the twenty-first
century. The United Nations must heed African
initiatives and be patient with a view to formulating
and promoting suitable programmes and to engaging in
a constructive search for the means to back up those
initiatives. The United Nations should be Africa's
primary partner in considering the implications of the
implementation of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development. That initiative was designed to be based
on strong, tangible partnerships.

Cote d'Ivoire remains convinced that these great
enterprises 4 the establishment of the African Union
and the implementation of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development 4 will in future years be viewed
as the "constitutive act" of the development of Africa.

It is no longer time for statements of intent:
everyone knows all the plans and programmes relating
to the situation in Africa and the solutions that are
needed. Most of them were formulated with the help of
the United Nations and its agencies and institutions.
We must now assess their implementation, along with
that of all the resolutions and recommendations
adopted by the United Nations and other international
institutions, to see what has been done, what has not
been done and the reasons for the inaction with respect
to a continent about whose many ills everyone is sorry,
and whose peoples feel that when it comes to them the
international community often does the minimum
possible or is even completely indifferent.

Now, it is time to work openly with Africans so
that Africa can play a larger role on the international
stage. Let us heed Africa's message to us, for that
message gives good reasons to believe that a better
future for the African continent is possible. Once
Africans themselves are determined, Africa's partners
should help make Africa's renaissance and recovery a
reality.

Let us reflect on the eloquent words spoken by
the British Prime Minister, Mr. Tony Blair, in his recent
speech at Brighton:

"The state of Africa is a scar on the
conscience of the world. But if the world as a
community focused on it, we could heal it. And if
we don't, it will become deeper and angrier."

Let us make sure that we contribute now to a
process that will enable Africa to heal its wounds and
take total control of its future.

