Mr. Dauth (Australia): Let me, like others, thank
you very much indeed, Sir, for convening this meeting
today. Let me also, like others, acknowledge the
splendid work of Ambassador Koonjul. I should
acknowledge the very helpful contributions of
Ambassador Ibrahima Fall and the presence of
Ambassador Simonovie too, but in the interest of
brevity, let me stop heaping even more deserved praise
on all ofyou.

As the Secretary-General has said, there is no
mission that is more important to fulfilling the vision
ofthe Charter than conflict prevention and recovery. In
that context, let me make three brief points today,
which I hope may in some way be helpful to the
Working Group.

My first point is that successful conflict
prevention and recovery must draw on political,
security, economic and regional perspectives. The
challenge, and also the promise, is to integrate those
perspectives so as to develop comprehensive responses.
We need a deeper understanding of how poverty, poor
governance and conflict feed off each other. We also
need to know how to encourage virtuous cycles, where
peace and sustainable development are mutually
supporting.

Focused and well-structured interaction between
the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council
and the Organization of African Unity (OAU), as
others have said, each bringing its own perspectives,
can be an important part of an integrated international
response to conflict. In that respect, Australia will
encourage this during our term on the Economic and
Social Council.

My second point - and a very welcome one - is
that with the growing understanding of the causes and
cures of conflict, it has to be said that our policy
toolbox is fuller than it once was. For example,
appreciation of the economic factors sustaining
conflicts has enabled a more effective international
response to the scourge of conflict diamonds, including
through the Kimberley Process, in which Australia is
deeply engaged. Transitional justice issues are also
receiving more attention, and Australia has been active
in its support for international tribunals. But caution is
needed. Conflict prevention and recovery remain very
inexact sciences. It is important, therefore, to
encourage more local input, local knowledge and local
ownership. African-driven initiatives and processes,
such as the New Partnership for Africa's Development,
must be supported.

Not only do we have more tools, we have also
been improving the tools we have. United Nations
peacekeeping, in particular, has made substantial
progress and must continue to do so. Here, I should say
that Australia has what we regard as a proud history of
peacekeeping in Africa, including in Rwanda, Somalia,
Namibia, Western Sahara, Mozambique and Ethiopia/
Eritrea.

Finally, conflict prevention and recovery in
Africa must be a partnership, we believe, between the
region and the wider international community. I am
happy to say that Australia is a willing and engaged
partner. We are, for example, working closely with
Nigeria and South Africa at the highest levels of our
Governments through the Commonwealth in relation to
the recent election in Zimbabwe in order to engage
with Zimbabwe on issues of democracy and
governance following the unsatisfactory conduct of the
recent presidential election.

We recognize that development assistance plays a
direct and practical role in promoting peace and
overcoming conflict. This year, Australia will adopt a
new policy on peace, conflict and development
cooperation. Delivering an aid programme that adopts a
comprehensive approach to conflict prevention and
recovery will be a major priority in the coming years.
We have a modest but targeted development assistance
programme for Africa. A major priority is poverty
reduction through capacity-building, governance and
the fight against HIV/AIDS, which is an immediate and
long-term threat to development and security.
Education is another priority, which includes
supporting the African Virtual University initiative in
Nairobi in cooperation with the World Bank.

