Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine): Yesterday, after my
final statement, the Israeli representative said,

"I regret the tone and content of the
statement just made by the Palestinian Observer.
In view of the fact that the statement was well
prepared, I particularly regret the use of terms
such as "silly" and "stupid". I believe that we
should conduct the business of this important
body in a parliamentary manner. The terms he
used are not in line with the parliamentary
manner." (S/PV.4510, p. 26)

Since that time, several ambassadors have asked
me outside this Chamber why I had described the
Israeli representative as silly and stupid. Others asked
why I described the Israeli statement as silly and
stupid. Today, of course, we heard another statement
from the Israeli representative, describing our
statement as irresponsible and using words such as
"derogatory", "no class", et cetera. Although relatively
minor, this is just another perfect example of the way
many Israeli officials are conducting their business.
They try to catch something out of context, make a lie
out of it and then wage their campaign. Most probably
it will work.

WhatI said yesterday was the following:

"A while ago, we listened to the statement
made by the Israeli representative, which was
indeed an absurd and unfortunate one. The
statement basically amounted to an attack on
President Yasser Arafat and contained silly,
stupid and unsubstantiated allegations that cannot
be believed." (ibid., p. 25)

S0 "silly" and "stupid" were not directed at the
statement and were definitely not directed at any
person. They were practically an understatement about
silly, stupid, derogatory, hostile, unsubstantiated - and
you can add dozens of other negative adjectives -
allegations that have only one aim: to undermine the
Palestinian Authority and, specifically, its President,
and to contribute to the campaign against them.

The Israeli representative then proceeded today to
speak about a letter we sent with regard to another
unsubstantiated allegation on the smuggling of an arms
shipment by ship. Let me repeat clearly here that the
Palestinian Authority and President Yasser Arafat have
no involvement whatsoever with that story. However,
we noted the presence of a Palestinian captain; we also
took note of the involvement of a very few Palestinian
officials in this story. As such, we recognize that there
absolutely is a certain degree of responsibility that
needs to be carried out and that an investigation has to
take place.

However, we remain convinced that the Israeli
story makes no sense. We stand firmly behind what we
said in our letter to the Secretary-General and to the
President of the Security Council (S/2002/39). No such
shipment was possible. No sane person would have
conceived such a thing. And no, Katyushas could not
be used in Gaza. The proof of this is that after all the
Israeli savagery that we have seen in the last 10 days,
no weapons other than rifles were used against the
invaders. That is further proof that everything said by
the Israeli side on the Palestinian smuggling of
weapons was just a lie.
The Israeli representative - by the way, I am
using the term "Israeli representative" intentionally in
response to the inability of the Israeli side to use the
correct and proper designation when he refers to me,
that is, the Permanent Observer of Palestine; his
inability to utter the word "Palestine" is unfortunate -
goes on and chooses to attack the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius. I am not going to get into
this, but, to tell you the truth, it is very difficult to
resist the feeling that a choice was made to serve
certain political purposes, that there is a member of the
Security Council here and that maybe that member is
playing a certain role. So why not try another round of
the usual intimidation against individuals. We hope
such intimidation will not work. What was said by the
Permanent Representative of Mauritius was no
different from what was said by at least 30 other
speakers. That is another indication of why he was
chosen.

The Israeli representative then goes on and refers
to the withdrawal from Qalqiliya and Tulkarm. Let me
clarify that the so-called withdrawal from Qalqiliya
and Tulkarm is taking place while the Israeli occupying
forces continue to surround both cities, keeping a very
solid and, indeed, hermetic closure on both. At the
same time the Israeli military attack continues and
escalates. Israeli occupying forces today reoccupied the
town of Dura, near Al-Khalil. The Israeli occupying
forces are escalating their attacks in Jenin and Nablus,
probably leading to a new Sabra and Shatila in the
refugee camps in Jenin.

In another glaring example of the same Israeli
tactics, the Israeli representative accused many of us of
committing a huge sin by daring to compare, on the
one hand, what happened to the Jews in Europe,
through the terrible Holocaust, to what has been said
about what the Israelis have been doing, on the other
hand. This, again, is not true. The Permanent Observer
of Palestine did not say that what the Israelis are
committing against the Palestinian people now is
tantamount to the Nazi Holocaust against the Jews in
Europe. What we said was clear, that what is happening
now in the Palestinian cities, what is being committed
by the Israeli army in those cities, has caused a
situation which, yes, is tantamount to European cities
under the occupation of Nazi German armies.

We stand by what we said; we believe that it is
correct. But it is completely different from what was
alleged by the Israeli representative. What the Israeli
army has been doing against our people does not differ
in many aspects from what the Nazi German armies did
in many European cities and against their inhabitants.

This is a fact, a terrible fact, which I hope will be
courageously faced by the Israeli people. Facing it is
the first step towards correcting it, towards a different
kind of behaviour, one which could, hopefully, lead to
peaceful coexistence between the two sides.

