Mr. Satoh (Japan): First, I want to welcome you
back to New York, Mr. President. My delegation
expresses its appreciation to you for providing us with
this opportunity to discuss the grave situation we face
today in the Middle East.

The current violence is already resulting in the
tragic loss of more lives and material destruction, and
we are concerned that the escalation of violence may
bring about a disastrous result in the whole region.
Moreover, the continued violence is damaging the
political atmosphere for peace, which is a prerequisite
for resuming substantive talks. We therefore urge all
the parties concerned to make determined efforts to put
an end to the current violence. We also call on all
parties to refrain from any action that could further
complicate the situation. Most importantly, they must
observe the "blue line" identified by the United
Nations last May.

As we all know, a negotiated peace is the only
realistic option. We therefore urge the parties
concerned yet anew to make every effort to resume
their negotiations, especially the final status
negotiation between Israel and the Palestinians.

In this context, we are encouraged by the fact that
in its basic policy guideline, the new Israeli
Government explicitly expressed its determination to
pursue final peace agreements with the Palestinians and
Syria, based on Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), and a peace treaty with
Lebanon. It is also encouraging that Foreign Minister
Shimon Peres came to discuss the issues with the
Council yesterday.

Yet we have to point out that too strict a linkage
between the cessation of violence and the resumption
of negotiation could play into the hands of those
elements who do not wish to seek a peaceful settlement
and the coexistence of the State of Israel with an
independent Palestinian State.

We believe that in the light of the heightened
enmities, to resume dialogue is an essential first step in
rebuilding confidence among the parties concerned. We
therefore call on them to make every effort to do so as
soon as possible.

The serious deterioration of the Palestinian
economy is also a matter of grave concern to us. The
livelihoods of the Palestinian people and the financial
basis of the Palestinian Authority are being
undermined. This will, no doubt, have a profoundly
negative effect on the peace process. We therefore urge
the Israeli Government to do its utmost to enable the
Palestinians to resume their normal economic
activities.

It is also critically important that the international
community help alleviate the suffering of the
Palestinians. Japan, for its part, has extended
contributions to the Palestinians amounting to $12
million since the outbreak of the clashes.

In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
that Japan will remain determined to make every
possible effort to help achieve the cessation of violence
and the resumption of the peace process.

