Mr. Lucas (Angola): At the outset, on behalf of
the Angolan delegation, I would like to commend the
Malaysian presidency for the initiative of convening
this meeting with the Chairs of the three Security
Council subsidiary organs responsible for countering
terrorism, whom we welcome.

The holding of this meeting less than a month
after the 29 May debate on the threat posed by foreign
terrorist fighters (see S/PV.7453) is a reflection of
our collective commitment to combating the threat
posed by terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
Terrorism is a global threat. It affects all continents and
peoples. Contemporary terrorism is the most evil and
sinister product of globalization. We are aware that a
global effort such as the one conducted by the United
Nations in cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations is absolutely needed to
counter terrorism more effectively.

Specifically on our continent, Africa, terrorism is
spreading extensively and dangerously: Boko Haram
in Nigeria and in the Lake Chad Basin; Al-Qaida and
affiliates in the Maghreb; Ansar Al-Sharia and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Libya;
Al-Shabaab in Somalia; the myriad terrorist groups
affecting the Sahel region; and terrorists in the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Mali. A disturbing situation has emerged in
Africa, with terrorists threatening peace and stability
all over the continent.

As underlined in the briefing by the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, the
human cost of Al-Qaida, ISIL and other terrorist-
related attacks is immense and tragic, be it in the
Middle East, in Africa, in Central Asia, in the Far
East or in Europe. The Security Council has devised
appropriate responses to this threat by expanding
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) and its Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team through the reporting on
oil and the financing of terrorism, ISIL, the Al-Nusra
Front and foreign terrorist fighters.

As terrorism grows, the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
has increased the number of individuals and entities
it has designated as associated with Al-Qaida. The
observation by the Chair of the Committee that listings
should be strategic, targeted and implementable and
should have a practical effect and focus on targeting
individuals and entities that can be disrupted is
appropriate for ensuring the sanctions' effectiveness.

Sanctions alone, however, are not enough to win
the fight against terrorism. We must strengthen global,
international, regional and subregional cooperation,
reinforce national capabilities at all levels and devise
creative ways of conducting an ideological struggle to
fight extremism and youth radicalization, to denounce,
isolate, degrade and successfully defeat the threat
posed by terrorism.

Still concerning the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), we
share the concerns expressed by the Committee's Chair
regarding the end of the mandates of the Ombudsperson
and the Monitoring Team Coordinator. We hope that
the changing of the guard will take place in a smooth
manner, in view of the crucial role of those mandates
in enabling the Committee to respond effectively to the
threat posed by Al-Qaida and affiliates.

We recognize the role that the United Nations
has assumed globally, its outstanding leadership in
the effort to combat terrorism through the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council on the issue, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) and Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate.
The recent ministerial-level open debate on terrorism,
and specifically on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2178 (2014), adopted in September
2014, and the steps taken by Member States and the
international community to prevent the threat posed by
foreign terrorist fighters, was an important instance in
Security Council action and international cooperation
to counter this most undesirable development in
international life.

We encourage and support the Security Council's
efforts to foster closer cooperation and coordination
among the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), their respective Expert Groups and the main
specialized agencies on counter-terrorism, such
as the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate,
the Monitoring Teams and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force.

To conclude, the risk of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction to non-State actors poses a serious
threat to international peace and security. We encourage

and support the Security Council's efforts to strengthen
cooperation and effective coordination between
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and the overall framework established
to counter terrorism. We express our support for the
press statement on the comprehensive review of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1540
(2004).
