Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my congratulations to
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council this month.

I would like to thank your predecessor, the
representative of the United States, for his efforts
during the United States' presidency of the Council last
month.

I would also like to express my great appreciation
for the briefing by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, concerning developments
in the Middle East, particularly regarding the question
of Palestine.
This year, the situation in the Middle East brings
many things to mind. It is the sixtieth anniversary of
the Palestinian disaster and the forced displaced of
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians. We had great
hopes that this year would end with the announcement
of the independent Palestinian on Palestinian soil, with
its capital in East Jerusalem, and with the enablement
of the Palestinians to exercise their right to return,
which is the basic condition for the establishment of a
comprehensive and just peace in the Middle East.

That was the hope, but what is the reality? The
twentieth century witnessed a number of serious
attempts to achieve comprehensive peace. In 1991, the
Madrid Conference was held under United States and
Soviet auspices. It was followed by the Oslo
Agreement between the Palestinians and the Israelis. A
number of agreements and understandings followed.

We are almost at the end of the first decade of the
twenty-first century and the attempts are still
continuing. In 2002, Arab leaders launched the Arab
peace initiative at the Beirut Conference, emphasizing
the same outcome at the various successive summits.
The 2003 road map added another term of reference for
the Palestinian-Israeli path, followed by the Annapolis
Conference, which renewed hopes of reaching a
peaceful agreement between the Palestinians and
Israelis before the end of this year.

There have thus been many initiatives, but what
is required are not miracles; what is required will
continue to be an obligation to commit to the terms of
reference of the Madrid Conference, the
implementation of international resolutions and the
adoption of the Arab peace initiative.

In Paris on 13 July, the Israeli Prime Minister was
optimistic about reaching an agreement with the
Palestinians, but Palestinian land is still being torn
apart, the Gaza Strip is still under siege and its people
are still being collectively punished. The policy of the
confiscation of lands in the West Bank, the
establishment of checkpoints and the separation wall
still go on. Worst of all, settlement activity continues;
hence the Arab Group's initiative to submit a draft
resolution to the Council aimed at stopping Israeli
settlement activities, which are the main impediment to
the peace process. We call on the Security Council
once again to uphold the values and norms of
international law and the rule of law by adopting the
draft resolution.
From Lebanon, I bring good news. On 21 May,
through an initiative of the League of Arab States
under the auspices of Qatar, the Lebanese leadership
reached an agreement in Doha. On 25 May, General
Michel Sleiman was elected President of the Republic
by the Lebanese parliament. His presidential speech
was welcomed by all Lebanese in Lebanon and abroad.
That was great news for the country. Last week, a
national unity Government was formed by Prime
Minister Fouad Siniora and will be presented soon
through a ministerial declaration. Work on
parliamentary elections will soon begin.

In order to pursue dialogue and promote the
sovereignty of the State, it will be necessary to
negotiate some controversial issues. We note the
intention of the President of the Republic, Mr. Michel
Sleiman, to visit Syria on the basis of an invitation
from President Bashar Al-Assad to discuss all fraternal
matters and pending issues between the two countries.
That announcement was made at a meeting of the two
Presidents in Paris hosted by President Nicolas
Sarkozy on the resumption of diplomatic relations, a
matter which the two countries must follow up.

Two weeks ago was the second anniversary of the
Israeli war against Lebanon, waged to recover two
soldiers who had been abducted. In two weeks, it will
be the second anniversary of the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006). In these two years,
very important steps were taken concerning the
deployment of the Lebanese army in the South and
cooperation with the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) in order to establish security and
stability in the South. The last of those steps was the
exchange of Lebanese prisoners of war held in Israeli
prisons for the two Israeli soldiers, whom Lebanon
returned under the auspices of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon. To Mr. Ban we offer great thanks and our
deepest gratitude.

A lot has been said about those exchanges. What
is important is the return of Lebanon's citizens and the
turning of a painful page in our history. National
solidarity has been demonstrated through the reception
of the prisoners of war and the remains of the fallen. In
exchange of prisoners was another step towards the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), and here we
would like to emphasize the continued technical
cooperation between Lebanon and the United Nations
in monitoring the Syrian-Lebanese borders, where an
independent working group for the observation of the
border has been installed.

Lebanon views the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) as crucial despite the fact that
the Minister of Defence of Israel, Mr. Ehud Barak, has
stated that the resolution has not and will not be
implemented. It is true that the resolution has not been
implemented, but it is true because Israel has not
implemented many of its provisions. For example,
Israel continues to violate Lebanese airspace.
More than 20 violations a day - an unprecedented
number - were reported by the Secretary-General in
his seventh report on the implementation of resolution

1701 (2006). Civilians in southern Lebanon are still
held hostage by mines and cluster bombs that were
planted by Israel. After two years of calls for maps
showing where those bombs have been laid, Israel has
offered only two years of flagrant refusal and
objections.

Who will return six-year old Ali Dakduk to his
mother and his family after he was killed by deadly
Israeli cluster bombs? Who will stop the series of
deaths caused by Israel in the houses, fields and farms
of southern Lebanon? Dozens of innocent civilians
have been killed by such bombs. Israel continues its
occupation of the village of Ghajar, the Shaba'a Farms
and the Kfar Shouba Hills. We emphasize here the
importance of immediate and unconditional withdrawal
from the northern part of the village of Ghajar and of
finding an appropriate solution for the Israeli
occupation of the Shaba'a Farms.

Returning to Mr. Barak's assertion that resolution
1701 (2006) would not be implemented, that remark
proves Israel's intention not to implement it.
Unfortunately, that is consistent with Israel's history,
since it is known for ignoring international resolutions
and refusing to implement them. The latest violation of
resolution 1701 (2006) is Israel's continued disruption
of the communication network in southern Lebanon
and the distribution of letters threatening and
intimidating civilians. We have already reported those
new violations of the security and freedom of Lebanese
citizens to the Council.

Lebanon aspires through international legitimacy
and resolutions to retrieving its occupied land and to
restoring stability in the South. It looks to international
legitimacy to bring about justice and to put an end to
the immunity of criminals who have tried to terrorize
Lebanese citizens and destabilize their security and
their country.

With regard to the ongoing special investigation
into the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafiq
Hariri, Mr. Daniel Bellemare continues his work as
Commissioner of the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission. The
administrative and logistical steps taken to establish
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon have advanced
through some very important stages. We would like to
thank donor States for their contributions to the budget
of the Commission and the ongoing work of the
Secretariat in that area.

08-4326]

Once again, it is quite clear that there is no
stability in our region and no security for its people.
Indeed, there will be no peace for the people in our
region except on the basis of respect for the provisions
of international law and the implementation of
resolutions of international legitimacy and legality,
especially those of the Security Council.

