Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): In
September, President Bush challenged the Security
Council to live up to its mandate to address Iraq's non-
compliance with its disarmament obligations. The
Council was entrusted with finding a solution to meet
that challenge. That ultimately resulted in the adoption
of resolution 1441 (2002). During eight weeks of
negotiation, the Council not only included the
perspectives of its members but also provided the
opportunity for all States to contribute to this
extremely important and ongoing process. In so doing,
the Security Council has reaffirmed its important role
in dealing with Iraq's threat to international peace and
security.

On African issues, the Council made outstanding
contributions, many of which did not make the front
pages of newspapers here in the United States, but
which remain extremely relevant and important to vast
numbers of people on this planet. For example, the
Council's swift endorsement of the July Pretoria
Agreement helped maintain the momentum behind the
Agreement. Our decision to expand the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and authorize phase III operations signalled
our support for the peace process.

Contributing to those decisions of the Council
was the Council's innovative approach to developing
information on those issues. For instance, in August,
the Foreign Ministers of the signatories to the Pretoria
Agreement met with the Council in a formal open
meeting to reaffirm their support for the Agreement
and to answer members' questions. The decision not to
have Council members make statements in that forum
kept the focus on the Foreign Ministers and gave the
Council's eventual presidential statement greater
political weight.

In Sierra Leone, the Council's work in urging the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone to play a role in the
successful May elections was crucial. The Council
needs to give the same amount of attention now to the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, which is moving
towards issuing its indictments in early 2003. The
security, extradition and social issues that this will
raise will require the Council's consideration. The
Court, which is a unique institution, independent of the
United Nations system but created by the United
Nations and Sierra Leone at the Security Council's
recommendation, will need the political support of the
Council during the upcoming months. How we respond
will determine the Court's eventual success.

On the Middle East, the Council made an
important contribution in 2002 by providing an agreed
endgame to this enduring conflict in resolution 1397
(2002), in which, for the first time, the Security
Council affirmed a vision of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side within secure and
recognized borders. That resolution was forward-
looking and has now become enshrined in the pantheon
of historic resolutions which form the basis upon which
peace will be negotiated. The Secretary-General and
key partners in the international community are deeply
involved, as members of the Quartet, in bringing the
parties back to the negotiating table.

The challenge for the Council on the Middle East
is now before us. We can remain on a constructive path
that supports the efforts of the Quartet and others
intricately involved in mediation in the Middle East, or
we can return to the destructive practice of seeking to
pass one-sided resolutions, heaping criticism on one
party - that is to say, Israel. We completely disagree
with an approach whereby draft resolutions seek to
highlight the issue of occupation while neglecting
Palestinian responsibility for eliminating terrorism. In
2002, the Council made several steps forward in
acknowledging the obvious: suicide bombings destroy
prospects for peace, as well as innocent lives. I would
ask the question: will the Council have the courage in
2003 to take aim at those groups and their supporters
that promote and perpetrate that violence and terror?

Finally, on counter-terrorism, I would like to call
attention to the important work of the committee
effectively chaired by you, Mr. President, in addressing
the terrorist threat posed by Al Quaeda and also the
continuing work of the groundbreaking Counter-
Terrorism Committee chaired by my colleague Sir
Jeremy Greenstock.

I would like to close with thanks to the
Colombian presidency for creating an opportunity
today for us to reflect, in perhaps the first quiet
moment of the month, about the challenges and
achievements over the past year and in the year ahead.
Indeed, as five of our colleagues leave us, I salute the
contributions that all have made during their
presidencies, as well as during the entire period of their
tenure.

