Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his detailed
briefing on recent events and progress made in the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I
also welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremie, and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kosovo, Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, and thank them
for their presence. I know that winter conditions in
Europe make travel to New York difficult, so their
resolve to participate in this meeting merits twofold
thanks.

We also welcome the presence via video
teleconference of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, whose intensive
work with local leaders and those in Belgrade and
Pristina is clearly outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General before us (S/20l2/72).

We regret the various incidents and violence that
have occurred in recent months, and therefore stress
the critical nature of UNMIK's work in easing tensions
and preventing the recurrence of such events. We also
regret acts of vandalism against churches and
cemeteries, threats against the press, and other acts of
violence, all of which hinder peaceful coexistence.

With respect to the allegations of trafficking in
human organs made in a report to the Council of
Europe in December 2010 by Mr. Dick Marty, we note
the positive start to the work of Mr. Clint Williamson,
as Lead Prosecutor of the Special Investigative Task
Force of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo. We hope that his work will give renewed
momentum to the rapid completion of the
investigations in order to ensure that those who are
guilty of these acts are brought to justice.

Colombia views with optimism the progress made
on issues of direct benefit to citizens, such as the civil
registry, the cadastre records, improved freedom of
movement, automobile registration and in particular
the possibility of joint management of border
crossings, which represents a dispute of great
sensitivity between the parties.

We are also optimistic about the resumption of
the European Union-facilitated dialogue. Colombia
stresses the importance of building on common ground
where progress can be made and the path to
reconciliation can run smoothly. We are concerned
about the slowing rate of voluntary returns of the
displaced and the stagnation in investigations of
missing persons. We therefore believe that increased
efforts are necessary in mobilizing not only political
will but also technical resources and cooperation.
Those issues play a critical role in the reconciliation
process and should enjoy the full commitment of all
parties concerned and the support of the international
community.

In setting its priorities, UNMIK should continue
to promote security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo and the region by collaborating with
the parties concerned, Kosovo communities and
regional and international agencies. The work of
UNMIK will be critical to persuading the parties to
show moderation and promote dialogue in order to
reach sustainable solutions to long-standing disputes.

Finally, we urge the parties to adopt measures
allowing for a reduction in tension and avoiding the
outbreak of new crises, and to work with the necessary
political resolve on the basis of agreements already
reached, because that is the true way to move towards
peace.

