Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his very comprehensive
briefing on the Seeretary-General's report (S/2013/297)
and the progress being made on efforts to combat the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). I would also like to
express our support for the draft presidential statement
circulated by the delegation of the United Kingdom.

Morocco, which is connected to the countries of
Central Africa by traditional ties of friendship and
cooperation, welcomes the progress they have made in
strengthening their cross-border cooperation, regional
integration and economic growth. That progress,
however, should not mask the growing security, political
and humanitarian challenges they face and that require
an urgent response. Insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea
and the Sahel region, acts of terrorism, cross-border
trafficking and poaching are having an increasingly
large impact on the Central African region's stability
and development. We remain concerned about the
growing threat of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, which
is unfortunately spreading farther and farther along
Africa's Atlantic coast. It is a matter of vital urgency to
fight this dangerous threat.

The need to strengthen interregional cooperation
among the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) and the Gulfoquinea
Commission, as well as the countries along the Gulf,
is becoming increasingly apparent. In that context,
we welcome regional initiatives, including the recent
ministerial meeting held in N'Djamena on maritime
security and the upcoming regional summit to be held
in Cameroon on 24 and 25 June, bringing together
ECCAS, ECOWAS, the Gulf of Guinea Commission
and the countries of the region. We hope that the summit
will be a decisive step towards the global and effective
implementation of the transregional and interregional
strategy. We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa in the region, as well
as the action and leadership Mr. Moussa has displayed
in facilitating that important meeting.

Regarding the region of the Sahel, we are worried
about the security repercussions that are unfortunately
being increasingly felt in neighbouring regions,
particularly Central Africa and the Maghreb. We
commend the decision of the Community of Sahelo-
Saharan States (CEN-SAD) at its recent N'Djamena
summit to create a permanent body concerned with
sustainable development and combating poverty, and a
permanent security council designed to help members
fight terrorism and other ills that threaten peace.
Morocco is pleased to be hosting the next CEN-SAD
summit as its contribution to helping improve collective
management of the challenges in the Sahelo-Saharan
region.

In that context, we welcome the participation of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa in
the various subregional and interregional conferences
on subjects related to cross-border and transregional
threats - including the CEN-SAD summit and the
meeting organized in Rabat by the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force on strengthening border
surveillance between the States of the Maghreb and the
Sahel - and we hope that it will continue to participate
actively in these kinds of meetings.

In the face of these growing transregional threats,
we encourage the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa and the United Nations Regional Office
for West Africa to continue to improve their cooperation
in support of regional efforts to fight transnational
organized crime, trafficking in small arms and light
weapons, and terrorism.

In the political arena, the recent crisis in the Central
African Republic has revealed the fragility of the
peacebuilding process. We are alarmed by the gravity
of the current situation there and remain concerned
about its effect on subregional stability, both as a
humanitarian issue and as concerns the fight against
the Lord's Resistance Army. We commend the decisive
role played by the Economic Community of Central
African States in managing the crisis and restoring
constitutional order. In that connection, we encourage
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
to continue to support subregional organizations, such
as the Economic Community of Central African States
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, particularly in the area of capacity-building,
including mediation, which we consider a priority,
especially in the light of recent events in the Central
African Republic and the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

Turning to the Lord's Resistance Army, which
continues to threaten the stability and lives ofthousands
of men, women and children in Central Africa and to
undermine peacebuilding efforts, Morocco reiterates its
firm condemnation of the crimes, atrocities and human-
rights violations that criminal group has committed,
particularly against women and children. We must
now ramp up our collective efforts to strengthen cross-
border cooperation and build on progress made to date,
thanks to the work done by States in the region and
the various political and peacekeeping missions, in
order to put an end to the LRA's presence in Central
Africa. In that regard, we commend the decision of the
Government of the Central African Republic to resume
and rejoin regional efforts against the LRA.

We welcome the significant role played by the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa in combating
the LRA, and the release of the implementation plan
for the United Nations regional strategy to combat
the threat and impact of the activities of the Lord's
Resistance Army. We encourage the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, in its coordinating
role, as well as the political and peacekeeping missions
and other United Nations entities in the region, to
intensify their efforts to implement the strategy.

For its part, Morocco, which is affected by the
activities of the Lord's Resistance Army through
the contingents it contributes to the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), will continue
to work to protect civilians and provide humanitarian
and medical aid, in accordance with the MONUSCO
mandate. Bilaterally, my country also continues to
provide humanitarian aid and support for capacity-
building and human development to countries affected
by the LRA's criminal activities.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our support
and appreciation for the work of Special Representative
Moussa and his team in helping to prevent conflict in
Central Africa and strengthening the coordination of
the activities of the United Nations and the subregional
organizations of the region, where stability and
security have always been a priority for the Kingdom
of Morocco.

